                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LIQUIDITY TRAP AND EXCESSIVE LEVERAGE

                                           Anton Korinek
                                            Alp Simsek

                                        Working Paper 19970
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19970


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




The authors would like to thank Larry Ball, Ricardo Caballero, Gauti Eggertsson, Emmanuel Farhi,
Ricardo Reis, Joseph Stiglitz and seminar participants at Brown University, Harvard University, London
School of Economics, New York Fed, University of Maryland and conference participants at the 2013
SED meetings, 2013 Econometric Society Meetings, 2013 Summer Workshop of the Central Bank
of Turkey, and the First INET Conference on Macroeconomic Externalities for helpful comments
and discussions. Korinek acknowledges financial support from INET/CIGI. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Anton Korinek and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage
Anton Korinek and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 19970
March 2014
JEL No. E32,E44

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate the role of macroprudential policies in mitigating liquidity traps driven by deleveraging,
using a simple Keynesian model. When constrained agents engage in deleveraging, the interest rate
needs to fall to induce unconstrained agents to pick up the decline in aggregate demand. However,
if the fall in the interest rate is limited by the zero lower bound, aggregate demand is insufficient and
the economy enters a liquidity trap. In such an environment, agents' ex-ante leverage and insurance
decisions are associated with aggregate demand externalities. The competitive equilibrium allocation
is constrained inefficient. Welfare can be improved by ex-ante macroprudential policies such as debt
limits and mandatory insurance requirements. The size of the required intervention depends on the
differences in marginal propensity to consume between borrowers and lenders during the deleveraging
episode. In our model, contractionary monetary policy is inferior to macroprudential policy in addressing
excessive leverage, and it can even have the unintended consequence of increasing leverage.


Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
440 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
akorinek@jhu.edu

Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E17-244
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Ma. 02139
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Leverage has been proposed as a key contributing factor to the recent recession and the
slow recovery in the US. Figure 1 illustrates the dramatic rise of leverage in the household
sector before 2008 as well as the subsequent deleveraging episode. Using county-level data,
Mian and Su… (2012) have argued that household deleveraging is responsible for much of
the job losses between 2007 and 2009. This view has recently been formalized in a number
of theoretical models, e.g., Hall (2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), and Guerrieri
and Lorenzoni (2012). These models have emphasized that the interest rate needs to fall
when constrained agents engage in deleveraging to induce unconstrained agents to make
up for the lost aggregate demand. However, the nominal interest rate cannot fall below
zero given that hoarding cash provides an alternative to holding bonds— a phenomenon
also known as the liquidity trap. When in‡ation expectations are sticky, the lower bound on
the nominal rate also prevents the real interest rate from declining, plunging the economy
into a demand-driven recession. Figure 2 illustrates that the short term nominal and real
interest rates in the US has indeed seemed constrained since December 2008.




Figure 1: Evolution of household debt in the US over the last 10 years. Source: Quarterly
Report on Household Debt and Credit (August 2013), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

    An important question concerns the optimal policy response to these episodes. The
US Treasury and the Federal Reserve have responded to the recent recession by utilizing
…scal stimulus and unconventional monetary policies. These policies are (at least in part)
supported by a growing theoretical literature that emphasizes the bene…ts of stimulating
aggregate demand during a liquidity trap. The theoretical contributions have understand-
ably taken an ex-post perspective— characterizing the optimal policy once the economy is in


                                             2
                                       15             10
                    interest rate (percentage points)
                               0       -5  5




                                      1980q1               1985q1    1990q1   1995q1      2000q1   2005q1    2010q1     2015q1
                                                                                       time

                                                              real rate          annualized nominal rate on 3 month T -bills




Figure 2: Nominal and real interest rates on 3 month US Treasury Bills between the third
quarter of 1981 and the fourth quarter of 2013. The real interest rate is calculated as the
annualized nominal rate minus the annualized current-quarter GDP in‡ation expectations
obtained from the Philadelphia Fed’s Survey of Professional Forecasters.


the trap. Perhaps more surprisingly, both the practical and theoretical policy e¤orts have
largely ignored the debt market, even though the problems are thought to have originated in
the debt market.1 In this paper, we analyze the scope for ex-ante macroprudential policies
in debt markets— such as debt limits and insurance requirements.
    To investigate optimal macroprudential policies, we present a tractable model, in which
a tightening of borrowing constraints leads to deleveraging and may trigger a liquidity trap.
The distinguishing feature of our model is that some agents, which we call borrowers, en-
dogenously accumulate leverage— even though agents are aware that borrowing constraints
will be tightened in the future. If borrowers have a su¢ ciently strong motive to borrow,
e.g., due to impatience, then the economy enters a liquidity trap and features an anticipated
demand driven recession.
    The main result of our model is that it is desirable to slow down the accumulation
of leverage in these episodes. In the run-up to a liquidity trap, borrowers who behave
individually rationally undertake excessive leverage from a social point of view. A simple
macroprudential policy that restricts leverage (coupled with appropriate ex-ante transfers)
could make all agents better o¤. This result obtains whenever ex-post deleveraging is
   1
     Several papers capture the liquidity trap in a representative household framework which leaves no room
for debt market policies (see Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), Christiano et al. (2011), Werning (2012)).
An exception is Eggertsson and Krugman (2011), which features debt but does not focus on debt market
policies.


                                                                                   3
severe enough to trigger a liquidity trap— assuming that the liquidity trap cannot be fully
alleviated by ex-post policies.

   The mechanism behind the constrained ine¢ ciency is an aggregate demand externality
that applies in environments in which output is in‡uenced by aggregate demand. When
this happens, agents’decisions that a¤ect aggregate demand also a¤ect aggregate output,
and therefore other agents’income. Agents do not take into account these general equilib-
rium e¤ects, which may lead to ine¢ ciencies. In our economy, the liquidity trap ensures
that output is in‡uenced by demand and that it is below its (…rst-best) e¢ cient level.
Moreover, greater ex-ante leverage leads to a greater ex-post reduction in aggregate de-
mand and a deeper recession. This is because deleveraging transfers liquid wealth from
borrowers to lenders, but borrowers who delever have a much higher marginal propensity
to consume (MPC) out of liquid wealth than lenders. Borrowers who choose their debt level
(and lenders who …nance them) do not take into account the negative demand externalities,
leading to excessive leverage. In line with this intuition, we also show that the strength of
the ine¢ ciency— and therefore the size of the required intervention— depends on the MPC
di¤erences between borrowers and lenders.
   Our model also provides a natural setting to contrast aggregate demand externalities
with traditional pecuniary externalities. When borrowers’ leveraging motive is relatively
weak, the real interest rate during the deleveraging episode remains positive and the econ-
omy avoids the liquidity trap. In this region, ex-ante accumulation of leverage generates
pecuniary externalities by lowering the ex-post real interest rate. These pecuniary exter-
nalities are harmful for lenders, who earn lower rates on their assets, but they are bene…cial
for borrowers, who pay lower interest rate on their debt. Indeed, the pecuniary externalities
in our setting net out since markets are complete and, absent a liquidity trap, the equi-
librium is constrained e¢ cient. In contrast, when there is a liquidity trap, the pecuniary
externalities are muted since the real interest rate is …xed at its lower bound, and greater
leverage generates aggregate demand externalities. Unlike pecuniary externalities, aggre-
gate demand externalities hurt all agents— since they operate by lowering incomes— which
opens the door for ine¢ ciencies.

   In practice, the deleveraging episodes are highly uncertain from an ex-ante point of
view. A natural question is whether agents share the risk associated with these episodes
e¢ ciently. The second main result of our model establishes that borrowers are also un-
derinsured with respect to a deleveraging episode. A mandatory insurance requirement
(coupled with ex-ante transfers) could make all households better o¤. Intuitively, borrow-
ers’ insurance purchases transfers liquid wealth in the deleveraging episode from lenders
(or insurance providers) to borrowers who have a higher MPC. This increases aggregate

                                              4
demand and mitigates the recession. Agents do not take into account these positive aggre-
gate demand externalities, which leads to too little insurance. Among other things, this
result provides a rationale for indexing mortgage liabilities to house prices (along the lines
proposed by Shiller and Weiss, 1999).

   We also investigate whether preventive monetary policies could be used to address ag-
gregate demand externalities generated by leverage. A common argument is that a con-
tractionary policy that raises the interest rate in the run-up to the recent subprime crisis
could have been bene…cial in curbing leverage. Perhaps surprisingly, our model reveals that
raising the interest rate during the leverage accumulation phase can have the unintended
consequence of increasing leverage. A higher interest rate reduces borrowers’incentives to
borrow keeping all else equal— which appears to be the conventional wisdom informed by
partial equilibrium reasoning. However, the higher interest rate also creates a temporary
recession which increases borrowers’incentives to borrow so as to smooth consumption. In
addition, the higher interest rate also transfers wealth from borrowers to lenders, which
further increases borrowers’ incentives to borrow. In our model, the general equilibrium
e¤ects typically dominate (for example for CRRA preferences), and raising the interest rate
has the perverse e¤ect of raising leverage. This may contribute to explaining the continued
increase in household leverage when the US Fed raised interest rates starting in June 2004,
as illustrated in Figures 1 and 2.
   There are versions of our model in which the conventional wisdom holds, and raising the
interest rate lowers leverage (as in Curdia and Woodford, 2009). But even in these cases,
the interest rate policy is inferior to macroprudential policies in dealing with excessive lever-
age. Intuitively, e¢ ciency requires setting a wedge between borrowers’and lenders’relative
incentives to hold bonds, whereas the interest rate policy creates a di¤erent intertemporal
wedge that a¤ects all agents’incentives equally. As a by-product, the interest rate policy
also generates an unnecessary recession— which is not a feature of constrained e¢ cient al-
locations. That said, a di¤erent preventive monetary policy, namely raising the in‡ation
target, is supported by our model as it would reduce the incidence of liquidity traps— and
therefore, the relevance of aggregate demand externalities.

   Our …nal analysis concerns endogenizing the debt limit faced by borrowers by assuming
that debt is collateralized by …nancial assets, creating the potential for …re-sale e¤ects. This
introduces a new feedback loop into the economy, with two main implications. First, higher
leverage lowers asset prices in the deleveraging phase, which in turn lowers borrowers’debt
capacity and increases their distress. Hence, higher leverage generates …re-sale externalities
that operate in the same direction as aggregate demand externalities. Second, an increase
in borrowers’ distress induces a more severe deleveraging episode and a deeper recession.

                                               5
Hence, …re-sale externalities exacerbate aggregate demand externalities. Conversely, lower
aggregate output further lowers asset prices, exacerbating …re-sale externalities. These ob-
servations suggest that episodes of deleveraging that involve asset …re-sales are particularly
severe.
   The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next subsection discusses
the related literature. Section 2 introduces the key aspects of our environment. Section
3 characterizes an equilibrium that features an anticipated demand-driven recession. The
heart of the paper is Section 4, which illustrates aggregate demand externalities, contrasts
them with traditional pecuniary externalities, and presents our main result about excessive
leverage. This section also relates the strength of the ine¢ ciency to empirically observable
variables. Section 5 generalizes the model to incorporate uncertainty and presents our sec-
ond main result about underinsurance. Section 6 discusses the role of preventive monetary
policies in our environment. Section 7 presents the extension with endogenous debt limits
and …re sale externalities, and Section 8 concludes. The appendix contains omitted proofs
and derivations as well as some extensions of our baseline model.

1.1   Related literature
Our paper is related to a long economic literature studying the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates and liquidity traps, starting with Hicks (1937), and more recently emphasized
by Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2004). A growing recent literature
has investigated the optimal …scal and monetary policy response to liquidity traps (see
e.g. Eggertsson, 2011; Christiano et al., 2011; Werning, 2012; Correia et al., 2013). Our
contribution to this literature is that we focus on debt market policies, mainly from an
ex-ante perspective.
   Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2012) describe how …-
nancial market shocks that induce borrowers to delever lead to a decline in interest rates,
which in turn can trigger a liquidity trap. Our framework is most closely related to Eggerts-
son and Krugman because we also model deleveraging between a set of impatient borrowers
and patient lenders. They focus on the ex-post implications of deleveraging as well as the
e¤ects of monetary and …scal policy during these episodes. Our contribution is to add an
ex-ante stage and to investigate the role of macroprudential policies. Among other things,
our paper calls for novel policy actions in debt markets that are signi…cantly di¤erent from
the more traditional policy responses to liquidity traps. Our paper also di¤ers in terms
of methodology: Instead of the New-Keynesian framework, we use a simple equilibrium
concept with rationing in the goods market to describe liquidity traps, which enables us to
obtain a sharp analytical characterization of the ine¢ ciencies in debt markets.


                                              6
   The aggregate demand externality we focus on has …rst been discovered in the context
of …rms’ price setting decisions, e.g., by Mankiw (1985), Akerlof and Yellen (1985) and
Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987). The broad idea is that, when output is not at its …rst-best
level and in‡uenced by aggregate demand, decentralized allocations that a¤ect aggregate
demand are socially ine¢ cient. In Blanchard and Kiyotaki, output is not at its …rst-best
level due to monopoly distortions, and …rms’ price setting a¤ects aggregate demand due
to complementarities in …rms’demand. In our setting, output is not at its …rst-best level
due to the liquidity trap. We also focus on agents’debt choices— as opposed to …rms’price
setting decisions— which a¤ect aggregate demand due to di¤erences in agents’ marginal
propensities to consume.
   A number of recent papers, e.g., Farhi and Werning (2012ab, 2013) and Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe (2012abc), also analyze aggregate demand externalities in contexts similar to
ours. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe analyze economies with …xed exchange rates that exhibit
downward rigidity in nominal wages. They identify negative aggregate demand externalities
associated with actions that increase wages during good times, because these actions lead to
greater unemployment during bad times. In Farhi and Werning (2012ab), output responds
to aggregate demand because prices are sticky and countries are in a currency union (and
thus, under the same monetary policy). They emphasize the ine¢ ciencies in cross-country
insurance arrangements. In our model, output is demand-determined because of a liquidity
trap, and we emphasize the ine¢ ciencies in household leverage in a closed economy setting.
In parallel and independent work, Farhi and Werning (2013) develop a general theory of
aggregate demand externalities in the presence of nominal rigidities and constraints on
monetary policy, with applications including liquidity traps and currency unions. Our
framework falls into this broad class of aggregate demand externalities, but we focus in
depth on the externalities created by deleveraging in a liquidity trap.
   Our results on excessive borrowing and risk-taking also resemble the recent literature on
pecuniary externalities, including Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003), Lorenzoni (2008),
Bianchi and Mendoza (2010), Jeanne and Korinek (2010ab) and Korinek (2011). In those
papers, agents do not internalize the impact of individual decisions on asset prices. A plan-
ner can improve welfare by moving asset prices in a way that relaxes …nancial constraints.
The aggregate demand externality of this paper works through a completely di¤erent chan-
nel. In fact, the externality applies not when prices are volatile, but in the opposite case
when a certain price— namely the real interest rate— is …xed. We discuss the di¤erences with
pecuniary externalities further in Section 4, and illustrate the interaction of our mechanism
with …re-sale externalities in Section 7.




                                             7
2        Environment and equilibrium
The economy is set in in…nite discrete time t 2 f0; 1; :::g, with a single consumption good.
There are two types of households, borrowers and lenders, denoted by h 2 fb; lg. There is
an equal measure of each type of households, normalized to 1=2. Households are symmetric
                                                                                     b           l
except that borrowers have a weakly lower discount factor than lenders,                              .
        Our central focus is to analyze how the debt or asset holdings of the two types of
households interact with aggregate output. Let dht denote the outstanding debt— or assets,
if negative— of household h at date t. Households start with initial debt or asset levels
denoted by dh0 . At each date t, they face the one-period interest rate rt+1 and they choose
their outstanding debt or asset levels for the next period, dht+1 .
        Our …rst key ingredient is that, from date 1 onwards, households are subject to a bor-
rowing constraint constraint, that is, dht+1            for each t      1. Here,      > 0 denotes an
exogenous debt limit as in Aiyagari (1994), or more recently, Eggertsson and Krugman
(2012). The constraint can be thought of as capturing a …nancial shock in reduced from,
e.g. a drop in loan-to-value ratios or collateral values, that would force households to reduce
their leverage. In contrast, we assume that households can choose dh1 at date 0 without any
constraints. The role of these ingredients is to generate household leveraging at date 0 fol-
lowed by deleveraging at date 1 along the lines of Figure 1. Moreover, to study the e¢ ciency
of agents’ex-ante decisions, we assume that the future …nancial shock is anticipated at date
0. In our baseline model, we abstract away from uncertainty so that the shock is perfectly
anticipated. In Section 5, we will introduce uncertainty about the …nancial shock.
        Our second key ingredient is a lower bound on the real interest rate:


                                       rt+1    rt+1 for each t.                                                 (1)

As suggested by Figure 2, real interest rates in the US appear to be bounded from below
in recent years. Japan had a similar experience during two decades of de‡ation. We take
the lower bound as exogenous here and investigate its implications for aggregate allocations
and optimal macroprudential policies. For our baseline analysis, we normalize the lower
bound to zero (see Section 6 for the e¤ects of changing the lower bound).
        In practice, the bound on the real interest rate emerges from a combination of the zero
lower bound on the nominal interest rate and stickiness of in‡ation expectations.2 The
bound on the nominal interest rate is uncontroversial— as it emerges from a no-arbitrage
condition between money and government bonds. There are di¤erent approaches to “micro-
                                                                                          h          i
    2                                                                                          Pt
    These two ingredients, combined with the Fisher equation, 1 + rt+1 = (1 + it+1 ) Et       Pt+1
                                                                                                         , lead to a
lower bound on the real interest rate.



                                                   8
founding”the stickiness of in‡ation expectations. We describe a particular microfoundation
in Appendix A.1 in which monetary policy is set according to a standard Taylor rule de-
signed to set in‡ation equal to a constant target. This leads to the bound in (1) with rt+1
equal to the negative of the in‡ation target.3 The New-Keynesian framework provides an
alternative microfoundation by positing that nominal prices or wages are sticky— which nat-
urally translates into stickiness of in‡ation, and thus, in‡ation expectations. Yet another
microfoundation is provided by a model in which households are boundedly rational in a way
that their in‡ation expectations are based on limited or past information, as documented
in recent work by Malmendier and Nagel (2013). We remain agnostic about the source
of the stickiness of in‡ation expectations by taking the lower bound in (1) as exogenous.
Aside from being consistent with the recent US experience, this provides us with a tractable
environment to obtain clean analytic insights into ine¢ ciencies in debt markets.

       The demand side of the model is described by households’ consumption-savings deci-
sion.4 For the baseline model, we assume households’state utility function over consumption
c~ht and labor nht takes the particular form, u c~ht                 v nht . We de…ne ct = c~ht        v nht as
net consumption. Households’optimization problem can then be written as:
                                        1
                                        X          t
                                               h
                    max                                u cht                                                (2)
              fcht ;dht+1 ;nht gt       t=0
                                                         dht+1
                      s.t. cht = eht          dht +             for all t,
                                                       1 + rt+1
                 where eht = wt nht +              t     v nht     and dht+1   t+1   for each t   1.

Here wt denotes wages,              t   denotes pro…ts from …rms that are described below, and eht
denotes households’net income, that is, their income net of labor costs. The preferences,
u c~ht     v nht , provide tractability but are not necessary for our main results (see Appendix
A.5). As noted in Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu¤man (GHH, 1988), the speci…cation
implies that there is no wealth e¤ect on labor supply. As a result, the e¢ cient output level
is constant.
       The supply side is described by a linear technology that can convert one unit of labor
   3
      In fact, in our setting the Taylor rule with a zero in‡ation target is the optimal time-consistent policy
if there is some cost of in‡ation: it is ex-post e¢ cient although, ex-ante, it generates a bound on the real
rate and a recession. So our explanation emphasizes the di¢ culty of monetary policymakers to commit to
in‡ation.
    4
      To keep the analysis simple, we ignore investment and focus on ine¢ ciencies associated household
leveraging. But our main results also have implications for ine¢ ciencies associated with investment and
…rms’leverage that we discuss in the concluding section.




                                                               9
to one unit of the consumption good. The e¢ cient level of net income is then given by:

                                         e       max nt        v (nt ) .
                                                  nt

However, the equilibrium does not necessarily feature e¢ cient production due to the con-
straint in (1). When this constraint binds, the interest rate is too high relative to its market
clearing level. Since the interest rate is the price of current consumption good (in terms
of the future consumption good), an elevated interest rate leads to a demand shortage for
current goods and a rationing of supply.
   To capture the possibility of rationing, we modify the supply side of the Walrasian
equilibrium to accommodate the constraint in (1). In particular, we consider a competitive
goods sector that solves the following optimization problem:
                                                 (
                                                       0    nt ,                   if rt+1 > 0
                 t   = max nt   wt n t   s.t.                          c~bt +~
                                                                             clt                    .                  (3)
                        nt                             0    nt              2 ,    if rt+1 = rt+1

When the real interest rate is above the lower bound, rt+1 > rt+1 , the sector optimizes as
usual. When the interest rate is at its lower bound, rt+1 = rt+1 , the sector is subject to
                                                                                                                   c~bt +~
                                                                                                                         clt
an additional constraint that supply cannot exceed the aggregate demand for goods,                                      2 .
When this constraint binds, the sector is making positive pro…ts, and …rms are in principle
willing to increase their output. However, their output is rationed due to a shortage of
aggregate demand. We assume that the available demand is allocated symmetrically across
…rms in this case. The equilibrium output is then determined by aggregate demand at the
bounded interest rate, rt+1 . We also assume households have equal ownership of …rms so
that each household receives pro…ts,         t   = nt       wt n t .

De…nition 1 (Equilibrium). The equilibrium is a path of allocations,                             cht ; dht+1 ; nht ; eht t ,
and real prices and pro…ts, fwt ; rt+1 ;     t gt ,   such that the household allocations solve problem
(2), the …nal good sector solves problem (3) and markets clear.

Remark (Comparison with Keynesian Models with rationing). Our equilibrium notion is
similar to the rationing equilibria analyzed by a strand of the macroeconomics literature,
e.g., Clower (1965), Barro and Grossman (1971), Malinvaud (1977), and Benassy (1986).
We focus on the special case in which there is rationing in the goods market— and only
when the lower bound on the real interest rate binds— but no rationing in the labor market.
We adopt this case since it features the minimally required departure from a Walrasian
equilibrium to capture a liquidity trap. Adding rationing to the labor market could further
exacerbate the outcomes but would not change our qualitative conclusions.
Remark (Comparison with New-Keynesian models). Our equilibrium notion generates a

                                                       10
similar rationing outcome as standard New-Keynesian models. There, monopolistic …rms
with pre-set prices (above their marginal costs) would be willing to supply the level of
output demanded at the exogenous interest rate, rt+1 = rt+1 . The main di¤erence is that
the New-Keynesian models generate an additional prediction that prices should fall during
a liquidity trap. This prediction did not hold in the data for the most recent US experience,
which stimulated a recent literature (see, for instance, Ball and Mazumder, 2011; Coibion
and Gorodnichenko, 2013; Hall, 2013). Our equilibrium notion enables us to abstract away
from in‡ation— and the ongoing debate about missing disin‡ation— so as to focus on real
allocations in debt markets. A number of recent papers take an approach similar to ours,
e.g., Hall (2011), Kocherlakota (2012), and Caballero and Farhi (2013).


3        An anticipated demand-driven recession
This section characterizes the decentralized equilibrium and describes a recession that is
anticipated by households. The next section analyzes the e¢ ciency properties of this equi-
librium. We simplify the notation as follows. First note that equilibrium labor supply is
                                                                        1
the same for both types of households, nht = (v 0 )                         (wt ), which implies that their net in-
come,     eht ,   is also the same. Hence, we let et = nt               v (nt ) denote this common value of net
income. Second, market clearing for debt implies dlt =                         dbt . Hence, we drop the superscript
and denote the debt level of borrowers at a given date by dbt = dt , and that of lenders by
dlt =      dt .
        To characterize the equilibrium, we normalize the lower bound on the interest rate in
(1) to zero in the current section, that is, we set rt+1 = 0 for each t                         1. We investigate
the e¤ects of changes in the lower bound in Section 6. Furthermore, we set r1 =                              1 in
the initial period, which enables us to abstract away from the possibility of a liquidity trap
at date 0.5 In addition, we make the standard assumptions about preferences: that is u ( )
and v ( ) are both strictly increasing, u ( ) is strictly concave and v ( ) is strictly convex, and
they satisfy the conditions limc!0 u0 (c) = 1; v 0 (0) = 0 and limn!1 v 0 (n) = 1. We also
                   u0 (2e )                l
assume       u0 (e + (1       l        <       , which allows for the constraint on the real rate to bind.
                                  ))

Steady state We will focus on equilibria in which borrowers’constraint binds at all dates,
that is, dt+1 =               for each t            1 (and lenders’ constraints do not bind). To characterize
these equilibria, …rst consider dates t                     2. At these dates, the economy is in a steady-state.
Since borrowers are constrained, the real interest rate is determined by the discount factor
                                                              l
of lenders and is constant at rt+1 = 1=                           1 > 0. At a positive interest rate, aggregate
    5
     Alternatively, we could impose assumptions on parameters such as initial debt to rule out the possibility
of a liquidity trap at date 0.


                                                                  11
demand is not a constraining factor and …rms are optimizing as usual so that equilibrium
wages are given by wt = 1 [cf. problem (3)]. The optimization problem of households (2)
then implies that their net income is at its e¢ cient level and consumption is given by:

                     cbt = e      1     l
                                                 and clt = e +                   1       l
                                                                                               for t   2                (4)


Deleveraging Next consider date t = 1. Borrowers’consumption is given by cb1 = e1
 d1      1+r2   . In particular, the larger the outstanding debt level d1 is relative to the debt
limit, the more borrowers are forced to reduce their consumption. The resulting slack in
aggregate demand needs to be absorbed by an increase in lenders’consumption:

                                      cl1 = e1 + d1                              :
                                                                 1 + r2

Since lenders are unconstrained, their Euler equation holds

                                            u0 cl1
                                            l 0
                                                           = 1 + r2 ,
                                             u     cl2

where cl2 is characterized in (4). Hence, the increase in lenders’ consumption at date 1 is
mediated through a decrease in the real interest rate, r2 . The key observation is that the
lower bound on the real interest rate e¤ectively sets an upper bound on lenders’consumption
in equilibrium, cl1     cl1 , given by the solution to

                                 u0 cl1 =        l 0
                                                  u      e +           1             l
                                                                                         :                              (5)

      The equilibrium at date 1 then depends on the relative size of two terms:

                                            d1           7 cl1        e .

The left hand side is the amount of deleveraging borrowers are forced into given that the
borrowing limit falls to       (and the real rate is at its lower bound). The right hand side is
the maximum amount of demand the unconstrained agents can absorb when the real rate
is at its lower bound. If the left side is smaller than the right side, then the equilibrium
features r2      0 and e1 = e . In this case, the e¤ects of deleveraging on aggregate demand
are o¤set by a reduction in the real interest rate and aggregate supply is at its e¢ cient level
e . The left side of Figure 3 (the range corresponding to d1                                 d1 ) illustrates this outcome.
      Otherwise, equivalently when the outstanding debt level is strictly above a threshold

                                       d1 > d1 =              + cl1        e ,                                          (6)

                                                         12
                          0.3


                          0.2


                          0.1


                                0


                         -0.1
                                0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8    0.9        1          1.1       1.2   1.3




                          1.1

                                1

                          0.9

                          0.8

                          0.7

                          0.6

                          0.5
                             0.5       0.6    0.7   0.8    0.9        1          1.1       1.2   1.3




     Figure 3: Interest rate and net income at date 1 as a function of outstanding debt d1 .


then the constraint on the real rate binds, r2 = 0. The interest rate cannot fall su¢ ciently
to induce lenders to consume the e¢ cient level of output. In this case, households’ net
consumption is given by cb1 = e1 d1 + and cl1 = cl1 . Firms’demand for labor is determined
                                                               c~b1 +~
                                                                     cl1
by aggregate demand for consumption, n1 =                           2 .        Hence, households’ net income, e1 =
n1     v (n1 ), is also determined by aggregate demand for net consumption:

                                             cb1 + cl1   e1       (d1            ) + cl1
                                      e1 =             =                                   .                        (7)
                                                 2                         2

After rearranging this expression, the equilibrium level of net income is given by:

                                             e1 = cl1 +           d1 < e .                                          (8)

In words, there is a demand shortage and rationing in the goods market, which in turn
lowers wages and employment in the labor market, creating a demand driven recession.
The right side of Figure 3 (the range corresponding to d1                              d1 ) illustrates this outcome.
      Eq. (7) illustrates that there is a Keynesian cross and a Keynesian multiplier in our
setting. The right hand side of Eq. (7) shows that an increase in borrowers’liquid wealth
by one unit, e.g., through an increase in their net income, increases the aggregate demand by
1=2 units. This is because borrowers’population share is 1=2 and their marginal propensity
to consume (MPC) out of liquid wealth is 1. The left hand side illustrates that net income is
in turn determined by aggregate demand as in a typical Keynesian cross. This dependence
also captures a Keynesian multiplier: An increase in borrowers’liquid wealth by one unit



                                                          13
increases net income by 1=2 units, which in turn further increases borrowers’liquid wealth,
which in turn increases net income by another 1=4 units, and so on.
    Eq. (8) characterizes the equilibrium net income and illustrates that a greater level of
outstanding debt leads to a deeper recession. Intuitively, an increase in leverage transfers
wealth at date 1 from borrowers to lenders. This in turn decreases aggregate demand and
output since borrowers in our model have a much higher MPC of liquid wealth, namely 1,
compared to lenders. The feature that borrowers’MPC is equal to 1 enables us to illustrate
our ine¢ ciency results sharply, but it is not necessary. Section 4.3 shows that net income is
                                     @e1
declining in outstanding debt,       @d1   < 0, as long as borrowers’MPC is greater than lenders’
MPC. As we will see, this feature is all we need for aggregate demand externalities to be
operational and to generate ine¢ ciencies.

Date 0 Allocations We next turn to households’ …nancial decisions at date 0. We
conjecture an equilibrium in which the net income is at its e¢ cient level, e0 = e . Since
households are unconstrained at date 0, the Euler equations of both of them hold

                                             l 0     b 0
                                      1       u cl    u cb
                                           = 0 l 1 = 0 b1 .                                           (9)
                                    1 + r1   u c0    u c0

The equilibrium debt level, d1 , and the interest rate, r1 , are determined by these equations.
We next identify two conditions under which households choose a su¢ ciently high debt level
that triggers a recession at date 1, d1 > d1 .

Proposition 1. There is a deleveraging-induced recession at date 1 if the borrower is suf-
…ciently impatient or su¢ ciently indebted at date 0. Speci…cally, for any debt level d0 there
                                           b
is a threshold level of impatience             (d0 ) such that the economy experiences a recession at
            b       b                                                      b
date 1 if       <       (d0 ). Conversely, for any level of impatience         there is a threshold debt
            b                                                                                 b
level d0        such that the economy experiences a recession at date 1 if d0 > d0                .

    We derive the relevant threshold levels in Appendix A.2. Under these conditions, the
appendix establishes that the economy experiences a demand driven recession and liquidity
trap at date 1.


4    Excessive leverage
This section analyzes the e¢ ciency properties of equilibrium and presents our main result.
We …rst illustrate the aggregate demand externalities in our setting. We then illustrate that
the competitive equilibrium is constrained ine¢ cient and that it can be Pareto improved



                                                      14
with simple macroprudential policies. The last part relates the strength of the ine¢ ciency
to the di¤erence between borrowers’and lenders’MPCs.

4.1   Aggregate demand externalities
We consider a constrained planner at date 0 that can a¤ect the amount of debt d1 that
individuals carry into date 1 (through policies we will describe) but cannot interfere there-
after. We focus on constrained e¢ cient allocations with d1               , so that conditional on d1 ,
the economy behaves as we analyzed in the previous section for date 1 onwards.
   Let V h (d1 ; D1 ) denote the utility of a household of type h conditional on entering date
1 with an individual level of debt d1 and an aggregate level of debt D1 . The aggregate debt
level D1 enters household utility because it determines the interest rate or net income at
date 1. More speci…cally, we have:
                                                                          1
                                                                          X         t
            V b (d1 ; D1 ) = u e1 (D1 )       d1 +                    +         b
                                                                                        u cbt             (10)
                                                       1 + r2 (D1 )
                                                                          t=2
                                                                          X1
                                                                                    t
            V l (d1 ; D1 ) = u e1 (D1 ) + d1                          +         l
                                                                                        u clt
                                                       1 + r2 (D1 )
                                                                          t=2

where r2 (D1 ) and e1 (D1 ) are characterized in the previous section and the continuation
utilities from date 2 onwards do not depend on d1 or D1 [cf. Eq. (4)].
   In equilibrium, we will …nd that D1 = d1 since individual agents of type h are symmetric.
But taking D1 explicitly into account is useful to illustrate the externalities. In particular,
                                                                                            @V h
the private marginal value of debt for an individual household is given by                  @d1    = u0 ch1 ,
                                       @V h       @V   h
whereas the social marginal value is   @d1    +   @D1 .    Hence, the externalities from leverage in
                               @Vh
this setting are captured by   @D1 ,
                                 which we characterize next.
                                          (
                                    @V h       u0 ch1 < 0, if h = l
Lemma 1. (i) If D1 2 [ ; d1 ), then @D1 =                           , where                        2 (0; 1).
                                              u0 ch1 > 0, if h = b
  (ii) If D1 > d1 , then

                  @V h   @e1 0 h
                       =     u c1 =           u0 ch1 < 0, for each h 2 fb; lg :                           (11)
                  @D1    @D1

   The …rst part of the lemma illustrates the usual pecuniary externalities on the interest
rate in the case in which the debt level is su¢ ciently low so that output is not in‡uenced
by demand, that is e1 (D1 ) = e . Higher aggregate debt D1 induces greater deleveraging at
date 1. This reduces the interest rate to counter the reduction in demand. The reduction
in the interest rate in turn generates a redistribution from lenders to borrowers (captured
by , which is characterized in the appendix). Consequently, deleveraging imposes positive

                                                  15
pecuniary externalities on borrowers but negative pecuniary externalities on lenders. In
fact, since markets between date 0 and 1 are complete, these two e¤ects “net out” from an
ex-ante point of view. In particular, the date 0 equilibrium is constrained e¢ cient in this
region (see Proposition 2 below).
       The second part of the lemma illustrates the novel force in our model, aggregate demand
externalities, and contrasts them with pecuniary externalities. In this case, the debt level
is su¢ ciently large so that the economy is in a liquidity trap, which has two implications.
First, the interest rate is …xed, r2 (D1 ) = 0, so that the pecuniary externalities do not apply.
                                                         @e1
Second, net income is decreasing in leverage,            @D1   < 0, through a reduction in aggregate
demand (see Figure 3). Consequently, an increase in aggregate leverage reduces agents’
welfare, which we refer to as an aggregate demand externality.
       A noteworthy feature about this externality is that it hurts all agents— because it oper-
ates through lowering incomes. This feature suggests that, unlike pecuniary externalities,
aggregate demand externalities can lead to constrained ine¢ ciencies, which we verify next.

4.2      Excessive leverage
In our setting, the equilibrium can be Pareto improved by reducing leverage. One way
of doing this is ex-post, by writing down borrowers’ debt. To see this, suppose lenders
forgive some of borrowers’ outstanding debt so that leverage is reduced from d1 to the
threshold, d1 , given by Eq. (6). By our earlier analysis, the recession is avoided and the net
income increases to its e¢ cient level, e . Borrowers’net consumption and welfare naturally
increases after this intervention. Less obviously, lenders’ net consumption remains the
same at the upper bound, cl1 . The debt writedown has a direct negative e¤ect on lenders’
                                                               @V l
welfare by reducing their assets, as captured by               @d1    =   u0 cl1 < 0. However, the debt
writedown also has an indirect positive e¤ect on lenders’welfare through aggregate demand
externalities. Lemma 1 shows that the externalities are su¢ ciently strong to fully counter
                      @V l
the direct e¤ect,     @D1    = u0 cl1 > 0, leading to ex-post Pareto improvement.
       From the lenses of our model, debt-writedowns are always associated with aggregate
demand externalities. However, these externalities are not always su¢ ciently strong to
lead to a Pareto improvement.6 Furthermore, ex-post debt writedowns are di¢ cult to
implement in practice for a variety of reasons, e.g., legal restrictions, concerns with moral
hazard, or concerns with the …nancial health of intermediaries (assuming that some lenders
are intermediaries). Therefore we do not analyze our results on ex-post ine¢ ciency further.
       An alternative, and arguably more practical, way to reduce leverage is to prevent it from
   6
    For instance, with separable preferences, u (c) v (l), analyzed in the appendix, debt writedowns do not
generate ex-post Pareto improvement. This is also the case for the extension analyzed in Section 4.3 with
heterogeneous borrowers.


                                                    16
accumulating in the …rst place. This creates a very general scope for Pareto improvements.
To capture this possibility, suppose households’ date 0 leverage choices are subject to an
additional constraint, dh1             D1 , where D1 is an endogenous debt limit (which will also be
the equilibrium debt limit, hence the abuse of notation). To trace the constrained e¢ cient
frontier, we also allow for a transfer of wealth, T0 , at date 0 from lenders to borrowers so
that the outstanding debt becomes d0                   T0 .
    Our main result characterizes the allocations that can be implemented with these poli-
cies. To state the result, consider a hypothetical planner that chooses the date 0 allocations
of households, ch0 ; nh0 h , as well as the debt level carried into the next date, D1 , and
leaves the remaining allocations starting date 1 to the market. We say that an allocation
  ch0 ; nh0   h
                  ; D1 is constrained e¢ cient if it is optimal according to this planner, that is, if
it solves
                             X                                                   X               X
                                 h
             max                     u ch0 +   h
                                                   V h (D1 ; D1 )        s.t.           ch0 =         nh0   v nh0 ,       (12)
       ((ch0 ;nh0 )h ;D1 )   h                                                      h             h


where         h   6= 0 captures the relative welfare weight assigned to type h agents. We next
characterize the constrained e¢ cient allocations, and show that these allocations can be
implemented with the simple policies described above.

Proposition 2 (Excessive Leverage). An allocation                               ch0 ; nh0   h
                                                                                                ; D1 , with D1        , is con-
strained e¢ cient if and only if output at date 0 is e¢ cient, i.e., e0 = e ; and the consumption
and debt allocations satisfy one of the following:
    (i) D1 < d1 and the Euler equation (9) holds.
    (ii) D1 = d1 the following inequality holds:

                                               l 0                 b 0
                                                u     cl1           u    cb1
                                                                                :                                         (13)
                                               u0 cl0              u0 cb0

Moreover, every constrained e¢ cient allocation of this type can be implemented as a com-
petitive equilibrium with the debt limit, dh1                  d1 for each h, combined with an appropriate
ex-ante transfer, T0 .

    The …rst part illustrates that equilibrium allocations in which d1 < d1 are constrained
e¢ cient. This part veri…es that pecuniary externalities alone do not generate ine¢ ciencies
in our setting.
    The second part, which is our main result, concerns equilibria in which d1                                         d1 and
aggregate demand externalities are active (on the margin). Constrained e¢ cient allocations
in this region are characterized by the debt level, D1 = d1 , and the inequality in (13),
which we refer to as the distorted Euler inequality. As this inequality illustrates, at the

                                                              17
optimal allocation borrowers would like to borrow— so as to increase their consumption at
date 0 and reduce their consumption at date 1— but they are prevented from doing so by
the planner. Indeed, the e¢ cient allocations can be implemented by a simple debt limit
applied to all agents (combined with an appropriate ex-ante transfer). A corollary is that
the competitive equilibrium characterized in Proposition 1, which features d1 > d1 and the
Euler equation (9), is constrained ine¢ cient.
   To understand the intuition for the ine¢ ciency, observe that lowering debt when the
economy is in a liquidity trap generates …rst-order welfare bene…ts because of positive
aggregate demand externalities, as illustrated in Lemma 1. By contrast, distorting agents’
consumption levels away from their privately optimal Euler equations in (9) generates locally
second order losses. Given an appropriate date 0 transfer, everybody can be made better o¤.
Intuitively, borrowers that choose their leverage (or equivalently, lenders that …nance them)
do not take into account the adverse general equilibrium e¤ects on demand and output
at date 1. A debt limit internalizes these externalities and leads to an ex-ante Pareto
improvement. This policy naturally tilts the date 1 consumption from lenders to borrowers
(and date 0 consumption from borrowers to lenders), as captured by the distorted Euler
inequality (13). In our baseline setting, the externalities are so strong that the planner
avoids the recession fully, that is, it is never optimal to choose D1 > d1 .
   The ex-ante ine¢ ciency result in Proposition 2 applies quite generally— except for the
part that the recession is avoided fully (in general, the planner …nds it optimal to mitigate
but not completely avoid the recession). For example, appendix A.5 establishes an analogous
result for the case with separable preferences, u (c)     v (n). We next present a di¤erent
generalization of the result, which is also useful to gauge the magnitude of the ine¢ ciency.

4.3   MPC di¤erences and the magnitude of the ine¢ ciency
Our analysis so far had the feature that borrowers’marginal propensity (MPC) to consume
out of liquid wealth is equal to 1. This feature is useful to illustrate our welfare results
sharply, but it is rather extreme. We next analyze a version of our model in which borrowers’
MPC can be ‡exibly parameterized. This version is useful, among other things, to relate
the strength of aggregate demand externalities to empirically observable variables.
   The main di¤erence is that there are now two groups of borrowers. These groups are
identical except for their MPCs at date 1. A fraction       2 [0; 1] of borrowers, denoted by
type bhigh , have high MPC at date 1 as before, while the remaining fraction, denoted by
blow , have lower MPC. Hence, borrowers as a group have an average MPC that is lower than
1 and that depends on the parameter . In practice, there are many sources of heterogeneity
among borrowers that could generate MPC di¤erences along these lines (e.g., heterogeneity


                                              18
in income shocks). In our analysis, we …nd it convenient to focus on heterogeneity in
borrowers’constraints. Formally, suppose all borrowers are identical at date 0 but they face
di¤erent constraints starting date 1. Type bhigh borrowers are identical to the borrowers we
have analyzed so far. In particular, they face the exogenous debt limit, , described earlier.
In contrast, type blow borrowers are unconstrained at all dates.
   To illustrate the basic e¤ect of these changes at date 1, suppose all agents have log
utility, that is, u (c) = log c. Suppose also that type blow borrowers have the same discount
                                                 blow       l
factor as lenders starting date 1, that is,             =          (As before, all borrowers at date
                              b      l
0 have the discount factor               ). Let M P C1h denote the increase in type h households’
consumption at date 1 in response to a transfer of one unit of liquid wealth at date 1,
keeping their wages and interest rates at all dates constant. In view of log utility, lenders
and type bhigh borrowers consume a small and constant fraction of the additional income
they receive— consistent with the permanent income hypothesis. More speci…cally

                                  M P C1l = M P C1blow = 1          .                          (14)

In contrast, since type bhigh borrowers are at their constraint, they consume all of the
                          b
additional income, M P C1high = 1. Hence, the marginal propensity to consume of borrowers
as a group is given by:
                                  M P C1b        + (1       ) (1   ).                          (15)

In particular, the parameter       enables us to calibrate the MPC di¤erences between bor-
rowers and lenders.
   To characterize the general equilibrium, we make a couple more simplifying
assumptions— that can be dropped at the expense of additional notation. First, suppose
borrowers do not know their types, fbhigh ; blow g, at date 0 and receive this information at
date 1. Second, borrowers also cannot trade assets whose payo¤s are contingent on their
idiosyncratic type realizations. These assumptions ensure each borrower enters date 1 with
the same amount of outstanding debt, denoted by d1 as before. As before, there is a thresh-
old debt level d1 , such that the equilibrium features a liquidity trap only if d1 > d1 . The
analysis in the appendix further shows that

                          @e1                       M P C1b M P C1l
                              =              =                         .                       (16)
                          @d1       2             2  M P C1b + M P C1l

As before, an increase in outstanding leverage at date 1 leads to a deeper recession. More-
over, the strength of the e¤ect depends on MPC di¤erences between borrowers and lenders.
Intuitively, greater leverage in‡uences aggregate demand by transferring wealth at date 1



                                                  19
from borrowers to lenders. This transfer a¤ects aggregate demand, and thus output, more
when there is a greater di¤erence between borrowers’and lenders’MPCs.
        It is also instructive to consider the planner’s constrained optimality condition— the
analogue of Eq. (13) in this case— given by:

                             l 0                            b
                              u    cl1                      E0 u0 cb1
                                                    =                      for each D1 > d1 ,                 (17)
                      1    M P C1l u0 cl0               1   M P C1b u0 cb0

where the expectation operator E0 [ ] is taken over borrowers’ types at date 1. Observe
                                                                                                  1
that the planner weighs type h agents’consumption at date 1 by a factor                        1 M P C1h
                                                                                                         .   Given
that borrowers have a higher MPC, the planner distorts agents’ Euler equations towards
providing more consumption to borrowers at date 1. Moreover, the planner’s optimal
intervention— measured as a wedge between borrowers’and lenders’Euler equations— also
depends on the MPC di¤erences between borrowers and lenders.
        The empirical literature shows that borrowers’ MPC was indeed signi…cantly greater
than lenders’ MPC in the recent deleveraging episode. For example, Baker (2013) …nds
that a one standard deviation increase in a household’s debt-to-asset ratio raises its MPC
by about 20% (about 7 percentage points from a baseline of 37 percentage points— for a
sample with median debt to asset ratio of approximately 0.4). See also the survey by Jappelli
and Pistaferri (2010) and recent papers by Mian et al. (2013) and Parker et al. (2013).
Our analysis suggest that the results from this literature can be used to guide optimal
macroprudential policy.


5        Uncertainty and underinsurance
We next analyze the e¢ ciency of households’insurance arrangements against deleveraging
episodes. This requires extending our analysis to incorporate uncertainty. To this end,
consider the baseline setting with a single type of borrower, but suppose the economy is in
one of two states s 2 fH; Lg from date 1 onwards. The states di¤er in their debt limits.
State L captures a deleveraging state with a debt limit as before,                    t+1;L      for each t     1.
State H in contrast captures an unconstrained state similar to date 0 of the earlier analysis,
that is,             = 1 for each t            1. We let    h   denote the belief of type h households for state
             t+1;H                                          s
s. We assume          h   > 0 8h so that the deleveraging episode is anticipated by all households.
                      L
        We simplify the analysis by assuming that starting date 1, both types of households have
                                       b        l
the same discount factor                   =        =   .7 At date 0, however, borrowers are weakly more
                                   b       l
impatient than lenders,            0       0.   In addition, we also assume borrowers are (weakly) more
    7
    This ensures that the equilibrium is non-degenerate in the high state H. Alternatively, we could impose
a …nite debt limit t+1;H < 1.


                                                                20
optimistic than lenders about the likelihood of the unconstrained state,                              b     l .   Neither
                                                                                                      H     H
of these assumptions is necessary, but since impatience/myopia and excessive optimism
were viewed as important contributing factors to many deleveraging crises, they enable us
to obtain additional interesting results.
     At date 0, households are allowed to trade in a complete market of one-period ahead
Arrow securities. Let q1;s denote the price of an Arrow security that pays 1 unit of consump-
tion good in state s 2 fH; Lg of date 1. Let dh1;s denote the security issuance of household h
                                                       P h b
contingent on state s 2 fH; Lg. Household h raises s q1;s      d1;s units of consumption good
                                                                                P
at date 0. Observe that the real interest rate at date 0 satis…es 1 + r1 = 1= s q1;s . Given
this notation, the optimization problem of households and the de…nition of equilibrium
generalize to uncertainty in a straightforward way.
     The equilibrium in state L of date 1 conditional on debt level d1;s is the same as described
as before. In particular, the interest rate is zero and there is a demand driven recession
as long as the outstanding debt level is su¢ ciently large, d1;L > d1 . The equilibrium in
state H jumps immediately to a steady-state with interest rate 1 + rt+1 = 1=                                  > 0 and
consumption         cht;H   =e   (1    ) dh1;H   8t       1.
     The main di¤erence concerns households’ date 0 choices. In this case, households’
allocations satisfy not only the analogue of the Euler equation (9) but also a full-insurance
equation across the two states:

                                               l u0   cl1;H          b u0        cb1;H
                                  q1;H         H                     H
                                       =                        =                        .                           (18)
                                  q1;L         l u0   cl1;L          b u0        cb1;L
                                               L                     L


We next describe under which conditions households choose a su¢ ciently high debt level
for state L to trigger a recession, d1;L > d1 :

Proposition 3. There is a deleveraging-induced recession in state L of date 1 if the borrower
is either (i) su¢ ciently impatient or (ii) su¢ ciently indebted or (iii) su¢ ciently optimistic
                                                                                   b          b
at date 0. Speci…cally, for any two of the parameters                              0 ; d0 ;   L   , we can determine a
threshold for the third parameter such that d1;L > d1 if the threshold is crossed, i.e. if
 b       b          b                 b    b          b         b   b
 0   <   0   d0 ;   L   or d0 > d0    0;   L     or   L   <     L   0 ; d0   .

     The thresholds are characterized in more detail in Appendix A.2. The …rst two cases
are analogous to the cases in Proposition 1: if borrowers have a strong reason to take on
leverage, they also place some of their debt in state L, even though this triggers a recession.
The last case identi…es a new factor that could exacerbate this outcome. If borrowers assign
a su¢ ciently low probability to state L, relative to lenders, then they naturally have more
debt outstanding in state L as opposed to state H. In each scenario, d1;L > d1 and there is

                                                           21
a recession in state L of date 1.
    To analyze constrained e¢ ciency of this equilibrium, consider a planner who chooses
households’ allocations at date 0 and the outstanding leverage at date 1, but leaves the
remaining allocations to the market. As before, we will see that the allocations chosen
by this planner can be implemented with simple debt market policies. The constrained
planning problem can be written as:

                                                           h
                                                                                       !
                              X                            X                                         X            X
                                  h
           max                        u   ch0   +      h
                                                       0           Vsh (D1;s ; D1;s )         s.t.        ch0 =       nh0   v nh0 .
  ((ch0 ;nh0 )h ;(D1;s )s )   h                              s                                        h           h
                                                                                                                                (19)
Our next result characterizes the solution to this problem.

Proposition 4 (Underinsurance). An allocation                                     ch0 ; nh0    h
                                                                                                   ; (D1;s )s , with D1;L        , is
constrained e¢ cient if and only if output at date 0 is e¢ cient, i.e., e0 = e ; households’
                                                                 l l             b b 0 b
                                                                     u0 (cl )        u (c1;H )
substitution between date 0 and state H of date 1 is e¢ cient, 0 Hu0 cl 1;H = 0 H              ;
                                                                      ( 0)         u (ch
                                                                                    0
                                                                                       0)
and the remaining consumption and leverage allocations satisfy one of the following:
    (i) D1;L < d1 and the full insurance equation (18) holds.
    (ii) D1;L = d1 and the distorted insurance inequality holds:

                                                l u0       cl1;H           b u0    cb1;H
                                                H                          H
                                                                                                                                (20)
                                                l u0       cl1;L           b u0    cb1;L
                                                L                          L


Moreover, every constrained e¢ cient allocation of this type can be implemented as a compet-
itive equilibrium with the mandatory insurance requirement, dh1;L                                         d1 for each h, combined
with an appropriate ex-ante transfer, T0 .

    The second part illustrates our main result with uncertainty: Constrained e¢ cient allo-
cations satisfy the distorted insurance inequality in (20). Moreover, these allocations can be
implemented with an endogenous limit on an agent’s outstanding debt in state L, db1                                            D1;L .
Since this policy is equivalent to an insurance requirement that restricts agents’ losses in
the deleveraging state, we refer to it as a mandatory insurance requirement. In particular,
the competitive equilibrium characterized in Proposition 3, which features d1;L > d1 , is
constrained ine¢ cient and can be Pareto improved with a simple insurance requirement.
    This result identi…es a distinct type of ine¢ ciency in our setting. Borrowers in a compet-
itive equilibrium not only take on excessive leverage, but they also buy too little insurance
with respect to severe deleveraging episodes. Intuitively, they do not take into account the
positive aggregate demand externalities their insurance purchases would bring about.
    Since housing price declines typically coincide with declines in the borrowing ability


                                                                     22
of households, this result provides a rationale for indexing mortgage liabilities to housing
prices. Home equity insurance along these lines has long been proposed as being privately
bene…cial for homeowners (see, for instance, Shiller and Weiss, 1999). Our model emphasizes
the uninternalized social bene…ts and creates a rationale for making this type of insurance
mandatory— especially with respect to severe and economy-wide downturns in house prices.
    In practice, homeowners do not seem to be particularly interested in home equity insur-
ance (see Shiller, 2003). One reason for this is borrowers’optimism (see Case, Shiller, and
Thompson, 2012, for evidence of homebuyers’optimism in the run-up to the recent crisis).
Our analysis— for the case of Proposition 3 in which borrowers and lenders disagree—
illustrates that optimism and aggregate demand externalities are complementary sources of
underinsurance. In particular, optimism generates a …rst source of underinsurance relative
to a common belief benchmark, which is privately optimal for the agent. However, opti-
mism also contributes to leverage and makes the aggregate demand externalities more likely
to emerge. These externalities in turn generate a second source of underinsurance that is
socially ine¢ cient.
    The ine¢ ciency result in Proposition 4 generalizes to an economy in which …nancial
markets are incomplete so that households only have access to noncontingent debt. This
amounts to imposing the constraint d1    d1;L = d1;H for households’problem in competitive
equilibrium as well as for the constrained planning problem. The main di¤erence in this
case is that, since the interest rate r2 in state H is variable, the planner that sets D1
considers not only the aggregate demand externalities in state L but also the pecuniary
externalities in state H. In fact, since agents’ marginal utilities across states H and L
are not equated, these pecuniary externalities by themselves could generate ine¢ ciencies.
However, in our setting with two continuation states, aggregate demand externalities are
su¢ ciently powerful that the equilibrium always features too much leverage.


6     Preventive monetary policies
The analysis so far has focused on macroprudential policies in debt markets. A natural
question is whether preventive monetary policies could also be desirable to mitigate the
ine¢ ciencies in this environment. In this section, we analyze respectively the e¤ect of
changing the in‡ation target and adopting contractionary monetary policy.

6.1   Changing the in‡ation target
Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (BDM, 2010), among others, emphasized that a higher
in‡ation target could be useful to avoid or mitigate the liquidity trap. Appendix A.1


                                            23
illustrates that a Taylor rule with a higher in‡ation target lowers the bound (1) on the
real rate. More speci…cally, the bound is now given by rt+1 =                      1+   for each t     1,
where       > 0 corresponds to a positive in‡ation target. Consequently, a greater level of
leverage is necessary to plunge the economy into a demand driven recession, consistent with
BDM (2010). Our analysis adds further that this policy might also improve social welfare
because the aggregate demand externalities emerge only when the real rate is constrained.
These welfare bene…ts should be weighed against the various costs of a higher steady-state
in‡ation.

6.2      Contractionary monetary policy
It has also been discussed that interest rate policy could be used as a preventive measure
against …nancial crises. In fact, a number of economists have argued that the US Federal
Reserve should have raised interest rates in the mid-2000s in order to lean against the
housing bubble or to reduce leverage (see Woodford (2012) and Rajan (2010) for detailed
discussions). We next investigate the e¤ect of contractionary policy at date 0 on household
leverage.
       To this end, consider the baseline setting with a single type of borrower and no uncer-
tainty. Suppose the conditions in Proposition 1 apply so that there is a liquidity trap at
date 1. We capture contractionary monetary policy by considering a policymaker that sets
the interest rate ‡oor r1 at date 0 to a level that is higher than the “natural” interest rate
characterized by the Euler equations (9). Then, the equilibrium interest rate is given by
this level, r1 = r1 , and the equilibrium features a policy-induced recession at date 0, that
is, agents’net income falls to e0 < e . Moreover, agents’Euler equations are now given by

                               l 0                     b 0
                       1        u (e1 + (d1    ))       u (e1 (d1    ))
                            =                     =                     ,                            (21)
                     1 + r1   u0 e0 + d0 1+rd1
                                                    u0 e0         d1
                                                             d0 1+r
                                                     1                         1



where e1 = cl1      (d1     ) < e as in (8). This describes two equations in two unknowns,
e0 (r1 ) ; d1 (r1 ), which can be solved as a function of the policy rate r1 . Our next result
characterizes the comparative statics with respect to r1 .

Proposition 5 (Contractionary Monetary Policy). Consider the equilibrium described
above with a liquidity trap at date 1 and the constrained interest rate r1 = r1 at date 0.
Suppose       u00 (x) =u (x) is a weakly decreasing function of x. Suppose also that d0 is su¢ -
                             d1 (r1 )
ciently large so that d0     1+r1       > 0. Then, e00 (r1 ) < 0 and d01 (r1 ) > 0, that is: increasing
the interest rate r1 decreases the current net income and increases the outstanding debt level
d1 .


                                                     24
   The proposition considers cases in which the utility function lies in the commonly
used decreasing absolute risk aversion family— which encompasses the CRRA family— and
lenders’initial assets are su¢ ciently large so that their consumption exceeds borrowers’con-
sumption (see (21)). As expected, raising the interest rate in the run-up to a deleveraging
episode creates a recession. Perhaps surprisingly, under quite natural assumptions, raising
the interest rate in our setting also increases the equilibrium leverage. This in turn leads
to a more severe recession at date 1.
   To understand this result, suppose u (c) = log c and              = 0. In this case, borrowers’and
lenders’ optimal debt choices have closed form solutions, conditional on the income levels
e0 and e1 , given by


                                   1
                         db1 =          b
                                            e1        b
                                                          (1 + r1 ) (e0   d0 )                   (22)
                                  1+
                                   1
                         dl1 =          l
                                            e1    l
                                                          (1 + r1 ) (e0 + d0 ) .
                                  1+

In particular, keeping e0 and e1 constant, a higher r1 reduces both db1 and dl1 . Intuitively,
the substitution e¤ect induces borrowers to borrow less but also lenders to save more. This
creates an excess demand in the asset market (that is, db1 +dl1 falls below 0)— or equivalently,
a shortage of demand in the goods market. To equilibrate markets, output falls and agents’
net income e0 declines. As this happens, both db1 and dl1 increases: that is, borrowers borrow
more and lenders save less so as to smooth their consumption. In our model, these e¤ects
are roughly balanced across borrowers and lenders since all agents share the same elasticity
of intertemporal substitution. In fact, if d0 were equal to 0, the reduction in e0 would be
(with log utility) just enough to counter the initial e¤ect and the equilibrium debt level
d1 = db1 =   dl1 would remain unchanged (see (22)). When d0 is su¢ ciently large, higher r1
creates an additional wealth transfer from borrowers to lenders. This increases borrowers’
debt db1 further— while increasing lenders’assets— generating a higher equilibrium debt level
d1 = db1 . The proof in the appendix uses more subtle arguments to establish the result more
generally.
   Hence, the conventional wisdom— that raising the interest rate decreases leverage— fails
in view of two general equilibrium e¤ects on borrowers’income and wealth. First, the higher
interest rate creates a temporary recession, which reduces borrowers’ current income and
induces them to take on greater debt. Second, the higher interest rate also transfers wealth
from borrowers to lenders, which further increases borrowers’ debt. The combination of
these two e¤ects can— and in our model typically does— dominate the partial equilibrium
e¤ect of the higher interest rate, leading to greater debt in equilibrium.


                                                 25
        We could construct variants of our model in which raising the interest rate decreases
the outstanding leverage, d1 . For instance, if borrowers’intertemporal substitution is more
elastic than lenders’, as in Curdia and Woodford (2009), then the equilibrium debt level
might decrease due to stronger a substitution e¤ect for borrowers. However, even in these
cases, the interest rate policy would not be the optimal instrument to deal with the excessive
leverage problem. To see this, recall that the constrained e¢ cient allocations in Proposition
2 do not feature a recession at date 0, and that they satisfy the distorted Euler inequality
(13). In contrast, raising the interest rate creates an ine¢ cient recession and continues to
satisfy the Euler equations in (21).
        One way to interpret these di¤erences is that the interest rate policy sets a single wedge
that a¤ects the incentives for intertemporal substitution, whereas the constrained e¢ cient
allocations require setting wedges that di¤erentially a¤ect borrowers’and lenders’incentives
to hold assets. Given that the interest rate policy targets “the wrong wedge,” it could
at best be viewed as a crude solution for dealing with excessive leverage. In contrast,
macroprudential policies, e.g., debt limits or insurance requirements, optimally internalize
aggregate demand externalities created by leverage.
        It is important to emphasize that contractionary monetary policy could well be desirable
for reasons outside the scope of our model. For instance, raising the interest rate might be
useful to mitigate ine¢ cient investment booms and …re-sale externalities as in Lorenzoni
(2008) or Stein (2012). A higher interest rate might also be useful to lean against asset
price bubbles, e.g., by discouraging the “search for yield” phenomenon discussed in Rajan
(2010). Our point is that contractionary monetary policy is not the ideal instrument to
reduce household leverage, and in fact, might have the unintended consequence of raising
leverage.


7        Aggregate demand and …re-sale externalities
In this section we endogenize the debt limit faced by borrowers by assuming that debt is
collateralized by a …nancial asset, creating the potential for …re-sale e¤ects. This introduces
a new feedback loop into the economy: …rst, a decline in asset prices reduces the borrowing
capacity of agents and forces them to delever, giving rise to …nancial ampli…cation; secondly,
in a liquidity trap, deleveraging leads to a demand-induced decline in output that triggers
Keynesian multiplier e¤ects. The two feedback e¤ects mutually reinforce each other. As
a result, a recession involving deleveraging and …re-sale e¤ects of collateral assets may be
particularly severe.8
    8
    The interaction between asset …re sales and aggregate demand has also been studied in Carlstrom and
Fuerst (1997), Bernanke et al. (1999) and Iacoviello (2005). In these papers, monetary policy can mitigate


                                                   26
       We modify our earlier setup by assuming that borrowers hold one unit at = 1 of a tree
from which they obtain a dividend yt every date. For simplicity, we assume that the tree
only pays dividends if it is owned by borrowers so the tree cannot be sold to lenders. The
tree trades among borrowers at a market price of pt . We follow Jeanne and Korinek (2010b)
in assuming that borrowers are subject to a moral hazard problem and have the option to
abscond with their loans after the market for loans has closed. In order to alleviate the
moral hazard problem, they pledge their trees as collateral to lenders. When a borrower
absconds with her loan, lenders can detect this and can seize up to a fraction                       t+1   < 1 of the
collateral and sell it to other borrowers. The borrowing constraint is therefore endogenous
and given by:
                                   dt+1 = (1 + rt+1 )           t+1 at+1 pt .

Similar to earlier, we assume        1   = 1 and   t+1      =        < 1 for each t       1. Deleveraging may
now be driven by two separate forces: a decline in the pledgeability parameter,                                 t,   and
a decline in the price of the collateral asset. We will see shortly that declines in                             t    are
generally ampli…ed by asset price declines.

       In the following, we make two simplifying assumptions. First, starting date t = 2, we
assume that the output from the tree is a constant y and there are no further shocks. Second,
                                                        b        l
we let the discount factors of the two agents               =        = . Together, these two assumptions
imply that the economy will be in a steady state starting date 2 in which debt is constant
at dt = d2 and the asset price and consumption satisfy pt =                     1   y, cbt = y + e         (1        ) d2 ,
clt   = e + (1     ) d2 for t   2 respectively.
       We next consider the equilibrium at date 1 at which the asset’s dividend is given by some
y1      y. As before, if the debt level is su¢ ciently large, that is, d1 > d1 for some threshold d1 ,
then the economy is in a liquidity trap. In particular, borrowers are constrained, d2 = p1 ,
the interest rate is at zero, r2 = 0, and output is below its e¢ cient level, e1 < e . Moreover,
the equilibrium is determined lenders’Euler equation at the zero interest rate:

                            u0 (e1 + d1      p1 ) = u0 (e + (1              ) p1 ) .                                 (23)

The di¤erence is that the asset price also enters this equation since higher prices increase
the endogenous debt limit, which in‡uences aggregate demand and output. The asset price
the feedback e¤ects resulting from tightening borrowing constraints. We consider the possibility of a lower
bound on interest rates that prevents this, and we add a normative dimension focused on debt market
policies.




                                                    27
is in turn characterized by:

                                                                     u0 cb2                            y
                p1 = M RS (e1 ; p1 ) p2 =                                                                  ,         (24)
                                                      (1         ) u0 cb1 +       u0   cb2     1
                                     (
                                         cb2 = e + y        (1      ) p1
                             where                                            .
                                         cb1   = e 1 + y1    d1 + p1

                                                                                       y
This captures that today’s asset price is tomorrow’s price p2 =                   1        discounted by the M RS
applicable to asset purchases, which in turn re‡ects that a fraction                               of the asset can be
purchased with borrowed funds. Since the extent of deleveraging at date 1 is endogenous to
p1 , the M RS is itself a function of the asset price p1 . For the implicit asset price equation
(24) to have a unique and well-de…ned solution, it is necessary that the slope of the left-
hand side is higher than the slope of the right-hand side, i.e. p2 @M RS=@p1 < 1. (The
condition is characterized in terms of fundamental parameters in the appendix.) We also
observe that @M RS=@e1 > 0 as higher income today makes borrowers more willing to buy
assets. Therefore the equilibrium asset price de…ned by the equation is increasing in current
income, dp1 =de1 > 0. Furthermore, the asset price is increasing in the exogenous collateral
limit, , which can be understood from a collateral value channel: A higher                                     implies the
asset is more useful to relax the borrowing constraint, which raises its price.
   The equilibrium is characterized by two equations, (23) and (24), in two unknowns
(e1 ; p1 ). The …rst equation describes an increasing relation, eAD
                                                                 1 (p1 ), that represents the
aggregate demand e¤ects of asset prices. Intuitively, a higher price raises the endogenous
debt level, which in turn raises aggregate demand and output. The second equation de-
scribes the consumer’s asset pricing relationship eAP
                                                   1 (p1 ), i.e. it captures the level of income
required to support a given asset price. It is also increasing under our earlier assumption
on the M RS. Intuitively, supporting a higher asset price requires higher consumption and
therefore a higher net income, e1 . Any intersection of these two curves, that also satis…es
@eAP         AD
  1 =@p1 > @e1 =@p1 , is a stable equilibrium.
                                                                                           @V h
   To analyze welfare, consider the externalities from leverage,                           @D1 ,       which can now be
written as:

                          @V l                  de1
                                 = u0 cl1           ;
                          @D1                   dD1
                          @V b                  de1    dp1 h 0 b                              i
                                 = u0 cb1            +      u c1                   u0 cb2          ,
                          @D1                   dD1    dD1

        de1         dp1
where   dD1   and   dD1   are jointly obtained from expressions (23) and (24) and are both negative
under the assumptions made earlier. Note that the expression for both types of households


                                                        28
features aggregate demand externalities. The expression for borrowers features in addition
…re sale externalities. Intuitively, a higher debt level lowers borrowers’consumption, which
in turn lowers the asset price. The low price in turn tightens borrowing constraints and
further reduces borrower’ welfare. Recall also that a low price further reduces aggregate
demand and output, which in turn generates even lower prices, and so on.
    It follows that endogenizing the …nancial constraint as a function of asset prices reinforces
the problems of excessive leverage and underinsurance through two channels. First, it
introduces …re-sale externalities that operate on borrowers’ welfare in the same direction
as aggregate demand externalities. Second, it exacerbates aggregate demand externalities
by tightening borrowing constraints further. The latter e¤ect also illustrates an interesting
mechanism through which asset price declines hurt all agents in the economy via aggregate
demand e¤ects, even if they do not hold …nancial assets. In this model, lenders do not
hold the asset, but they are nonetheless hurt by the price decline because it leads to more
deleveraging and magni…es the recession.


8    Conclusion
When borrowers are forced to delever, the interest rate might fail to decline su¢ ciently to
clear the goods market, plunging the economy into a liquidity trap. This paper analyzed
the role of preventive policies in the run-up to such episodes. We established that the com-
petitive equilibrium allocations feature excessive leverage and underinsurance. A planner
can improve welfare and implement constrained e¢ cient allocations by using macropru-
dential policies such as debt limits or mandatory insurance requirements. The size of the
required intervention depends on the di¤erences in marginal propensity to consume between
borrowers and lenders during the deleveraging episode.
    We also showed that contractionary monetary policy that raises the interest rate cannot
implement the constrained e¢ cient allocations in this setting. Moreover, due to general
equilibrium e¤ects, this policy can have the unintended consequence of increasing household
leverage and exacerbating aggregate demand externalities. That said, a contractionary
monetary policy could well be desirable for reasons outside our model. We leave a more
complete analysis of preventive monetary policies for future work.
    Although we focus on consumption and household leverage, our mechanism also has
implications for investment and …rms’leverage. Similar to households, …rms feature a great
deal of heterogeneity in their propensities to invest out of liquidity. Moreover, although
there is no consensus, …rms that are more …nancially constrained seem to have greater
propensity to invest (see, for instance, Rauh, 2006) especially during a …nancial crisis (see
Campello, Graham, Harvey, 2010). Hence, transferring ex-post wealth from borrowing …rms

                                               29
to “lending” …rms (those with large holdings of cash) is likely to decrease investment and
aggregate demand. Our main results then suggests that …rms will also borrow too much,
and purchase too little insurance, in the run-up to …nancial crises. Just like with households,
these ine¢ ciencies can be corrected with macroprudential policies such as debt limits and
capital/insurance requirements.
   A growing literature on …nancial crises has emphasized various other factors that en-
courage excessive leverage, including …re-sale externalities, optimism, and moral hazard.
Our analysis suggests these distortions are complementary to the aggregate demand ex-
ternalities that we emphasize. For instance, asset …re sales reduce aggregate demand by
tightening borrowing constraints, which in turn exacerbates aggregate demand externali-
ties. Similarly, optimistic beliefs imply agents take on excessive leverage and do not want
to insure, which makes it more likely that the economy enters the high-leverage conditions
under which aggregate demand externalities matter. An interesting future direction is to
investigate further the interaction between various sources of excessive leverage.




                                              30
References
Aiyagari, Rao, 1994, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,”Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 109(3), pp. 659-684.

Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen, 1985, “A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle,
With Wage and Price Inertia,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, pp. 823-838.

Ball, Laurence and Sandeep Mazumder, 2011, “In‡ation Dynamics and the Great Reces-
sion,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 337-387.

Barro, Robert and Herschel Grossman, 1971, “A General Disequilibrium Model of Income
and Employment,” American Economic Review 61(1), pp. 82-93.

Benassy, Jean-Pascal, 1986, Macroeconomics: An Introduction to the Non-Walrasian Ap-
proach, Academic Press:Orlando.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics 1(21), pp. 1341-
1393.

Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, 2010, “Rethinking Macroeco-
nomic Policy”, IMF Sta¤ Position Note 10/3.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Borrowing: Finan-
cial Development and Underinsurance”, Journal of Finance 58(2), pp. 867-894.

Caballero, Ricardo and Emmanuel Farhi, 2013, “A Model of the Safe Asset Mechanism
(SAM): Safety Traps and Economic Policy,” NBER Working Paper 18737.

Campello, Murillo, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey, (2010), “The Real E¤ects of
Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis,”Journal of Financial Economics,
97, p.470-487.

Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy S. Fuerst (1997), “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and
Business Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,”American Economic
Review 87(5), pp. 893-910.

Case, Karl, Robert Shiller, and Anna Thompson (2012), “What Have They Been Thinking?
Home Buyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Christiano, Larry, Eichenbaum, Martin and Sergio Rebelo (2011), “When is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 19, pp. 78–121.

Clower, Richard, “The Keynesian Counter-Revolution: A Theoretical Appraisal,” in F. H.
Hahn and F. P. R. Brechling, eds., The Theory of Interest Rates, London.

                                          31
Coibion, Oliver and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2013), “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well
After All? In‡ation Expectations and the Missing Disin‡ation,” working paper.
Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini and Pedro Teles (2013), “Unconven-
tional Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound”, American Economic Review 103(4), pp. 1172-1211.
Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, 2009, “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Pol-
icy,” BIS Working Paper 278.
Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford, 2003, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 139-233.
Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford, 2004, “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a
Liquidity Trap”, NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, 2004.
Eggertsson, Gauti, 2011, “What Fiscal Policy is E¤ective at Zero Interest Rates?” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Vol. 25, pp. 59-112.
Eggertsson, Gauti and Paul Krugman, 2012, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), pp. 1469-1513.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, 2012a, “Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Capital
Controls with Fixed Exchange Rates”, NBER Working Paper 18199.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, 2012b, “Fiscal Unions”, NBER Working Paper 18280.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, 2013, “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the
Presence of Nominal Rigidities”, NBER Working Paper 19313.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
the Liquidity Trap”, NBER Working Paper 17583.
Hall, Robert E., 2011, “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review 101(2), 431–469
Hall, Robert E., 2013, “The Routes into and out of the Zero Lower Bound,”Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Proceedings.
Hicks, John R., 1937, “Mr. Keynes and the "Classics;" A Suggested Interpretation,”Econo-
metrica 5(2).
Iacoviello, Matteo, 2004, “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in
the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 95(3), 739-764.
Japelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, 2010, “The Consumption Response to Income Changes,”
Annual Review of Economics, pp. 479–506.
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2010a, “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigou-
vian Taxation Approach,” American Economic Review, pp. 403–407.

                                           32
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2010b, “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigou-
vian Taxation Approach,” NBER Working Paper 16377.

Kocherlakota, Narayana, 2012, “Incomplete Labor Markets,”mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis.

Korinek, Anton, 2011, “Systemic Risk-Taking: Ampli…cation E¤ects, Externalities, and
Regulatory Responses”, ECB Working Paper 1345.

Krugman, Paul, 1998, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap”,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998(2), pp. 137-187.

Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, “Ine¢ cient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies 75(3),
809-833.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, 2013, “Learning from In‡ation Expectations,”Stan-
ford University, mimeo.

Malinvaud, Edmond, 1977, Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered, Oxford: Blackwell Pub-
lishers.

Mankiw, Gregory, 1985, “Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic
Model of Monopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(2), pp. 529-537.

Mian, Atif and Amir Su…, 2012, “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate
Demand Channel,” NBER Working Paper 17830.

Mian, Atif, Kamelesh Rao and Amir Su…, 2013, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
and the Economic Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson and Robert McClelland (2013),
“Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American Economic
Review 103(6), pp. 2530-2553.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2010, Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Econ-
omy, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

Rauh, J., 2006, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of
Corporate Pension Plans,”Journal of Finance, 61, p.33-75.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, 2012a, “Prudential Policy for Peggers”, Amer-
ican Economic Review 102(2), pp. 192-197.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, 2012b, “Managing Currency Pegs”, NBER
Working Paper 18092.



                                            33
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, 2012c, “Pegs and Pain”, NBER Working
Paper 16847.

Shiller, Robert and Allan Weiss, 1999, “Home Equity Insurance,” Journal of Real Estate
Finance and Economics 19, p.21–47.

Shiller, Robert, 2003, The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, Princeton Uni-
versity Press.

Stein, Jeremy, 2012, Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 127, no. 1, p.57-95.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Woodford, Michael, 2012, “In‡ation Targeting and Financial Stability,” NBER Working
Paper 17967.

Werning, Iván, 2012, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy”, NBER
Working Paper 17344.




                                             34
A     Appendix: Extensions and omitted proofs
A.1    Microfounding the lower bound on the real interest rate
In the main text, we took the lower bound (1) on the real interest rate as given. We next
provide a microfoundation for this bound based on two assumptions related to nominal
variables. Consider the cashless limit economy described in Woodford (2003). Let Pt
denote the nominal price of the consumption good at date t and it+1 denote the nominal
interest rate.
Assumption (A1). There is a zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate:

                                       it+1   0 for each t      0.                                    (A.1)

This assumption captures a no-arbitrage condition between money and government bonds.
Assumption (A2). The nominal interest rate, it+1 , is set according to a standard Taylor
rule adjusted for the zero lower bound, given by:


                                           n
         log (1 + it+1 ) = max 0; log 1 + rt+1 +               (log (Pt =Pt   1)     log (1 + )) , (A.2)
                  n                      u0 cht
       where 1 + rt+1 =       min       h 0
                                                    and       > 1.
                             h2fb;lg     u cht+1

This version of the Taylor rule is designed to set the gross in‡ation equal to the gross target,
1+ , whenever possible. In fact, we will see below that the Taylor rule in our setting implies

                               Pt+1 =Pt = 1 +           for each t   1.                              (A.3)
                                                                                                   h      i
Combining Eqs. (A:1) and (A:3) with the Fisher equation, 1 + rt+1                  = (1 + it+1 ) Et PPt+1
                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                            ,
leads to the bound:
                        rt+1 rt+1 =           for each t 1:
                                        1+
The baseline analysis considers the case in which the target, , is normalized to 0. Section
6 discusses the case       0.
    Eq. (A:3) also implies that the Taylor rule with = 0 is the optimal time-consistent
policy if there is some cost to in‡ation, i.e. it is ex-post e¢ cient. Hence, absent commitment,
the optimal monetary policy naturally leads to the lower bound in (1). On the other hand,
if the monetary policy could commit at date 0 to creating in‡ation at date 1, then the
lower bound could be circumvented–as emphasized by Krugman (1998) and the subsequent
literature.
    It remains to show the claim that the Taylor rule in (A:2) implies Eq. (A:3). Recall
that starting date 2 the real interest rate is constant and given by rt+1 = 1= l 1 > 0.
Assumption (A2) then implies that the in‡ation is at its target level, that is, Pt =Pt 1 = 1+
for each t 2 as long as the nominal interest rate, it~+1 , is positive and …nite for each t~ 2.
To see this, suppose Pt =Pt 1 > 1 + for some t               2. Then, the Taylor rule along with



                                                   35
                                                                       Pt+1
the Fisher equation, 1 + rt+1 = (1 + it+1 ) PPt+1
                                               t
                                                  , implies        Pt
                                                                              =
                                                                  Pt 1 = (1 + )
                                                                        Pt      . Given the
                                                                    Pt~+1
Taylor coe¢ cient > 1, repeating this argument implies limt~!1 Pt~ = 1, which yields a
contradiction. A similar contradiction is obtained if Pt =Pt 1 < 1 + for some t 2.9

A.2     Omitted proofs for the baseline model
This section presents the proofs of the results for the baseline model and its variants analyzed
in Sections 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Proof of Proposition 1. The result claims there is a recession at date 1 under appropriate
conditions. To prove this result, suppose the contrary, that is, e0 = e1 = e . Let r1 (d0 )
denote the interest rate at which lenders would hold assets d1 in equilibrium, de…ned by:
                                           l 0
                                 1          u e + d1
                                      = 0                      .
                               1 + r1  u e + d0 d1 = (1 + r1 )

Note that for r1 (d0 ) is a decreasing function of d0 . This also implies that d0
d1 = (1 + r1 (d0 )) is increasing in d0 .
     The equilibrium features d1 > d1 if the marginal rates of substitution of the two agents
at the debt level d1 satisfy:

                                    l 0                        b 0
                                     u    cl1                   u      cb1
                                                          >
                                   u0 cl0                      u0 cb0
                                                d1 =d1                     d1 =d1
                         l 0                                             b 0
                          ue + d1                                         u e         d1 +
          or                                              >                                           .   (A.4)
                u0   e + d0 d1 = (1 + r1 (d0 ))               u0   e         d0 + d1 = (1 + r1 (d0 ))

Observe that the right hand side of this inequality is decreasing in b . Hence, for a given
                                                          b
debt level d0 , there is a threshold level of impatience (d0 ) such that the inequality holds
                 b
for each b         (d0 ).
    Similarly, since d0 d1 = (1 + r1 (d0 )) is increasing in d0 , the left hand side of (A:4) is
increasing in d0 , while the right hand side is decreasing in d0 . Hence, for a given level b ,
there is a threshold level d0 b such that the inequality holds for each d0 > d0 b . It
follows that d1 > d1 , and thus, there is a recession at date 1, if the borrowers is su¢ ciently
impatient or su¢ ciently indebted at date 0.
                                                                         de1
Proof of Lemma 1. First consider the case d1 > d1 . Eq. (8) implies dd     1
                                                                             = 1. Eq. (10)
                h
             @V       0   h
then implies @D1 = u u1 < 0.
   Next consider the case d1 < d1 . In this case, di¤erentiating lenders’Euler equation (9),
we have:
                        dr2                 u00 cl1
                            = l                                < 0.
                        dd1      u0 cl2     u00 cl1 = (1 + r)2
   9
   We abstract away from the equilibria with self-ful…lling de‡ationary traps and in‡ationary panics (see
Cochrane, 2011).


                                                         36
This in turn raises consumption of borrowers and lowers consumption of lenders by:

                              dcb1                         dr2              dcl1
                                   =               2                  and        =         .
                              dd1        (1 + r)           dd1              dd1

It can also be checked that         2 (0; 1), completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 2. Let rsub V h (d1 ; D1 ) denote the set of subgradients of function
V h ( ) with respect to its second variable (aggregate debt level). If D1 6= d1 , the function
V h is di¤erentiable in its second variable. In this case, there is a unique subgradient
characterized by Lemma 1. If D1 = d1 , then the function V h has a kink at d1 due to
the kink of the function e1 (D1 ) (see Eqs. (10) and (8)). In this case, there are multiple
subgradients characterized by:

                                                       u0 ch1 ; u0 ch1 ;                 if h = l
                      rsub V h d1 ; d1 =                                                          .    (A.5)
                                                         u0 ch1 ; u0 ch1                 if h = b

In particular, for each h, the the subgradients lie in the interval between the right and the
left derivatives of the function V h characterized in Lemma 1.
    Next consider the optimality conditions for problem (12), which can be written as:
                                   l                   l         b              b
                                        u0 cl1 +                     u0 cb1
                                                           =                         ,                 (A.6)
                                         u0 cl0                       u0 cb0
where h 2 rsub V h (D1 ; D1 ) denotes the subgradient evaluated at individual and aggregate
debt levels, D1 . Note that we consider generalized …rst order conditions that apply also at
points at which the objective function might have a kink. Conversely, it can also be seen
that any allocation that satis…es these conditions, along with the intratemporal condition
v 0 nh0 = 1 for each h, corresponds to a solution to problem (12) given Pareto weights that
        b     0   b
satisfy l = uu0 (c
                 (c0 )
                   l . Hence, it su¢ ces to characterize the allocations that satisfy condition
                   0)
(A:6).
    First consider the case D1 < d1 . Using Lemma 1, condition (A:6) becomes identical
to the Euler equation (9), proving the …rst part. Next consider the case D1 > d1 . Using
Lemma 1, condition (A:6) is violated since the left hand side is zero while the right hand
side is strictly positive. Hence, there is no constrained e¢ cient allocation with D1 > d1 .
Finally consider the case D1 = d1 . Using (A:5), we have:
                                               "                    #
                              l
                                u0 cl1 + l         (1    ) l u0 cl1
                                             2 0;
                                 u0 cl0                 u0 cl0

and:                                              "                                            #
                          b               b
                              u0 cb1                  (1      ) b u0 cb1 2 b u0 cb1
                                              2                          ;                         .
                               u0 cb0                        u0 cb0        u0 cb0




                                                            37
Combining these expressions with condition (A:6), we obtain:
                                             l 0                 b 0
                                              u     cl1           u        cb1
                                                                                 .
                                             u0 cl0              u0 cb0

Conversely, for any allocation that satis…es this inequality, there exists subgradients l and
 b
   such that condition (A:6) holds.
    It follows that the optimal allocations with D1        d1 are characterized by D1 = d1
and the distorted Euler inequality (13). Note, from our analysis in Section 3, that these
allocations feature e1 = e and:

                           cl1 = cl1 = e + d1              and cb1 = e                   d1            .             (A.7)

    Next consider cl0 ; cb0 ; cl1 ; cb1 that satis…es the distorted Euler inequality (13) and Eq.
(A:7), along with the resource constraints at date 0. We next claim that this allocation can
be implemented with the endogenous debt limit dh1              d1 , and an appropriate transfer T0 .
The transfer can be equivalently thought of as setting borrowers’ initial debt level at an
alternative level d~0 = d0 T0 . With this debt level, the date 0 allocations are given by:

                 cl0 = e + d~0      d1 = (1 + r1 ) and cb0 = e                       d~0 + d1 = (1 + r1 ) .

By time discounting, we also have cl0 cl1 > e . The debt limit does not bind for lenders,
which implies the interest rate is given by:
                                    l 0          l 0
                             1       u cl1        u e + d1
                                  = 0 l    =                           .
                           1 + r1   u c0     u0 e + d~0 d1 = (1 + r1 )

As in the proof of Proposition 1, the expression, d~0 d1 = (1 + r1 ), is increasing in d~0 . Hence,
there exists a level of d~0 such that d~0 d1 = (1 + r1 ) is equal to cl0 e > 0. It follows that,
this choice of d~0 (and the corresponding T0 ), along with the debt limit, dh1 d1 , implements
the desired allocation.

Proof of Proposition 3. Under either condition (i), (ii), or (iii), we claim that there
exists an equilibrium in which d1;L   d1 and a recession is triggered in state L of date 1.
The optimality conditions can be written as:

      1         u0 (e + d0       q1;H d1;H         q1;L d1;L )         u0 (e           (d0      q1;H d1;H q1;L d1;L ))
            =                   l l u0 cl
                                                                 =                   b b u0
                                                                                                                      (A.8)
                                                                                                                       ,
     q1;L                       L        1                                           L         cl1
                                                                                                 + 2(     d1:L )
    q1;L          l
                  L             u0 cl1                     b
                                                           L     u0 cl1 + 2 (                 d1:L )
            =     l                      l
                                                      =    b                              l
                                                                                                           .
    q1;H          H   u0   e + 1             d1;H          H     u0    e             1         d1;H

These expressions represent 4 equations in 4 unknowns, d1;H ; d1;L ; q1;L ; q1;H . Given the
regularity conditions, there is a unique solution. For the conjectured allocation to be an
equilibrium, we also need the solution to satisfy d1;L d1 . First consider conditions (i) or


                                                          38
(ii), i.e., suppose bL = lL . In this case, a similar analysis as in the proof of Proposition 3
                                                       b
establishes that d1;L d1 is satis…ed when b0                  b
                                                       0 d0 ; L or when d0      d0 b0 ; bL (for
                                       b
appropriate threshold functions 0 ( ) and d0 ( )). Next consider condition (iii). It can be
checked that d1;L is decreasing in bL , and that lim bL !0 d1;L > d1 (since lim bL !0 cb1;L = 0).
Thus, there exists a threshold function bL b0 ; d0 such that d1;L > d1 whenever bL <
  b     b
  L     0 ; d0 , completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 4. The proof proceeds similar to the proof of Proposition 2. Opti-
                                         l l
                                             u0 (cl )     b b
                                                              u0 (cb )
mality conditions for problem (19) imply 0 Hu0 (cl )1;H = 0 Hu0 (ch )1;H and
                                                                    0                   0

                                  h                       i          h                      i
                              l                       l                                 b
                              L       u0 cl1;L +                   l u0 cb
                                                                   L     1;L
                                                              =                                 ,                    (A.9)
                                      l u0    cl1;H                     l u0    cb1;H
                                      H                                 H


Here, l and b denote respectively the subgradients of V h (d1 ; D1 ) with respect to the second
variable, evaluated at d1 = D1 . Conversely, it can be seen that any allocation that satis…es
these equations corresponds to a solution to the planner’s problem with appropriate Pareto
weights. Hence, it su¢ ces to characterize the allocations that satisfy condition (A:6).
    For the case D1;L < d1 , applying Lemma 1 in the numerator of Eq. (A.9) makes the
condition equivalent to (18). For the case D1;L > d1 , the numerator on the left hand side of
Eq. (A.9) is zero whereas the right-hand side remains positive, implying that D1;L > d1 is
never optimal. Finally, for the case D1;L = d1 , it can be seen that condition (A:9) implies the
insurance inequality (20). Conversely, given the inequality in (20), there exists subgradient
such that the condition (A:9) holds. This completes the characterization of the solution
to problem (19). As in the proof Proposition 2, it can also be seen that the allocation
can be implemented with a mandatory insurance requirement, dh1;L d1 combined with an
appropriate initial transfer T0 , completing the proof.

   We next establish the following lemma, which will be useful to prove Proposition 5.
Lemma 2. Consider a strictly increasing and strictly concave function u ( ) such that
 u00 (x) =u0 (x) is a weakly decreasing function of x. Then,

                          d    u0 (x + y)                           d    u0 (x + y)
                                                      0 and                                 < 0,
                         dx    u0 (x y)                            dy    u0 (x y)

for each x; y 2 R+ .
Proof of Lemma 2. Note that
                  d    u0 (x + y)             u0 (x + y)          u00 (x + y)      u00 (x           y)
                                          =                                                                   0,
                 dx    u0 (x y)               u0 (x y)            u0 (x + y)       u0 (x            y)

where the inequality follows since              u00 (x) =u0 (x) is weakly decreasing in x. We also have:

             d    u0 (x + y)              u00 (x + y) u0 (x          y) + u0 (x + y) u00 (x              y)
                                      =                                                                       < 0,
            dy    u0 (x y)                                         u0 (x y)2

                                                              39
where the inequality follows since u ( ) is strictly concave.

Proof of Proposition 5. Let d1 (r1 ) and e0 (r1 ) denote the solution to Eqs. (21). It is
also useful to de…ne
                                              d1 (r1 )
                              y (r1 ) = d0             ,
                                              1 + r1
which corresponds to lenders’ consumption at date 0 in excess of their net income. Note
that, by assumption, we have y (r1 ) > 0.
   We …rst show that e00 (r1 ) < 0. Suppose, to reach a contradiction, e00 (r1 ) 0. Note that
lenders’Euler equation implies [cf. Eq. (21)]:

                                 1
                                      u0 (e0 (r1 ) + y (r1 )) =     l 0
                                                                     u    cl1 .           (A.10)
                               1 + r1
Since e00 (r1 )  0, this expression implies y 0 (r1 ) < 0. Using the de…nition of y ( ), this
further implies d01 (r1 ) > 0. Next consider borrowers’Euler equation [cf. Eq. (21)]:
                                             b 0
                                  1           u   cl1 2 (d1 (r1 )   )
                                       =        0
                                                                      .
                                1 + r1         u (e0 (r1 ) y (r1 ))

The left hand side is strictly decreasing in r1 . However, since e00 (r1 ) 0; y 0 (r1 ) < 0 and
d01 (r1 ) > 0, the right hand side is strictly increasing in r1 . This yields a contradiction and
proves e00 (r1 ) < 0.
     We next establish that d01 (r1 ) > 0. Suppose, to reach a contradiction, d01 (r1 ) 0. Using
the de…nition of y ( ), this further implies y 0 (r1 ) > 0. Combining lenders’ and borrowers’
Euler equations, we also have [cf. Eq. (21)]:
                        l            u0 cl1                   u0 (e0 (r1 ) + y (r1 ))
                       b
                                                          =                           .
                            u0 cl1   2 (d1 (r1 )      )       u0 (e0 (r1 ) y (r1 ))

The left hand side is weakly increasing in r1 since d01 (r1 ) 0. However, since e00 (r1 ) < 0
and y 0 (r1 ) > 0, Lemma 2 implies the right hand side is strictly decreasing in r1 . This yields
a contradiction and shows d01 (r1 ) 0, completing the proof.

A.3    Extension with heterogeneous borrowers
This section completes the characterization of the model with two types of borrowers
fbhigh ; blow g described in Section 4.3. We …rst describe the equilibrium and then analyze its
e¢ ciency properties.
     As described in the main text, at date 0 all borrowers choose the same debt level,
d1 . Consider the equilibrium starting date 1. As before, there is a threshold debt level d1 ,
characterized in Eq. (A:15) below, above which the equilibrium features a liquidity trap with
r2 = 0 and e1 e . Suppose d1 d1 , then type bhigh borrowers are forced into deleveraging.
Thus, their outstanding debt for the next date is d2 = and their consumption is given by:
                        b                                 b
                       c1high = e1      d1 +       and c2high = e          (1      ).

                                                     40
In contrast, type blow borrowers choose their consumption and outstanding debt according
to the Euler equation:

                                  u0 cb1low = u0 cb2low ,                                             (A.11)
               where cb1low    = e1      d1 + db2low and cb2low = e                 db2low (1    ).

As a group, borrowers’total outstanding debt at date 2 is then given by:

                                      d2 =       + (1         ) db2low .                              (A.12)

   As before, lenders choose their consumption and outstanding debt according to the Euler
equation:

                                      u0 cl1 = u0 cl2 ,                                               (A.13)
                    where cl1 = e1 + d1           d2 and cl2 = e + d2 (1                    ).

Here, the second line uses the debt market clearing condition. The equilibrium triple,
 e1 ; db2low ; d2 , is found by solving the three equations (A:11) ; (A:12) ; (A:13). Using log
utility, there is a closed form solution given by:

                                             e
                                 e1 =                             d1                                  (A.14)
                                                  2

                               dlow
                                2   =            d1 +                  d1
                                                        2
                                                            1
                              and d2 =                +                2 d1
                                             2              2=
The …rst equation implies Eqs. (16) in the main text. The same equation also implies there
is a liquidity trap with e1 < e and r2 = 0 as long as:

                                                  1               2
                                d1 > d1 = e               1                 +   .                     (A.15)

   Next consider the equilibrium at date 0. As before, we conjecture an equilibrium in
which the net income is at its e¢ cient level, e0 = e . Since households are unconstrained,
both of their Euler equations hold:
                                        l 0                   b
                                 1       u cl                     E0 u0 cb1
                                      = 0 l1 =                                      .
                               1 + r1   u c0                       u0 cb0

Here, the expectation is taken over borrowers’types at date 1, that is,
                         h       i
                                          b
                     E0 u0 cb1 = u0 c1high + (1         ) u0 cb1low :

In view of our characterization starting date 1, the Euler equations represent two equations


                                                   41
in two unknowns, (r1 ; d1 ), which has a solution. As before, there is a deleveraging-induced
recession at date 1, that is, d1 > d1 , as long as borrower is su¢ ciently impatient or su¢ -
ciently indebted at date 0.

    We next analyze the e¢ ciency of this equilibrium. As in the main text,let V h (d1 ; D1 )
denote the expected utility of a household of type h at date 1 but before the realization of
borrowers’type at date 1. With this notation, the aggregate demand externalities (for the
region D1 > d1 ) are given by:


                     @V l            @e1 0 l
                               =         u c1 =                          u0 cl1 ,                            (A.16)
                     @D1             @D1           2
                     @V b            @e1   h      i                               h       i
                 and           =         E0 u0 cb1 =                            E0 u0 cb1 .
                     @D1             @D1                                 2
The constrained planning problem is then still given by (12). Using Eq. (A:16), the …rst
order condition in this case is given by:
                         l 0              b
                          u    cl1          E0 u0 cb1
                                     =                  for each D1 > d1 .
                        u0 cl0           (1    ) u0 cb0

Plugging in the value of , this leads to Eq. (17). This equation can also be used to obtain
an analogue of the main result, Proposition 2 for this case.

A.4    Extension with …re sales
This section completes the characterization of the model with …re sales described in Section
7. To characterize the condition p2 @M RS=@p1 < 1 in more detail, note that

   @M RS         (1    ) u00 cb2     (1         ) u0 cb1         2   u0 cb2           (1       ) u00 cb1 u0 cb2
         =                                                                            2
    @p1                                    (1       ) u0 cb1 +               u0 cb2

If we approximate     1, all but the last term disappear from the numerator. Furthermore,
we approximate u0 cb1        u0 cb2 which holds exactly in the neighborhood of where the
constraint becomes binding. This simpli…es the expression in the denominator. Taken
together,

           @M RS         (1       ) u00 cb1          (1          )       1                            cb1
                                            =                        <          or        (1    )<
            @p1                u0 cb1                      cb1           p2                           p2
where is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. In short, the solution to equation
(24) is unique and well-de…ned if the leverage parameter is su¢ ciently small compared to
the consumption/asset price ratio. If the condition was violated, an in…nitesimal increase
at date 1 consumption would lead to a discrete upward jump in the asset price and relax the
constraint by more than necessary to …nance the marginal increase in consumption. This
would violate the assumption that the equilibrium exhibits a binding borrowing constraint.


                                                     42
Observe also that this is a common type of condition in models of …nancial ampli…cation to
guarantee uniqueness (see e.g. Lorenzoni, 2008; Jeanne and Korinek, 2010b).

A.5    Extension with separable preferences
This section describes and analyzes a version of the baseline model in which households
have separable preferences. We …rst characterize the equilibrium. We then characterize the
constrained e¢ cient allocations and establish the ine¢ ciency of equilibrium— generalizing
the main result, Proposition 2, to this case.
    Consider the same model as in the main text with two di¤erences. First, households’
preferences are given by u (c) v (n), where u ( ) and v ( ) satisfy the standard assumptions.
Second, suppose type h households hold all of the shares of …rms in which they work (and
none of the shares of other …rms) so their equilibrium income is always given by nh1 . The
latter assumption is made only for simplicity and can be relaxed at the expense of additional
notation.
    As before, consider …rst dates t     2, at which the level of consumer debt is constant
at the maximum permissible level dt = and borrowers pay lenders a constant amount of
                                 l
interest 1 1+r1t+1      = 1          at every date. Households labor supply is given by:

         u0 nl + 1          l
                                   = v 0 nl     , and u0 nb + 1                  l
                                                                                         = v 0 nb   ,

with nl < nb (since cl > cb ).
     Now consider date 1. As in the main text, there is a threshold, d1 , such that r2 0 only
if d1 d1 . To characterize this threshold, consider lenders’Euler equation at zero interest
rate, v 0 nl1 = l v 0 nl1 ;which pins down their labor supply, nl1 . Their intratemporal
optimality condition, u0 nl1 + d1      = l v 0 nl1 , then pins down d1 .
     The equilibrium when d1 < d1 is standard and characterized by the variables,
  r2 > 0; nl1 ; nb1 , that satisfy:

                   u0 nb1       d1 +                = v 0 nb1
                                       1 + r2

              and u0 nl1 + d1                       = v 0 nl1 =     l
                                                                        (1 + r2 ) v 0 nl1      .
                                       1 + r2
                                                                             l                      b
                                                     @r2
For comparison with below, it is useful to note that @d 1
                                                          < 0; @n                @n1
                                                               @d1 2 ( 1; 0) and @d1 2 (0; 1).
                                                                 1


In particular, an increase in debt leads to a reduction in the interest rate, a decrease in
lenders’labor supply and an increase in borrowers’labor supply (through a wealth e¤ect).
Note also that agents’labor supply responses are less than one-for-one (as usual).
   The equilibrium when d1 > d1 features the liquidity trap. In this case, r2 = 0 and thus
lenders’Euler equation can be written as:

                        u0 nl1 + d1             =    l 0
                                                     u     nl + 1        l
                                                                                     .



                                                     43
This implies
                                                                 nl1 (d1 ) = nl1 + d1         d1 ;
which is the analogue of Eq. (8) in the main text. In particular, lenders’employment and
                                                                  l
output decreases one-to-one with leverage as in the main text: @n
                                                                @d1 = 1. The equilibrium
                                                                  1


wage is given by:

                                                             v 0 nl1                 v 0 nl1             v 0 nl1
                                      w1 (d1 ) =                                =                    =           < 1:
                                                         u0 nl1 + d1                  l 0
                                                                                       v (nl     )       v 0 nl1

The last inequality implies the labor wedge is strictly positive

                                                                      1   =1   w1 (d1 ) > 0:

That is, when d1 > d1 ,the economy experiences a demand driven recession. Note also
that the elasticity of the wage with respect to leverage is given by @w1 =@d1  1 d1
                                                                      w1 =d1 = l nl , where                                      1
          00       l       l
 l= v v(n  1 )n1
        0 (nl )  is the Frish elasticity of lenders’labor supply. This expression illustrates that
            1
the wage response is in‡uenced by two factors: The size of debt relative to output and the
Frish elasticity.
    Borrowers’labor supply (and consumption) is then determined by their intratemporal
condition, v 0 nb1 = w1 (d1 ) u0 nb1 (d1           ) . Implicitly di¤erentiating, and using the
expression for the wage response, we obtain:

                                                     @nb1 v 00 nb1   u00 cb1        cb1         1 cb1   1
                                                                                          =           + b,
                                                     @d1        w1 u0 cb1                        l nl
                                                                                                    1

               b                     u00 (cb1 )cb1
where                  = 1=          u0 (cb1 )
                                                       is de…ned as lenders’intertemporal elasticity of consumption.10
                                                         @nb1 (d1 )                                              @nl1
This expression also implies                               @d1        < 1, which when combined with              @d1    =   1 implies:

                                                                          @nl1 @nb1
                                                                              +     < 1:                                             (A.17)
                                                                          @d1   @d1
In particular, the total employment is decreasing in leverage regardless of the parameters.
    Date 0 equilibrium is then characterized by Euler equations (9). Under conditions similar
to those in Proposition 1, the equilibrium features d1 > d1 and an anticipated recession.

   We next analyze the e¢ ciency properties of this equilibrium. First let V h (d1 ; D1 ) denote
the utility of a household of type h conditional on entering date 1 with an individual level
     10
    Hence, the sign of borrowers’ labor supply response to leverage is in general ambiguous. On the one
hand, greater leverage lowers borrowers’ consumption and increases their marginal utility, which in turn
induces them to work more: this is captured by the second term. On the other hand, greater leverage lowers
aggregate demand and wages, which in turn induces borrowers to work less: this is captured by the …rst
term. The net e¤ect is likely to be negative if the labor elasticity, l , is low relative to the intertemporal
                       b            cb
elasticity,                (given    1
                                    nl1
                                          is likely to be close to 1).




                                                                               44
of debt d1 and an aggregate level of debt D1 . We have:
                                                                                         1
                                                                                         X         t
        b                                                                                      b
      V (d1; D1 ) = u n1 (D1 )           d1 +                           v (n1 (D1 )) +                 u cbt
                                                1 + r2 (D1 )
                                                                                         t=2

for borrowers and a similar expression for lenders. For D1 > d1 , taking the …rst order
conditions with respect to D1 , we obtain:

                                  @V h          @nh1
                                       = u0 ch1                1   for D1 > d1 ,                               (A.18)
                                  @D1           @D1
which characterizes the aggregate demand externalities in this case. Note that the strength
of the externalities for type h households depends on their employment response to leverage.
    Next let W h (D1 ) = V h (d1; D1 ) and consider the ex-ante constrained planning problem
described in Section 4.2. The …rst order conditions imply Eq. (A:6) also in this case. Using
the expression for externalities in (A:18), the planner’s optimality condition can be written
as:

                 l 0                  @nl1         b 0                  @nb1
                  u    cl1     1+     @D1 1         u    cb1       1    @D1 1
                                              =                                    for D1 > d1 .               (A.19)
                             u0 cl0                            u0 cb0
Recall from (A:17) that aggregate employment always declines with leverage. Combining
this inequality with Eq. (A:19) shows the distorted Euler inequality (13) also holds in
this case. The following result combines these observations to characterize the constrained
e¢ cient allocations in this setting.
Proposition 6 (Excessive Leverage with Separable Preferences). An allocation
  ch0 ; nh0 h ; D1 , with D1    , is constrained e¢ cient if and only if labor supply and out-
put at date 0 is e¢ cient, i.e., u0 ch0 = v 0 nh0 for each h; and the consumption and debt
allocations satisfy one of the following:
     (i) D1 < d1 and the Euler equation (9) holds.
     (ii) D1 d1 , and the planner’s optimality condition in (A:19), and thus also the distorted
Euler inequality in (13), holds. Moreover, every constrained e¢ cient allocation of this type
can be implemented as a competitive equilibrium with a debt limit, dh1          D1 for each h,
combined with an appropriate ex-ante transfer, T0 .
    This result is the analogue of our main result, Proposition 2, for separable preferences.
The only di¤erence is that debt levels strictly greater than d1 can also correspond to con-
strained e¢ cient allocations, as long as the allocation satis…es the planner’s optimality
condition in (A:19). In these cases, the planner mitigates but does not completely alleviate
the recession. Intuitively, this is because the aggregate demand externalities with separable
preferences depend on the size of the labor wedge, 1 [cf. Eq. (A:18)]. At D1 = d1 , the
labor wedge is small, 1 = 0, which implies that the planner might prefer to allow for a
mild recession so as to improve ex-ante risk sharing. In contrast, the aggregate demand
externalities with the GHH preferences analyzed in the main text are large regardless of the
labor wedge [cf. Eq. (11)], which induces the planner to fully avoid the recession.

                                                     45
