NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION, HEALTH AND WAGES
James J. Heckman
John Eric Humphries
Gregory Veramendi
Sergio Urzúa
Working Paper 19971
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19971

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We thank Rob Shimer and Chris Taber for very helpful comments on this draft. This research was
supported in part by the American Bar Foundation, the Pritzker Children's Initiative, the Buffett Early
Childhood Fund, NICHD 5R37HD065072, 1R01HD54702, an anonymous funder, the support of a
European Research Council grant hosted by University College Dublin, DEVHEALTH 269874, and
a grant from the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET) to the Human Capital and Economic
Opportunity Global Working Group (HCEO)--an initiative of the Becker Friedman Institute for Research
in Economics (BFI). Humphries acknowledges the support of a National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the funders or persons named here. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, Gregory Veramendi, and Sergio Urzúa. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Education, Health and Wages
James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, Gregory Veramendi, and Sergio Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 19971
March 2014
JEL No. C32,C38,I12,I14,I21
ABSTRACT
This paper develops and estimates a model with multiple schooling choices that identifies the causal
effect of different levels of schooling on health, health-related behaviors, and labor market outcomes.
We develop an approach that is a halfway house between a reduced form treatment effect model and
a fully formulated dynamic discrete choice model. It is computationally tractable and identifies the
causal effects of educational choices at different margins. We estimate distributions of responses to
education and find evidence for substantial heterogeneity in unobserved variables on which agents
make choices. The estimated treatment effects of education are decomposed into the direct benefits
of attaining a given level of schooling and indirect benefits from the option to continue on to further
schooling. Continuation values are an important component of our estimated treatment effects. While
the estimated causal effects of education are substantial for most outcomes, we also estimate a quantitatively
important effect of unobservables on outcomes. Both cognitive and socioemotional factors contribute
to shaping educational choices and labor market and health outcomes. We improve on LATE by identifying
the groups affected by variations in the instruments. We find benefits of cognition on most outcomes
apart from its effect on schooling attainment. The benefits of socioemotional skills on outcomes beyond
their effects on schooling attainment are less precisely estimated.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
John Eric Humphries
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
johnerichumphries@gmail.com

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19971

Gregory Veramendi
Department of Economics
Arizona State University
501 East Orange Street
CPCOM 412A
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
gregory.veramendi@asu.edu
Sergio Urzúa
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall #3115C
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
urzua@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

Persons with more schooling have better health, healthier behaviors, and higher wages.
The causal basis for these relationships is the topic of a large literature.1
Figure 1 illustrates these familiar empirical regularities for the four outcomes
analyzed in this paper: wages, health, self-esteem, and smoking.2 The black bar in each
panel shows the unadjusted mean difference in outcomes for persons at the indicated
levels of educational attainment compared to those for high school dropouts. An obvious
explanation for such relationships is ability bias. However, as shown by the grey bars in
Figure 1, adjusting for family background and adolescent measures of ability attenuates,
but does not eliminate, the estimated effects of education.3
It is easy to fault the simple adjustments used in Figure 1. The measures used to
make the adjustments may be incomplete or imperfect. Such concerns have given rise to
a search for instrumental variables (exclusion restrictions including randomization and
regression discontinuity methods) to secure causal estimates of the effect of education.
The IV literature has itself been faulted. The available instruments for schooling are
often weak (see Bound, Jaeger, and Baker, 1995). When agents select into schooling on
the basis of their idiosyncratic benefits from it, instruments identify “causal effects” for
unidentified groups of persons (see, e.g., Heckman, 1997; Heckman and Vytlacil, 1999,
2005) that often differ from average treatment effects, treatment on the treated, or policyrelevant treatment effects (see Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil, 2011). Regression
discontinuity methods identify responses for individuals at the points of discontinuity
of the instruments which may or may not be the individuals toward which policies are
best targeted.
1

A positive association between education and labor market outcomes has long been noted in the
literature (Mincer, 1958; Becker, 1964; Mincer, 1974). For surveys, see Card (1999) and Heckman, Lochner,
and Todd (2006) and the references they cite. The positive correlation between schooling and health is also a
well-established finding (Grossman, 1972, 2000, 2006). See also Adams (2002); Arendt (2005); Lleras-Muney
(2005); Silles (2009); Spasojevic (2003); Arkes (2003); Auld and Sidhu (2005); Grossman (2008); Grossman
and Kaestner (1997); Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010); Conti, Heckman, and Urzúa (2010), and the literature
review in Section B of the Web Appendix.
2
The Web Appendix reports results for other outcomes.
3
See, e.g., the papers cited in Card (1999).

3

Figure 1: The Observed Benefits from Education after Controlling for
Background and Ability
Daily Smoking (measured at age 30)
0
−.2
−.6

−.4

Gains over Dropouts

.6
.4
.2
0

Gains over Dropouts

.8

Log Wages (measured at age 30)

GED

High School

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

GED

College

Some College

College

Background Controls

Physical Health (PCS−12)(measured at age 40)

−.2

.6
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

Gains over Dropouts

.6

.8

.8

Self−Esteem (Rosenberg) (measured at age 40)

Gains over Dropouts

High School

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

Background Controls

GED

High School

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

College

GED

Background Controls

High School

Some College

Raw Data
Background and Ability Controls

College

Background Controls

Notes: The bars represent the coefficients from a regression of the designated outcome on dummies for educational attainment,
where the omitted category is high school dropout. Regressions are run adding successive controls for background and proxies
for ability. Background controls include race, region of residence in 1979, urban status in 1979, broken home status, number
of siblings, mother’s education, father’s education, and family income in 1979. Proxies for ability are average score on the
ASVAB tests and ninth grade GPA in core subjects (language, math, science, and social science). “Some College” includes
anyone who enrolled in college, but did not receive a four-year college degree.
Source: NLSY79 data.

4

Most of the treatment effect literature focuses on identifying the effects of choosing
between two levels of final schooling attainment or else assumes that schooling is
captured by “years of schooling”4 and estimates versions of the Mincer (1974) model.5
With a few notable exceptions,6 little work in the treatment effect literature considers
models with multiple discrete schooling levels or dynamic models of schooling attainment.
Moreover, identifying treatment effects at multiple margins of choice requires choicespecific instruments that are often not available.
A growing literature formulates and estimates dynamic discrete choice models of
schooling that account for both the nonlinearity of the effects of schooling and the
information available to agents when they make their schooling choices.7 With these
models, it is possible to identify the margins of choice which different instruments
identify and the populations affected by the various instruments.8
However, many question the robustness of estimates from such models because of
the often strong assumptions made about schooling choice models, the information
sets that agents are assumed to act on, the apparent arbitrariness in the choices
of functional forms in the estimation equations, and the invocation of assumptions
about the support of the instruments (see, e.g., Imbens, 2010). Many scholars report
difficulties in identifying crucial cost parameters.9 Nonpecuniary or “psychic” costs play
a dominant role in many structural models of schooling in which agents are assumed to
make choices to maximize expected future net income. See, e.g., Cunha, Heckman, and
Navarro (2005); Eisenhauer, Heckman, and Mosso (2013); Abbott, Gallipoli, Meghir,
and Violante (2013). Unexplained “psychic costs” or tastes for schooling substantially
outweigh financial costs in accounting for schooling choices. This casts some doubt on

4

See Card (1999) for a survey.
See Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006) for a discussion of the empirical evidence against the Mincer
model. There is abundant evidence of “sheepskin” effects, i.e. nonlinearities associated with completion of
college. Those authors also show that the original Mincer model ignores continuation values to education
which we show to be an important component of the “true” effect of schooling.
6
Angrist and Imbens (1995) and Heckman, Urzúa, and Vytlacil (2006). The latter paper points out some
difficulties in the economic interpretation of the decompositions reported in the former paper.
7
Keane and Wolpin (1997); Keane, Todd, and Wolpin (2011).
8
This approach produces conceptually clean models. See Heckman and Urzúa (2010).
9
See, e.g., Eisenhauer, Heckman, and Mosso (2013) and Eisenhauer, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2014).
5

5

the specifications of decision rules used in the current structural literature.
As a result of the criticism directed against the various approaches, the literature
on the “causal effects” of schooling is divided into camps organized around favored
methodologies, as well as beliefs about the questions they think can be “credibly”
answered by the data. This paper implements an approach that is a halfway house
between the IV literature that reports “effects” at unspecified margins and the fully
structural dynamic discrete choice literature. Our approach draws on identifying
strategies from the matching, IV, and control function literatures.10 We identify the
causal effects of schooling at different stages of the life cycle based in part on a rich
set of covariates to control for selection bias. We also use exclusion restrictions to
identify our model as in the IV and control function literatures. Like the structural
econometrics literature, we estimate causal effects at clearly identified margins of choice
for populations affected by policies. Unlike the structural literature, we are agnostic
about the specific model of choice used by agents. We approximate the dynamic choice
model following suggestions of Heckman (1981), Eckstein and Wolpin (1989), Cameron
and Heckman (2001), and Geweke and Keane (2001).
We build on the sequential discrete choice model of Cameron and Heckman (2001) by
adding schooling-specific outcome equations and by adding interpretable measurements
to proxy the cognitive and socioemotional variables found to be important predictors of
schooling, the returns to schooling, and the psychic costs of schooling.11 We explore the
dimension of the space of unobservables required to control for selection and to fit the
data. Instead of trying to purge the effects of multiple abilities on outcomes to isolate
causal effects of schooling, we estimate the effects of these abilities in shaping schooling
and in mediating the effects of schooling on outcomes. We use numerous proxies of
both cognitive and socioemotional abilities in an attempt to account for ability bias
at multiple margins of choice. We find that at least two dimensions of heterogeneity
are required to produce an adequate empirical model of schooling and its effects on
10

See Heckman (2008) for a review of these alternative approaches.
See the evidence in Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008) and Almlund, Duckworth,
Heckman, and Kautz (2011).
11

6

outcomes. We also find that after accounting for these abilities, there is little additional
role for unmeasured abilities in shaping the dependence between schooling decisions
and outcomes. We account for measurement error in measuring abilities and show that
doing so has important consequences.12 We capture heterogeneity in the response to
treatment on which individuals sort into schooling that is a hallmark of the recent IV
literature. We estimate the empirical consequences of sorting on multiple components
of ability.
In our model, as in standard dynamic discrete choice models, educational choices at
one stage open up educational options at later stages. The expected consequences of
future choices and their costs are implicitly valued by individuals when deciding whether
or not to continue their schooling. Our empirical strategy allows for these ex ante
valuations but does not explicitly estimate them.13 We decompose the ex post treatment
effects of educational choices into the direct benefits of the choice and the continuation
values arising from access to additional education beyond the current choice. Thus
we estimate ex post returns to schooling both as the direct causal benefit comparing
two final schooling levels—the traditional focus in the human capital literature (see,
e.g., Becker, 1964)—and as returns through continuation values created by the options
opened up by schooling (Weisbrod, 1962; Comay, Melnik, and Pollatschek, 1973; Altonji,
1993; Cameron and Heckman, 1993; and Heckman, Lochner, and Todd, 2006).
Our paper also contributes to an emerging literature on the importance of both
cognitive and socioemotional skills in shaping life outcomes (see Borghans, Duckworth,
Heckman, and ter Weel, 2008; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa, 2006; Almlund, Duckworth,
Heckman, and Kautz, 2011). The traditional literature on the benefits of education
focuses on the effects of cognitive ability. We confirm the findings in the recent literature
that both cognitive and socioemotional skills are important predictors of educational
attainment. Fixing schooling levels, the effects of cognition on outcomes are still
substantial. The estimates of the within-schooling effects of socioemotional skills on
outcomes are less precisely estimated.
12
13

See Section F of the Web Appendix for evidence on this issue.
See, e.g., Eisenhauer, Heckman, and Mosso (2013), where this is done.

7

We find that (a) there is substantial sorting into schooling both on cognitive and
socioemotional measures; (b) there are causal effects of education on smoking, physical
health, and wages at all levels of schooling; (c) for most outcomes, only high-ability
people benefit from graduating from college. An exception to this rule is that low-ability
people are the only ability group to benefit in terms of self-esteem; (d) continuation values
are an important component of the causal effects of schooling; and (e) measurement
error is empirically important, and ignoring it affects our estimates. We also contribute
to the literature on the non-market benefits of education by studying the causal effects
of education on health, healthy behaviors, and mental health (see, e.g., Lochner, 2011,
Oreopoulos and Salvanes, 2011, and Cawley and Ruhm, 2012).

1.1

The Benefits and Limitations of Our Approach

Like the treatment effect literature, our approach enables us to identify the gross
benefits of education. Unlike what is obtained from that approach, we can identify
average benefits for persons at multiple levels of schooling in terms of observable and
unobservable characteristics. The approach adopted in this paper complements the
analyses of Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2005, 2007a,b); Heckman, Urzúa, and Vytlacil
(2006), and Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2011) by providing a flexible parametric
alternative to their data-demanding semi-parametric analyses. Our approach is useful in
estimating parameters for samples of moderate size, such as the NLSY79 data analyzed
in this paper.
Because we are agnostic about the decision model used by our agents, like the rest of
the treatment effect literature, we do not identify costs.14 We do not impose particular
models of expectations such as rational expectations. Fully structural models do so, but
typically impose greater parametric structure. Accordingly, we cannot estimate ex ante
14

We can use auxiliary data to identify components of costs such as tuition. However, we cannot identify
the full components of cost, including psychic costs, which have been estimated to be very important. See
Eisenhauer, Heckman, and Mosso (2013), Eisenhauer, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2014), and Abbott, Gallipoli,
Meghir, and Violante (2013) where explicit structural approaches are developed and applied to generate
treatment effects and the costs and benefits of treatments. Structural models like those of Eisenhauer,
Heckman, and Mosso (2013) identify both ex ante and ex post rates of return.

8

benefits and costs, nor can we estimate net rates of return. This limitation precludes
a full cost-benefit analysis. With our approach we can only identify a portion of the
ingredients required to evaluate social programs—the ex post gross benefit portion
emphasized in the literature on treatment effects although monetary components of cost
may be available from auxiliary sources. Our approach represents a computationally
tractable compromise between the conventional literature on treatment effects and a
fully structural approach that allows us to explore economically relevant margins of
choice without imposing strong assumptions about agent decision making.

2

The Model

We estimate a sequential model of schooling with the transitions at the nodes shown in
Figure 2, where J is a set of possible schooling states, Cj,j 0 is the available choice set
for a person at j choosing between remaining at j or transiting to j 0 , where j, j 0 ∈ J .
J is not necessarily ordered. Dj,j 0 = 1 if a person at j chooses j 0 ∈ Cj,j 0 at decision
node {j, j 0 }. Dj,j 0 ∈ D, the set of possible educational transition decisions taken by an
individual over the life cycle. We assume that the environment is time-stationary and
that educational decisions are irreversible. Each choice set contains two options: (a)
remain at j ∈ Cj,j 0 or (b) continue on to j 0 ∈ Cj,j 0 , where j 0 6= j.
Qj,j 0 = 1 denotes that a person gets to decision node {j, j 0 }. Qj,j 0 = 0 if the person
never visits decision node {j, j 0 }. The history of nodes visited by an agent can be
described by the collection of Qj,j 0 such that Qj,j 0 = 1. Clearly, Dj,j 0 is not defined
if Qj,j 0 = 0. Formally we assign the value “0” to such undefined states, but we could
assign any finite value.
We adopt the convention that j = 0 is the state of being without a high school
credential; j = 1 denotes being a high school graduate; j = 2 denotes getting a GED
(an option for dropouts); j = 3 denotes attending college; j = 4 denotes graduating
college. The “j” denotes possible states a person can visit. We let s denote the realized
final schooling level, and S denote the discrete random variable. A person who drops

9

out of high school (D0,1 = 1) and does not earn a GED (D0,2 = 1) is a permanent
dropout with s = 0. We observe post-schooling outcomes associated with each level of
final educational attainment. In our sample, we have so few GEDs who attempt college
that we ignore this possibility in our empirical analysis.15

Figure 2: Sequential Schooling Decisions

at
du
a
r

{3,4} G
Dr
op
ge
e
ou
ll

te

Dr
op

ou
t

t
Some College (s=3)

Co
lle
ge

High School Graduate (s=1)
GED (s=2)

ED

{0,1}

a
du
ra
G

HS

Co
No

G

{1,3}

4-yr College Graduate (s=4)

e

{0,2}
High School Dropout (s=0)

Decision Node Qj,j 0
{0, 1}
{0, 2}
{1, 3}
{3, 4}

15

Decision Taken:
Dj,j 0 = 1
Dj,j 0 = 0
Graduate High School (j = 1) Drop out of High School (j = 0)
Get GED (j = 2)
High School Dropout (j = 0)
Attend College (j = 3)
High School Graduate (j = 1)
Graduate 4-yr college (j = 4) Some College (j = 3)

See Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014).

10

2.1

A Sequential Model of Educational Attainment

Under general conditions, the optimal decision at each node is characterized by an
index threshold-crossing model

Dj,j 0 =




1

if Ij,j 0 ≥ 0,



0

otherwise,

(1)

where Ij,j 0 is the perceived value (by the agent) of attaining schooling level j 0 for a
person currently in educational state j. We do not take a position on the precise
information set available to agents or the exact decision rule used. In principle, agents
can make irrational choices or their educational choices could be governed by behavioral
anomalies.
Associated with each final schooling state are a set of k potential outcomes for
∗ as latent variables
health, healthy behavior, and labor market outcomes. Define Yk,s

that map into potential outcomes Yk,s :

Yk,s =



 Y∗
k,s

if Yk,s is continuous,


 1(Y ∗ ≥ 0)
k,s

if Yk,s is a binary outcome,

(2)

k ∈ {1, . . . , K}.

Let Hs = 1 if s is the highest level of attained schooling. Hs = 0 otherwise. Using
the familiar switching regression framework of Quandt (1958), the observed outcome
Yk is

Yk =

X

Hs Yk,s .

s∈S

11

(3)

2.2

Parameterizations of the Decision Roles and Potential

Outcomes
Following a well-established tradition in the literature,16 we approximate Ij,j 0 using a
linear-in-the-parameters model:

Ij,j 0 = Xj,j 0 βj,j 0 + θαj,j 0 − νj,j 0 ,

(4)

where Xj,j 0 is a vector of variables (and functions of these variables) observed by the
economist that determine the schooling transition decision of the agent with schooling
level j, θ is a vector of unobserved (by the economist) endowments. This approximation
is a starting point for a more general analysis of dynamic discrete choice models.
Endowments θ are not directly observed by the econometrician but are proxied by
measures. θ plays an important role in our model. Along with the observed variables,
it generates dependence among schooling choices and outcomes. νj,j 0 represents an
idiosyncratic error term assumed to be independent across agents and states. It plays the
role of a random shock: νj,j 0 ⊥⊥ (Xj,j 0 , θ), where “⊥⊥” denotes statistical independence.
Latent variables generating outcomes are also approximated by a linear-in-theparameters model.
∗
Yk,s
= Xk,s βk,s + θαk,s + νk,s ,

(5)

where Xk,s is a vector of observed controls relevant for outcome k and θ is the vector
of unobserved endowments. νk,s represents an idiosyncratic error term that satisfies
νk,s ⊥⊥ (Xk,s , θ).

2.3

Measurement System for Unobserved Endowments θ

Most of the literature estimating the causal effect of schooling develops strategies for
eliminating the effect of θ in producing spurious relationships between schooling and

16

See Heckman (1981), Cameron and Heckman (1987, 2001), Eckstein and Wolpin (1989), Geweke and
Keane (2001), and Arcidiacono and Ellickson (2011).

12

outcomes.17 Our approach is different. We proxy θ to identify the interpretable sources
of omitted variable bias and to determine how the unobservables mediate the causal
effects of education. We follow a recent literature documenting the importance of both
cognitive and noncognitive skills in shaping schooling choices and mediating the effects
of schooling on outcomes.
Given θ, and conditional on X, all educational choices and outcomes are assumed
to be statistically independent. If θ were observed, we could condition on (θ, X) and
achieve selection-bias-free estimates of causal effects and model parameters. This would
be equivalent to a parametric version of matching on θ and X.18 Both matching and
the procedure in the paper assume that conditional on θ and X, outcomes and choices
are statistically independent. In this paper, we do not directly measure θ. Instead, we
proxy it and correct for the effects of measurement error on the proxy. Our analysis
can be thought of as a parametric version of matching on mismeasured variables where
we estimate and correct for the measurement error in the matching variables.19 We test
the robustness of our approach by allowing for an additional unproxied unobservable
that accounts for dependence between schooling and economic outcomes not captured
by our proxies. These additional sources of dependence can be identified without proxy
measurements for them under the conditions stated in Heckman and Navarro (2007).
Following Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa
(2006), we adjoin a system of measurement equations to proxy θ. We have access to
information on cognitive and socioemotional measures. We thus link our paper to an
emerging literature on the importance of cognitive and noncognitive skills in shaping
schooling choices and outcomes.20 The recent literature establishes that both cognitive
and noncognitive skills can be shaped by interventions and that they are effective
margins for social policy (see Heckman and Mosso, 2014, Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev,
17

See Heckman (2008).
Matching is a version of selection on observables. See Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman, 2003, and
Abbring and Heckman, 2007. See also Heckman and Vytlacil (2007b).
19
See Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) and Conti, Heckman, Pinger, and Zanolini (2009) for
applications of this approach.
20
See, e.g., Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008); Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, and
Kautz (2011); Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014).
18

13

2013).
Let θC and θSE denote the levels of cognitive and socioemotional endowments and
C be the lth
suppose θ = (θC , θSE ). We allow θC and θSE to be correlated. Let Ts,l
SE the lth socioemotional measure, and T C,SE the lth measure
cognitive test score, Ts,l
s,l

influenced by both cognitive and socioemotional endowments, all measured at schooling
level s. Parallel to the treatment of the index and outcome equations, we assume linear
measurement systems for these variables:

C
Ts,l

=

C C
C
+ eC
Xs,l
βs,l + θC αs,l
s,l ,

(6)

SE
Ts,l

=

SE SE
SE
Xs,l
βs,l + θSE αs,l
+ eSE
s,l ,

(7)

C,SE C,SE
C
SE
Xs,l
βs,l + θC α̃s,l
+ θSE α̃s,l
+ eC,SE
.
s,l

(8)

C,SE
Ts,l
=

The structure assumed in Equations (6), (7), and (8) is identified even when
allowing for correlated factors, if we have one measure that is a determinant of cognitive
C ), one measure that is a determinant of socioemotional endowments
endowments (Ts,l
SE ), at least three measures that load on both cognitive ability and socioemotional
(Ts,l

ability, and conventional normalizations are assumed.21 We collect our assumptions
about the dependence structure among the model unobservables in Table 1. In Section
I of the Web Appendix, we test if additional unobservables beyond θC and θSE are
required to capture the dependence between schooling and outcomes beyond that arising
from observables. Our empirical estimates are essentially unchanged when we introduce
a third factor to capture dependencies between schooling and outcomes not captured
by the proxy factors. To simplify the exposition, in the main text we report results
from models that use measurements to proxy θ.

21

See, e.g., the discussion in Anderson and Rubin (1956) and Williams (2011). One of the factor loadings
for θC and θSE has to be normalized to set the scale of the factors. Nonparametric identification of the
distribution of θ is justified by an appeal to the results in Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010).

14

Table 1: Assumptions About Unobservables

Choice equation (2):

νj,j 0 ⊥
⊥ Xk,l ∀ j, j 0 , k, l
νj,j 0 ⊥
⊥ νk,l

∀ (k, l) 6= (j, j 0 )

Labor market and health outcomes (4) and (6):
νk,s ⊥
⊥ Xk,s0

∀ k, s, s0

νk,s ⊥
⊥ νk,s0

∀ s0 6= s, k

Measurement system (9), (10), and (11):
eqs,l ⊥
⊥ Xsq0 ,l0
0

eqs,l ⊥
⊥ eqs0 ,l0 ,

∀ s, l, s0 , l0 , q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}
∀ (s0 , l0 , q 0 ) 6= (s, l, q), (q, q 0 ) ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}

Cross-systems dependence:


q
θ⊥
⊥ νj,j 0 , Xj,j 0 , νk,s , Xk,s , eqs,l , Xs,l

∀ j, j 0 , k, s, l, q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}

Mutual independence of errors across systems:


q
νj,j 0 ⊥
⊥ Xk,s , Xs,l
∀ j, j 0 , k, s, l, q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}


q
νk,s ⊥
⊥ Xj,j 0 , Xs0 ,l
∀ j, j 0 , k, s, l, s0 , q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}


q
es,l ⊥
⊥ Xj,j 0 , Xk,s0
∀ j, j 0 , k, s, l, s0 , q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}
νj,j 0 ⊥
⊥ eqs,l ∀ j, j 0 , s, l, q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}


νk,s ⊥
⊥ νj,j 0 , eqs0 ,l
∀ j, j 0 , s, k, s0 , l, q ∈ {C, SE, (C, SE)}

Note: For linear models the independence assumption can be relaxed to allow the error terms to share a
common component (e.g. εk ) across schooling levels (i.e. instead assume ν̂k,s ⊥⊥ ν̂k,s0 , where νk,s = εk + ν̂k,s ).

2.4

Sources of Identification

Our model has multiple sources of identification. First, if θ were measured without
error, the model would be identified by conditioning of θ (a version of matching on
X and θ in a parametric model). If it is measured with error but all components are
proxied, and the identifying restrictions for the factor models given in the previous
section are satisfied, we can use the extension for matching on mismeasured variables
developed in Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev
(2013). Under either set of conditions, the model is identified without making any
distributional assumptions on the unobservables (see, e.g., Cunha, Heckman, and
Schennach, 2010). We also have access to transition-specific instruments, variables in
Xj,j 0 , not in Xk,s , assumed to be independent of the model unobservables. The benefit
of access to instrumental variables is that they allow us to test the validity of either
version of the matching assumption. Under support conditions on the instruments

15

specified in Heckman and Navarro (2007), the model is identified without invoking any
distributional assumptions on the unobservables. We approximate the distribution of
unobservables using mixtures of normal sieve estimators (see Chen, 2007).

3

Defining Treatment Effects

Under our assumptions, the model estimates distributions of counterfactual outcomes.
Hence a variety of treatment effects for the effect of education on labor market and
health outcomes can be generated from it. They can be used to predict the effects of
manipulating education levels through different channels for people of different ability
levels. They allow us to understand the effectiveness of policy for different segments of
the population.
We consider two different formulations of treatment effects. The first compares
returns between two terminal schooling levels. The second estimates the treatment
effect of specific educational decisions, inclusive of the continuation values associated
with future decisions.
The traditional literature on estimating the returns to schooling defines its parameters in terms of the returns generated from going from one final schooling level to
another (Becker, 1964). It ignores the sequential nature of schooling and the options
created by going to an additional level of school. For example, after graduating from
high school, an agent may enroll in college. After enrolling, the agent may choose to
earn a four-year degree. The benefits of graduating from high school include the options
which subsequent education makes possible. (See Weisbrod, 1962; Comay, Melnik, and
Pollatschek, 1973; Altonji, 1993 and Cameron and Heckman, 1993.)
Treatment effects can be identified at each node in the educational choice tree of
Figure 2. For example, we estimate the treatment effect for deciding to graduate from
high school or drop out (node {0, 1}). Once agents graduate from high school, they
have the option of going to college and even graduating from college. Similarly, once
agents drop out, they have the option of getting a GED. The full returns to early

16

choices include the benefits from access to additional educational options.

3.1

Traditional Treatment Effects: Differences Across Fi-

nal Schooling Levels
We estimate the traditional returns to education defined as the gains from choosing
between terminal schooling levels. Let Ys0 be an outcome at schooling level s0 and Ys
be an outcome at schooling level s. Conditioning on X = x and θ = θ, the average
treatment effect of s compared to s0 is E(Ys − Ys0 |X = x, θ = θ). Measured over the
entire population it is

∗
AT Es,s
0

ZZ
≡

E(Ys − Ys0 |X = x, θ = θ) dFX,θ (x, θ).

(9)

The average treatment effect calculated by averaging over the subset of the population
that completes one of the two final schooling levels is
ZZ
AT Es,s0 ≡

3.2

E(Ys − Ys0 |X = x, θ = θ) dFX,θ (x, θ | Hs + Hs0 = 1).

(10)

Dynamic Treatment Effects

We also estimate treatment effects associated with each decision node. These take into
account the benefits associated with the options opened up by educational choices.
This treatment effect is the difference in expected outcomes arising from changing a
single educational decision in a sequential schooling model and tracing through its
consequences. We estimate the continuation value as the probability-weighted benefit
of further educational choices using probabilities perceived by the agent. In computing
a version of these probabilities to identify treatment effects (but only for this purpose),
we assume rational expectations: the empirical probabilities are assumed to be what
the agent acts on.22 The expected value associated with fixing a particular education

22

We do not impose rational expectations in estimating the choice model, just in interpreting it.

17

transition (Dj,j 0 = 1) for an individual with X = X and θ = θ is


E Y |X = X, θ = θ, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1
X


≡
P r s|X = x, θ = θ, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1 × E Ys |X = x, θ = θ .23
s∈S

The expectation (E) on the left-hand side is over future educational choices and

idiosyncratic shocks. P r s|X = x, θ = θ, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1 is the probability that the
individual stops at education level s when fixing Dj,j 0 = 1. Ys is the value of the outcome
if the individual stops at education level s. For example, the choice of graduating from
high school opens up the possibility of enrolling in college and possibly graduating from
college.24
The person-specific treatment effect for an individual making a decision at node
(j, j 0 ) deciding between going on to j 0 or stopping at j is the difference between the
expected value of the two decisions:

Tj,j 0 [Y |X = x, θ = θ] ≡ E(Y |X = x, θ = θ, F ix Qj,j 0 = 1, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1)
− E(Y |X = x, θ = θ, F ix Qj,j 0 = 1, F ix Dj,j 0 = 0).

The person-specific treatment effect not only takes into account the direct effect of the
decision, but also includes the value of any additional schooling. Averaged over the full
population
∗D
AT Ej,j
0 ≡

ZZ
Tj,j 0 [Y |X = x, θ = θ] dFX,θ (x, θ).

(11)

The corresponding parameter for those who ever visit the decision node {j, j 0 } is

D
AT Ej,j
0

ZZ
≡

Tj,j 0 [Y |X = x, θ = θ] dFX,θ (x, θ | Qj,j 0 = 1).

23

(12)

The distinction between fixing and conditioning traces back to Haavelmo (1943). For a recent analysis
see Heckman and Pinto (2013). Under the assumptions in Table 1, fixing and conditioning produce the same
causal parameter conditioning on X and θ.
24
The expected outcome for an individual with characteristics X and θ who chooses to graduate from
high school (D0,1 = 1) is thus E(Y |X = x, θ = θ, F ix D0,1 = 1) = P r(s = 1|X = x, θ = θ, F ix D0,1 =
1) × E(Y1 , |X = x, θ = θ) + P r(s = 3|X = x, θ = θ, F ix D0,1 = 1) × E(Y3 |X = x, θ = θ) + P r(s = 4|X =
x, θ = θ, F ix D0,1 = 1) × E(Y4 |X = x, θ = θ).

18

The average marginal treatment effect is the average effect of choosing an additional
level of schooling for individuals who are at the margin of indifference between the two
choices:
ZZ
AM T Ej,j 0 ≡

Tj,j 0 [Y |X = x, θ = θ] dFX,θ (x, θ̄ | |Ij,j 0 | ≤ ε),

(13)

where ε is an arbitrarily small neighborhood around the margin of indifference. AMTE
defines causal effects at well-defined and empirically identified margins of choice. This
is the proper measure of marginal gross benefits for evaluating social policies.25
Each treatment effect can be decomposed into direct effects and a continuation value.
For example, the continuation value of graduating from high school is the probability
that the individual enrolls in college times the expected wage benefit of having some
college plus the probability of completing college times the wage benefit of completing
college and stops there:26

CV0,1 (Y |X = X, θ = θ)
= E(Y4 − Y1 |X = X, θ = θ) × Pr(s = 4|X = X, θ = θ, F ix D1,0 = 1)
+ E(Y3 − Y1 |X = X, θ = θ) × Pr(s = 3|X = X, θ = θ, F ix D1,0 = 1).

We report estimates of the continuation value ratio (CVR) to summarize the relative
importance of the CV. It is the average continuation value (ACV) divided by the
average treatment effect for the population considered (CV R =

3.3

ACV
AT E ).

Policy Relevant Treatment Effects

The policy relevant treatment effect (PRTE) is the average treatment effect for those
induced to change their educational choices in response to a particular policy intervention.
Let Y p be the aggregate outcome under policy p. Let S(p) be the schooling selected
25

See, e.g., Heckman and Vytlacil (2007a) and Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2010).
The direct effect of graduating from high school is DT E0,1 (Y |X = x, θ = θ) = E(Y1 − Y0 |X = x1 , θ =
θ) − E(Y2 − Y0 |X = x, θ = θ) × Pr(s = 2|X = x, θ = θ, F ix D0,1 = 0). The second term on the right-hand
side arises from the forgone option of taking the GED.
26

19

under policy p. The policy relevant treatment effect from implementing policy p
compared to policy p0 is:
ZZ
P RT Ep,p0 ≡

0

E(Y p − Y p |X = X, θ = θ), dFX,θ (X, θ|S(p) 6= S(p0 )),

(14)

where S(p) 6= S(p0 ) denotes the set of people and their associated θ, X values for whom
attained schooling levels differ under the two policies.

4

Data

We use the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) to estimate our
model. It is a nationally representative sample of men and women born in the years
1957–1964. Respondents were first interviewed in 1979 when they were 14–22 years of
age. The NLSY surveyed its participants annually from 1979 to 1992 and biennially
since 1992. The NLSY measures a variety of adult outcomes including income and
health. The survey also measures many other aspects of the respondents’ lives, such as
educational attainment, fertility, scores on achievement tests, high school grades, and
family background variables. This paper uses the core sample of males, which, after
removing observations with missing covariates, contains 2242 individuals.27 We report
results for samples that pool race groups.

4.1

Outcomes, Transitions, and Final Attainment Levels

This paper considers the effect of education on three different health and health-related
outcomes: overall physical health, smoking, and self-esteem.28 As a measure of physical
27

Respondents were dropped from the analysis if they did not have valid ASVAB scores, missed multiple
rounds of interview, had implausible educational histories, were missing control variables which could not
be imputed, or had implausible labor market histories. A number of imputations where made as necessary.
Previous years’ covariates were used when covariates where not available for a needed year (such as region
of residence). Responses from adjacent years were used for some outcomes when outcome variables were
missing at the age of interest. Mother’s education and father’s education were imputed when missing. See
Web Appendix Section A for the analysis of the deleted observations.
28
The literature focuses primary attention on the effect of mortality and on smoking. See Cutler and
Lleras-Muney (2010).

20

health, we use the PCS-12 scale, the Physical Component Summary obtained from
the SF-12.29 The SF-12 in turn is designed to provide a measure of the respondent’s
mental and physical health irrespective of their proclivity to use formal health services.
We also study smoking at age 30 as an additional measure of healthy behaviors. It is
a self-reported, binary variable recording whether the individual smoked daily at age
30. As a measure of mental health, the effect of education on self-esteem is considered.
Self esteem is measured using Rosenberg’s self-esteem scale collected in 2006, when
individuals were in their 40s.
We also analyze the effect of education on log wages at age 30 as a traditional
benchmark. Details on the construction of these outcome variables are presented in the
Web Appendix Section A.
We estimate models with the four different transitions and five final schooling levels
depicted in Figure 2. Education at age 30 is treated as the respondent’s final schooling
level.30

4.2

Measurement System (T )

Our approach to estimating the impact of cognitive and socioemotional measures on
schooling choices and outcomes improves on the traditional approach, which uses indices
of direct measures of behavior, designated as cognitive and socioemotional indices, to
proxy latent traits. We allow for measurement error and use factor analysis to let the
data determine the weights on specific measures used in forming indices.31
As noted by Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, and Kautz (2011) and Heckman and
Kautz (2012, 2014), a fundamental identification problem plagues the extraction of
psychological characteristics. Traits are measured from behaviors that can also be
affected by incentives and other traits. Even after controlling for these incentives and
other traits, some normalizations are necessary to operationalize the measures of traits,
29

SF-12 is a 12-question health survey designed by John Ware of the New England Medical Center Hospital
(see Ware, Kosinski, and Keller (1996) and Gandek, Ware, Aaronson, Apolone, Bjorner, Brazier, Bullinger,
Kaasa, Leplege, Prieto, and Sullivan (1998).
30
A negligible fraction of individuals change schooling levels after age 30.
31
See Cunha and Heckman (2008).

21

and distinguish one trait from another. Even if this distinction cannot be made, we
can condition on the (entire) set of traits without distinguishing which particular traits
produce outcomes. Hence, our estimates of the causal effects of schooling on outcomes
do not require that we solve these identification problems. Our estimates of effects of
specific factors do.
We identify the cognitive and socioemotional factors used in this paper from an
auxiliary measurement system fit jointly with a model of educational choice. Following
Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004), we control for the effect of schooling at the
time the measurements are taken on the measurements to control for feedback from
schooling to measured traits. We do not use the outcome measures (Y ) in extracting
the distributions of latent factors to avoid getting tautologically good fits between
outcomes and factors and to render the factors interpretable.
Sub-tests from the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) are used
as dedicated measures of cognitive ability and are assumed not to be determined by
the socioemotional factor. Specifically, we consider scores from Arithmetic Reasoning,
Coding Speed, Paragraph Comprehension, Word Knowledge, Math Knowledge, and
Numerical Operations.32
Academic success (measured by GPA) depends on cognitive ability, but also depends strongly on socioemotional traits such as conscientiousness, self-control, and
self-discipline. This motivates our identification strategy of including both a cognitive
and socioemotional factor as determinants of 9th grade GPA, as much of the variance in
this measure not explained through cognitive test scores has been shown to be related
to socioemotional traits.33
To identify the socioemotional factor, we use measures of participation in minor

32

A subset of these tests is used to construct the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) score, which is
commonly used as a measure of cognitive ability. AFQT scores are often interpreted as proxies for cognitive
ability (Herrnstein and Murray, 1994). See the discussion in Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, and Kautz
(2011).
33
As noted by Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Humphries (2011) and Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman,
and Kautz (2011), the principal determinants of the grade point average are personality traits and not
cognition. Similarly, Duckworth and Seligman (2005) find that self-discipline predicts GPA in 8th graders
better than IQ. See also Duckworth, Quinn, and Tsukayama (2010).

22

risky or reckless activity in 1979 in the measurement system for the socioemotional
endowment.34 In order to identify the distribution of correlated factors, risky behavior
is restricted to not load on the cognitive factor.35
As a robustness check, we include five additional measures of risky adolescent
behavior to check our estimates based on the non-cognitive factor.36 We consider
violent behavior in 1979 (fighting at school or work and hitting or threatening to hit
someone), tried marijuana before age 15, daily smoking before age 15, regular drinking
before age 15, and any intercourse before age 15. For violent behavior, we control for
the potential effect of schooling on the outcome. The estimates based on including
these measures are essentially the same as the ones reported in the text.

4.3

Control Variables (X)

For every outcome, measure, and educational choice, we control for race, broken home
status, number of siblings, mother’s education, father’s education, and family income
in 1979. We additionally control for region of residence and urban status at the time
the relevant measure, decision, or outcome was assessed.37 For log wages at age 30, we
additionally control for local economic conditions at age 30.
The models for educational choice include additional choice-specific covariates.
Following Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2011), we control for both long-run economic
conditions measured by unemployment and current deviations from those conditions. By
controlling for the long-run local economic environment, local unemployment variations
capture current economic shocks that might affect schooling decisions.
34

Preliminary data analysis suggested that one measure of risky behavior is the least correlated cognitive
endowments among our measures of socioemotional traits. This variable is a binary variable which is unity if
an agent answers yes to any of the following questions in 1980: “Taken something from the store without
paying for it,” “Purposely destroyed or damaged property that did not belong to you?,” “Other than from a
store, taken something that did not belong to you worth under $50?,” and “Tried to get something by lying
to a person about what you would do for him, that is, tried to con someone?”
35
These measures are used for estimating one of the three-factor models discussed in Web Appendix
Section I.
36
Gullone and Moore (2000) present a line of research which studies the relationship between personality
traits and adolescent risk-behavior.
37
Based on the data, we assume that high school, GED certification, and college enrollment decisions
occur at age 17 while the choice to graduate from college is made at age 22.

23

4.4

Exclusion Restrictions

Identification of our model does not rest solely on the conditional independence assumptions listed in Table 1 which, by themselves, could justify identification of our
model as a version of matching on mismeasured variables. Under sufficient support
conditions on the regressors, the model is nonparametrically identified and does not
require either conditional independence assumptions or normality assumptions.38 To
nonparametrically identify treatment effects without invoking the full set of conditional
independence assumptions, node-specific instruments are critical. We have a variety
of exclusion restrictions that affect choices but not outcomes. These are listed in the
bottom five rows of Table 2. The node-specific exclusion restrictions are noted at the
base of the table.
In a dynamic forward-looking model, instruments at later stages that are known
at earlier stages cannot be excluded from choices at earlier stages. Following the
literature on rational expectations econometrics (see Hansen and Sargent, 1980), stagespecific expectations of the future-stage realized value of instruments qualify as valid
instruments. We find that candidate instruments based on future variables (e.g., college
tuition for high school graduation) were not statistically significant predictors of earlystage (high school graduation) decisions. In our samples, future realizations of the
potential instruments do not predict previous stage-specific schooling choices. Invoking
linearity of the effect of schooling on outcomes widely used in the literature (Card,
1999, 2001) avoids the need for stage-specific instruments. However, linearity in years
of schooling for wage equations is decisively rejected in many data sets.39 In addition,
different schooling levels are qualitatively different.40

38

Heckman and Navarro (2007) and Abbring and Heckman (2007).
See the evidence discussed in Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006). See Web Appendix Section O for
our evidence on nonlinearity.
40
For example, there is no specific number of years of schooling to assign to GEDs.
39

24

Table 2: Control Variables and Instruments Used in the Analysis
Variables
Race
Broken Home
Number of Siblings
Parents’ Education
Family Income (1979)
Region of Residence
Urban Status
Agea
Local Unemploymentb
Local Long-Run Unemployment
Instruments
Local Unemployment at Age 17c
Local Unemployment at Age 22d
GED Test Difficultye
Local College Tuition at Age 17f
Local College Tuition at Age 22g
Notes:
results.

a
b

Measurement Equations
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Choice Outcomes
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Age in 1979 is included as a cohort control. We also included individual cohort dummies which did not change the
For economic outcomes, local unemployment at the time of the outcome.

{0, 1}, {0, 2}, and {1, 3}.

d This

c

This is an instrument for choices at nodes

is an instrument for the choice at {3, 4}. Region and urban dummies are specific to the age that

the measurement, educational choice, or outcome occurred. e GED test difficulty only enters the decision to earn a GED. GED
difficulty is proxied by the percent of high school graduates able to pass the test in one try given the state’s chosen average
and minimum score requirements. Control variables at age 17 are used for the high school graduation, GED certification, and
college enrollment decisions. Control variables at age 22 are used for the college graduation decision. Control variables at age
14 are used for 9th grade GPA, and control variables from 1979 are used for the ASVAB tests.
17 only enters the college enrollment graduation decisions.

g Local

equation.

25

f Local

college tuition at age

college tuition at age 22 only enters the college completion

5

Estimation Strategy

We estimate the model in two stages. The distribution of latent endowments and the
model of schooling decisions are estimated in the first stage. The outcome equations
are estimated in the second stage using estimates from the first stage.
We follow Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004), and correct estimated factor
distributions for the causal effect of schooling on the measurements by jointly estimating
the schooling choice and measurement equations. The distribution of the latent factors
is estimated using data on only educational choices and measurements. This allows
us to interpret the factors as cognitive and socioemotional endowments. It links our
estimates to an emerging literature on the economics of personality and psychological
traits but is not strictly required if we only seek to control for selection in schooling
choices. We do not use the final outcome system to estimate the factors, thus avoiding
producing tautologically strong predictions from the estimated factors.
Assuming independence across individuals, the likelihood is:

L=

Y

f (Yi , Di , Ti |Xi )

i

=

YZ

f (Yi |Di Xi , θ)f (Di , Ti |Xi , θ)f (θ)dθ,

i

where f (·) denotes a probability density function. The last step is justified from the
assumptions listed in Table 1. For the first stage, the sample likelihood is

1

L =

YZ
i

f (Di , Ti |Xi , θ = θ) dFθ (θ),

(15)

θ∈Θ

where we integrate over the distributions of the latent factors. We approximate the
factor distribution using a mixture of normals.41 We assume that the idiosyncratic
shocks are mean zero normal variates. The goal of the first stage is to secure estimators
of f (Di , Ti | Xi , θ) and f (θ). In the second stage, we use first stage estimates (denoted
41

Mixtures of normals can be used to identify the true density nonparametrically, where the number of
mixtures can be increased based on the size of the sample. For a discussion of sieve estimators, see Chen
(2007).

26

“ ˆ ”) to form the likelihood

2

L =

YZ
i

f (Yi |Di , Xi , θ = θ)fˆ(Di , Ti |Xi , θ = θ)dF̂θ (θ).

(16)

θ∈Θ

Since outcomes (Yi ) are independent from the first stage outcomes conditional on
Xi , θ, Di and we impose no cross-equation restrictions, we obtain consistent estimates
of the parameters for the adult outcomes. Each stage is estimated using maximumlikelihood. Standard errors and confidence intervals are calculated by estimating two
hundred bootstrap samples for the combined stages.

6

Empirical Estimates

Since the model is nonlinear and multidimensional, in the main text we only report
interpretable simulations of it.42 We randomly draw regressors from the observations
and the estimated factor distributions to simulate the various outcomes.
We present our empirical analysis in the following order. Section 6.1 discusses the
estimates of the measurement system and the estimated effects of the endowments
on schooling, labor market, and health outcomes. Section 6.2 presents estimates of
the treatment effects of education. Section 6.3 gives estimates of the policy relevant
treatment effect of a subsidy to college tuition. Section 6.4 discusses the importance of
the latent cognitive and socioemotional endowments.

6.1

The measurement of endowments and their effects on

outcomes
Figure 3 shows the variance decomposition of the measures. The latent factors explain
between 20% and 70% of the variance of the ASVAB tests and school grades. While the
socioemotional factor explains only 2%–3% of the variation in reckless behavior, it has a
statistically significant effect on outcomes for those with at least a high school degree.43
42
43

Parameter estimates for individual equations are reported in the Web Appendix.
See Web Appendix Section C.

27

Although observed and latent variables combined explain a large part of the variance
of the test scores and grades, there is a still significant amount of measurement error
(labeled as “Residual” in the figure).44 We test and reject the hypothesis that a bivariate
normal model produces good model fit in favor of a model with a mixture of two normals
for the factor distribution.45 Simulations of the model show that the estimated model
fits the data well.46 We find a positive and statistically significant correlation between
the cognitive and socioemotional/personality endowments (ρ = 0.23).

44

This implies that any predictions of the factors would also have a significant amount of measurement
error.
45
The likelihood ratio test was used to test for the appropriate number of mixtures.
46
The goodness of fit measurements are made for the various outcomes and measurement systems. Goodness
of fit for discrete outcomes is tested using a χ2 test of fit of the model to data. For continuous outcomes, the
equality of the model and data are tested using t-tests. We test for mean equivalence of the means for many
sub-populations and jointly test if the means are equivalent for all sub-populations using a χ2 test. Tests of
goodness of fit are found in Section E in the Web Appendix.

28

Social Science Grades

Language
Grades
Language
Grades

Graduate
College
Graduate
College

Enroll
in College
Enroll
in College

Attain GED

Attain GED

Graduate Highschool

Education

29
0

0

.2

.4

Observables

.2

.6

Cognitive

.8

.4

1

.6
Covariance

0

.8
Socioemotional

.5

1
Residual

1

Coding Speed (>12)

Math Knowledge (>12)

Numerical Operations (>12)

Paragraph Comprehension (>12)

Word Knowledge (>12)

Arithmetic Reasoning (>12)

Coding Speed (=12)

Math Knowledge (=12)

Numerical Operations (=12)

Paragraph Comprehension (=12)

Word Knowledge (=12)

Arithmetic Reasoning (=12)

Coding Speed (<12)

Math Knowledge (<12)

Numerical Operations (<12)

Paragraph Comprehension (<12)

Word Knowledge (<12)

Arithmetic Reasoning (<12)

Notes: Bars indicate the fraction of the variance in each outcome explained by observable covariates (X), unobservable cognitive and
socioemotional factors (θC , θSE ), and remaining unobservables (). For continuous outcomes we decompose the observed variance, while
for discrete outcomes we decompose the variance of the latent index. Given the assumption that the factors, observable characteristic,
and unobservables are all independent, the total variance of an outcome can be decomposed as var(Y ) = var(X 0 β) + var(θ 0 α) + var()
for continuous outcomes and var(I) = var(X 0 β) + var(θ 0 α) + var() for discrete outcomes. Furthermore, var(α0 θ) = var(θC αC ) +
2cov(θC αC , θN C αN C ) + var(θN C αN C ). In the legend above, for continuous outcomes, “Observables” is var(X 0 β)/var(Y ), “Cognitive” is
var(θC αC )/var(Y ), “Covariance” is 2cov(θC αC , θN C αN C )/var(Y ), and “Socioemotional” is var(θN C αN C )/var(Y ). Calculations for the
discrete outcomes are the same, but are normalizes by var(I) rather than var(Y ). The ASVAB tests are assumed to not depend on the
socioemotional endowment, while reckless behavior is assumed to not depend on the cognitive endowment. The ASVAB and behavior
models are estimated separately for those with less than twelve years (< 12), those who are high school graduates (= 12), and those
who have attended college (> 12) at the time they took the ASVAB tests. Minor reckless behavior, which is also measured in 1979, also
estimates models separately for those with less than 12 years and those with 12 or more years of schooling.

Reckless Behav. (>=12)

Reckless Behav. (>=12)

Reckless Behav. (<12)

Reckless Behav. (<12)

Math Grades

Math Grades

Science Grades

Science Grades

Social Science Grades

Behavior

Grades

Behavior

Grades

Education

Graduate Highschool

Figure 3: Decomposing Variances in the Measurement System

ASVAB

Figure 4: Distribution of factors by schooling level

.6
.4
0

.2

Density

.8

1

Sorting into Schooling

−2

−1

0

1

Cognitive Factor
1

HS Drop
GED

.8

HS Grad.
Some College

.4

.6

4yr Coll. Grad.

0

.2

Density

2

−2

−1

0

1

2

Socioemotional Factor

Note: The factors are simulated from the estimates of the model. The simulated data contain
1 million observations.

30

Figure 5: The Probability of Educational Decisions, by Endowment Levels
(Final Schooling Levels are Highlighted Using Bold Letters)
B. HS Dropout vs. Getting a GED
Probability

1
0.8
0.6

0.4

0.16

j

0.14

0.12
0.6

0.12
0.6

8

10

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

0

2

4

6

8

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0.15

10

0.1
0.05

0

0

2

4

6

Decile of Cognitive

8

10

0

Decile of Socio-Emotional

D. Some College vs. 4-year college degree
Probability

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0
10
De 9 8
cile
of 7 6
So
cio 5 4
-Em 3
otio 2 1
na
l

0
10
De 9 8
cile
of 7 6
So
cio 5 4
-Em 3
otio 2 1
na
l

0.14

0.6

0.4

9 10
7 8
itive
of Cogn
Decile

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14

0.6

0.12

0.12

0.1

0.1

0.08

0.4

0.08

0.06
0.2

0.04

10
Decile of Cognitive

0

0.3
0.8
0.25
0.6

0.2

0.2

0.04

2

3

5

4

6

9 10
7 8
itive
of Cogn
Decile

0.3

Probability

1

0.25
0.8
0.2
0.6
0.15

0.15

0.4

0.4

0.1

0.1

0.06

0.02
8

0.35

Probability

1

1

j

0.22

j

0.24

Probability

1

0.8

Fraction

6

j'

0.16

5

4

y - y Probability

0.18

Fraction

0.2

j

0.22

3

j'

0.24

Probability

2

y - y Probability

1

0.2

0.05

0.2

0.05

0.02
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0

2

4

6

8

10
Decile of Cognitive

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Socio-Emotional

Notes: For each of the four educational choices, we present three figures that study the probability of that specific educational
choice. Final schooling levels do not allow for further options. For each pair of schooling levels 0 and 1, the first subfigure (top)
presents P rob(D|dC , dSE ) where dC and dSE denote the cognitive and socioemotional deciles computed from the marginal
distributions of cognitive and socioemotional endowments. P rob(D|dC , dSE ) is computed for those who reach the decision node
involving a decision between levels 0 and 1. The bottom left subfigures present P rob(D|dC ) where the socioemotional factor is
integrated out. The bars in these figures display, for a given decile of cognitive endowment, the fraction of individuals visiting
the node leading to the educational decision involving levels 0 and 1. The bottom right subfigures present P rob(D|dSE ) for
a given decile of socioemotional endowment, as well as the fraction of individuals visiting the node leading to the educational
decision involving levels 0 and 1.

31

0

Fraction

0.2

Fraction

Probability

0.25

0.05

0.6

j'

j

y - y Probability

0.3

0.2

1

6

0.35

0.2

0.8

0.8

4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.4

2

0.45

0.1

C. HS Graduate vs. College Enrollment

0

Probability

1

0.8

0.6

0.15

0.02

Decile of Cognitive

1

9 10
7 8
itive
of Cogn
Decile

j'

6

0.25

0.4

0.04

0.2

0.02
4

6

0.06

0.04

2

5

4

0.2

0.08

0.4

0.06

0

0.3

0.1

0.08

0.2

0.35

0.6

0.1
0.4

0.4

Probability

1

0.8

3

j

0.18

2

j'

0.2

Probability

1

0.8

1

Fraction

9 10
7 8
itive
of Cogn
Decile

j'

j

6

j'

0.14

5

4

y - y Probability

0.16

3

Fraction

0.18

Fraction

0.2

0.8

2

y - y Probability

1

Fraction

0
10
De 9 8
cile
of 7 6
So
cio 5 4
-Em 3
otio 2 1
na
l

y - y Probability

0.2

0
10
De 9 8
cile
of 7 6
So
cio 5 4
-Em 3
otio 2 1
na
l

Probability

1

0.6

0.2

j'

j

y - y Probability

0.4

1
0.8

y - y Probability

Probability

A. Dropping from HS vs. Graduating from HS

Figure 6: The Effect of Cognitive and Socioemotional endowments

Smoker

B. Daily Smoking
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
De
cile
of 12 3
So 4 5
cio
-Em 6 7 8
otio 910
na
l

8

10

2

4

6

Decile of Cognitive

8

0.4

0.08

0.3

0.06

0.3

0.06

0.04

0.1
2

4

6

0.08

-0.4

0.06

SF-12 Physical
0.14
0.12

0

0.1

-0.2

0.08

-0.4

0.06

-0.8

0.02

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Cognitive

0

j

0.2

Fraction

Fraction

0.16

0.04

-0.6

-0.6

0.02

2

8

10

Fraction

0

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0.2

0.4

0.18

0.2

0.16
0.14

0

0.12
0.1

-0.2

0.08

-0.4

0.06

0.04

-0.8

6

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

j'

j'

0.1

-0.2

0.18

0.4

y - y SF-12 Physical

0.12

0

0.2

0.6

j

0.14

4

10
De 9 8 7
cile 6
9 10
of 5 4
6 7 8
So 3 2
3 4 5 le of Cognitive
cio
-Em 1 1 2
Deci
otio
na
l

j'

0.2

y - y Rosenberg

Rosenberg

0.16

j

y - y Rosenberg

0.18

0.02

2

D. Physical Health

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
10
De 9 8 7
cile 6
9 10
of 5 4
6 7 8
So 3 2
3 4 5 le of Cognitive
cio
-Em 1 1 2
Deci
otio
na
l
0.2

10

0.1

0

Decile of Cognitive

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0.4

8

0.04

0.2

0.02

C. Self-Esteem

0.6

Fraction

0.08

0.2

0

10

0.1

0.4

0.14

4

6

8

0

10

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0.2

0.4

0.18

0.2

0.16
0.14

0

0.12
0.1

-0.2

0.08

-0.4

0.06

0.04

-0.6

0.02

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Cognitive

0

0.04

-0.6

0.02

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Socio-Emotional

Notes: For each of the four outcomes, we present three figures that study the impact of cognitive and socioemotional endowments.
The top figure in each panel displays the levels of the outcome as a function of cognitive and socioemotional endowments. In
particular, we present the average level of outcomes for different deciles of cognitive and socioemotional endowments. Notice
that we define as “decile 1” the decile with the lowest values of endowments and “decile 10” as the decile with the highest levels
of endowments. The bottom left figure displays the average levels of endowment across deciles of cognitive endowments. The
bottom right figure mimics the structure of the left-hand side figure but now for the socioemotional endowment.

32

0

Fraction

6

0.5

Fraction

4

0.12

0.1

j

2

0.06

0.02

2.2

0

0.08

0.04

0.6

j'

2.2

0.5

0.16

0.7

0.14

y - y SF-12 Physical

0.02

0.1

0.18

0.8

j

2.4

0.04

0.12

0.2

0.9

j'

0.06

2.4

0.16

0.6

0.12

2.6

0.08

0.18

0.8
0.7

0.14

2.8

0.2

0.9

j

0.16

j'

j'

0.1

2.6

0.18

3

1
4 3 2
7 6 5
10 9 8 Cognitive
of
ile
ec
D

j'

0.12

2.8

0.2

3.2

j

0.14

y - y Smoker

0.16

Fraction

0.18

3

Fraction

0.2

3.2

y - y Log-wages

2.4
2.2
10
De 9 8 7
cile 6
9 10
of 5 4
6 7 8
So 3 2
3 4 5 le of Cognitive
cio
ci
-Em 1 1 2
e
D
otio
na
l

y - y Smoker

3
2.8
2.6

j

y - y Log-wages

Log-wages

A. (log)Wages

There may be concern that the socioemotional factor is describing something like
academic ability, since it is partly based on grades.47 In order to address this issue,
the role of the cognitive and socioemotional factors in adverse adolescent behaviors is
investigated. Table 3 reports estimates for smoking, drinking, intercourse and violent
behaviors. The factor loadings (the coefficients for “cognitive” and “socioemotional”
factors at the base of each table) show that the socioemotional factor plays a significant
role in these adverse behaviors, whereas the cognitive loadings are either statistically
insignificant or much smaller than the socioemotional loadings.

47

Our exclusion restriction for the socioemotional factor is “risky and reckless behavior in 1979”, which is
a binary measure of whether the person had ever done any of the following things: (1) purposefully damaged
another person’s property, (2) stolen an item of value from another person that was worth less than $50,
(3) stolen a small item from a store, or (4) tried to get something from someone by lying about what they
would do in return. Not included as part of the measurement system, we have additional binary measures for
violent behavior in 1979, daily smoking before age 15, tried marijuana before 15, regular drinking before 15,
and sexual intercourse before age 15. These five measures were excluded from the measurement system as
they are extreme enough that they may affect schooling decisions and later life health. For example, we did
not want to predict later life health decisions with early life health decisions, or educational choice by actions
that could lead to incarceration (such as violent behavior). We include these as outcomes that do not inform
our measurement system to help us interpret our factor. We chose risky and reckless behavior in 1979 as our
exclusion restriction because it was less likely to directly determine educational outcomes. All of the risky
measures had low and statistically insignificant correlations with AFQT (| ρ |< 0.05). See section N.1.

33

34
-0.113
-0.604
2239

0.048
0.059

-0.210
-0.526
2176

0.054
0.064

Std Err.
0.112
0.150
0.081
0.015
0.017
0.013
0.003
0.213
0.081
0.075

β
-0.331
-0.504
0.411
0.035
-0.020
-0.037
-0.002
-0.487
0.116
-0.027

Std Err.
0.100
0.124
0.072
0.014
0.015
0.011
0.003
0.185
0.072
0.066

β
-0.327
-0.152
0.444
0.024
0.007
-0.007
0.000
-0.770
0.258
-0.103

Daily Smokinga

Tried Marijuanaa

-0.142
-0.287
2231

β
-0.242
-0.009
0.243
0.027
-0.001
-0.003
-0.001
-1.059
0.095
0.066

0.051
0.061

Std Err.
0.108
0.130
0.077
0.015
0.016
0.012
0.003
0.198
0.077
0.071

Regular Drinkinga

-0.281
-0.401
2218

β
0.600
-0.033
0.366
0.011
-0.022
-0.027
-0.003
-0.860
0.212
0.104

0.057
0.066

Std Err.
0.099
0.140
0.080
0.016
0.017
0.013
0.003
0.216
0.087
0.076

Intercoursea

-0.160
-0.497
1272

0.062
0.078

Violent
<12 yrs school
β
Std Err.
0.125
-0.253
-0.316
0.161
0.094
0.220
0.009
0.018
0.030
0.019
-0.034
0.015
0.004
-0.006
-3.223
3.597
0.131
0.093
-0.204
0.098
0.117
-0.125
0.120
-0.184
0.517
0.384
-0.017
0.010

in 1979b
≥12 yrs school
β
Std Err.
0.157
0.154
-0.054
0.204
0.116
0.130
0.013
0.021
-0.033
0.023
0.009
0.016
0.003
-0.006
15.948 10.354
0.012
0.104
0.050
0.113
0.132
0.149
0.122
0.053
-1.434
0.990
0.033
0.024
-0.132
0.124
-0.233
0.073
0.090
-0.262
909

The numbers in this table represent the estimated coefficients and standard errors associated with binary choice models of early risky
behaviors on the set of controls presented in rows. Information about living in the West and Northeast is only available in 1979. a The
dependent variable takes a value of one if the individual has reported the behavior before age 15, and zero otherwise. b The variable
“Violent” takes a value of one if the individual participated in fighting or assault in 1979, and is estimated separately by education level to
account for age differences in 1979. For violent behavior, which is measured in 1979 rather than at a specific age, we include age and age
squared.

Black
Hispanic
Broken Home
Number of Siblings
Mother’s Education
Father’s Education
Family Income
Intercept
Urban
South
West
Northeast
Age
Age2
College Attendance
Cognitive
Socioemotional
N

Variable

Table 3: Early Outcomes: Estimates for “Early Risky Behaviors”

35
0.138
0.144

1.011
0.169
522

0.823
0.983
2242

0.093
0.090

D0,2 : GED
vs. HS Dropout
β
Std Err.
0.178
-0.119
0.252
-0.083
0.140
-0.240
0.027
0.003
0.033
0.073
0.038
0.026
0.008
0.018
-0.931
0.874
0.161
0.508
0.331
0.193
0.211
0.209
0.222
0.136
5.344
2.872
6.859
-2.217
-0.046
0.031
-0.001
0.068

D0,1 : Graduate HS
vs. Drop out of HS
β
Std Err.
0.129
0.075
0.179
0.649
0.101
-0.484
0.019
-0.048
0.022
0.127
0.066
0.016
0.005
0.020
-1.288
0.525
0.097
-0.179
-0.412
0.121
0.125
-0.398
0.124
0.213
2.887
1.756
4.347
-10.992
0.043
0.019

0.846
0.493
1720

-0.261

0.092
0.082

0.059

D1,3 : Enroll College
vs. HS Graduate
β
Std Err.
0.140
0.174
0.175
0.643
0.103
-0.047
0.019
-0.053
0.021
0.097
0.127
0.015
0.004
0.012
-3.616
0.483
0.088
0.153
0.170
0.117
0.128
-0.172
0.107
0.400
3.948
1.628
4.051
-5.127
0.051
0.019

-1.078
-0.022
0.058
-0.107
-0.469
0.031
0.833
0.587
891

-4.070
0.012

1.722
0.085
0.131
0.153
0.180
0.154
0.114
0.115

4.828
0.023

D3,4 : 4-year College Degree
vs. Some College
β
Std Err.
0.196
0.010
0.255
0.410
0.141
-0.278
0.027
-0.028
0.027
0.100
0.103
0.019
0.004
0.013
-2.863
0.646

Notes: The numbers in this table represent the estimated coefficients and standard errors associated with individual binary choice models
of the sequential education model. Terminal schooling levels are highlighted in bold. Age in 1979 is included as a cohort control. We also
included individual cohort dummies and it did not change the results. a Local long-run unemployment is the average local unemployment
level over the previous 5 years. Local unemployment is the current unemployment rate. GED passrate is the estimated number of high
school graduates able to pass the test on a single try given the state’s passing standard. Unemployment variables, tuition, region dummies,
and urban status are at age 17 for high school graduation, GED certification, and college enrollment choices. Tuition, unemployment
variables, region dummies, and urban status are at age 22 for the choice to graduate from college.

Black
Hispanic
Broken Home
Number of Siblings
Mother’s Education
Father’s Education
Family Income
Intercept
Urban (age 17)
South (age 17)
West(age 17)
Northeast (age 17)
Local Unemployment (age 17)
Local Long-run Unemployment
Age
GED Passrate
Local 4-year College Tuition (age 17)
Local Unemployment (age 22)
Local 4-year College Tuition (age 22)
Urban (age 22)
South (age 22)
West (age 22)
Northeast (age 22)
Cognitive
Socioemotional
N

Variable

Table 4: Estimates for Schooling Choice Model

To test the robustness of the measurement system and our identification strategy,
several alternative specifications were estimated. For example, the measurement system
was also estimated including models for early adverse behavior. Including these measures
does not substantially change either the distribution of the factors or the loadings in
the education and grade models. In Appendix Section I.2.4, we report that inclusion of
a third factor, unrelated to cognitive and noncognitive measurements, but included in
the schooling and outcome equations, does not substantially affect any of our empirical
results.48 This lends support to an empirical strategy of matching on mismeasured
proxies for interpretable factors and correcting for measurement error.49
Table 4 presents the estimates of the schooling choice model. The cognitive factor
loadings are statistically significant for all educational decisions. The socioemotional
loadings are statistically significant in all decisions but the decision for GED certification.
Figure 3 shows that the latent factors explain about 20%–40% of the variance in the
educational models. Figure 4 shows the distribution of the factors by final schooling
level. Figure 5 presents the probabilities of making the indicated educational choice
at various levels of agent latent endowments. Individuals sort on both cognitive and
socioemotional endowments into increasing schooling levels. The only exception are
the GEDs, who have cognitive ability distributions similar to terminal high school
graduates but socioemotional distributions similar to dropouts.
The latent endowments have statistically significant effects on labor market and
health outcomes. Figure 6 plots the effects of the latent endowments on (log) wages,
daily smoking, self-esteem, and physical health. The cognitive endowment affects all four
outcomes, while the effect of the socioemotional endowment is statistically significant
only in the equations for wages and smoking. Moving someone from the lowest decile
to the highest decile in both cognitive and socioemotional ability, increases their wages
by 0.6 log points, lowers the probability of being a smoker by 60%, increases their
self-esteem by one standard deviation and increases their health by half a standard
48

The third factor is assumed to be uncorrelated with the other two factors. Proof of identification of the
model is straightforward using the analysis in Anderson and Rubin (1956).
49
Appendix F shows the importance of accounting for measurement error in forming proxies for the factors.

36

deviation.
The estimates reveal clear evidence of sorting into education by both cognitive and
socioemotional endowments. At the same time, these endowments have significant
impacts on adult outcomes. Together these results imply strong selection biases in
observed differences in outcomes by education level. This highlights the importance
of accounting for observed and latent traits when estimating the causal impact of
education.

6.2

The Effects of Educational Choices

As discussed in Section 3, the causal effects of educational can be calculated by comparing
outcomes between two final schooling levels or comparing final outcomes based on fixing
decisions at a specified choice. We first compare the outcomes from a particular final
schooling level s with those associated with being a high school dropout. The estimated
treatment effects of education on log wages, smoking, physical health, and self-esteem
are shown in Figure 7.50 For each of the outcomes, the bars labeled “Observed” display
the observed differences in the data. The bars labeled “Causal Mechanism” display the
average treatment effect obtained from the comparison of the outcomes associated with
a particular schooling level j relative to the high school dropout status.51 This figure
shows the observed earnings difference between dropouts and other educational groups.
Since the “observed” bar only uses the individuals in two groups, the ATE is calculated
over the same sub-population to increase comparability.
Our sequential model allows us to construct and analyze treatment effects by decision
node. We also compute the gain to achieving (and possibly exceeding) the designated
state inclusive of the continuation value and compare it to the outcome associated with
not achieving the state. AMTE is the average treatment effect for the subpopulations
50

These are calculated by simulating the mean outcomes for the designated state and comparing it with
the mean-simulated outcome for the benchmark dropout state for the subpopulation of persons who are in
either the designated state or the dropout state.
51
Tables showing ATE for the full population; TT and TUT can be found in Section J of the Web
Appendix.

37

Figure 7: Causal Versus Observed Differences by final schooling level
Decomposition of Schooling Effects
Daily Smoking (age 30)

0

−.6

−.4

−.2

Average TE

.4
.2

Average TE

0

.6

.2

Decomposition of Schooling Effects
Log Wages (age 30)

GED

High School

Some College

College

GED

High School

Margin
Observed
p < 0.05

Some College

College

Margin
Causal Mechanism
p < 0.01

Observed
p < 0.05

Decomposition of Schooling Effects
Physical Health (PCS−12)(age 40)

.4
−.2

−.2

0

.2

Average TE

.4
.2
0

Average TE

.6

.6

.8

Decomposition of Schooling Effects
Self−Esteem (Rosenberg) (age 40)

Causal Mechanism
p < 0.01

GED

High School

Some College

College

GED

High School

Margin
Observed
p < 0.05

Some College

College

Margin
Causal Mechanism
p < 0.01

Observed
p < 0.05

Causal Mechanism
p < 0.01

Notes: Each bar compares the outcomes from a particular schooling level j and the HS dropout status. The “Observed” bar
displays the observed differences in the data. The “Causal Mechanism” bar displays the estimated average treatment effect
(ATE) obtained from the comparison of the outcomes associated with a particular schooling level j relative to the HS dropout
status. The ATE is calculated for those who have one of the final schooling levels being considered, so that the population
is the same as the “Observed.” The RR
ATE for the full population and other margins is reported in the Web Appendix. The
average treatment effect is AT Es,0 ≡
E(Ys − Y0 |X = X, θ = θ) dFX,θ (X, θ | H0 + Hs = 1) where E is the expectation over
idiosyncratic shocks to the outcomes Ys and Y0 . The difference between the observed and causal treatment effect is attributed
to the effect of selection and ability. The error bars and significance levels for the estimated ATE are calculated using 200
bootstrap samples. Error bars show one standard deviation and correspond to the 15.87th and 84.13th percentiles of the
bootstrapped estimates, allowing for asymmetry. Significance at the 5% and 1% levels is shown by open and filled circles on
the plots, respectively.

38

approximately indifferent to the two options of a particular choice.52 The PRTE is
defined as the average treatment effect for those induced to change final educational
levels by a change in policy from p to p0 . Again, the gains include continuation values.
The estimated treatment effects of educational decisions on log-wages, smoking,
physical health and self-esteem are shown in Figure 8. Each figure presents the average
effects of educational choices on the outcome of interest. The effects are presented as
different bars in each figure, and they are defined as the differences in the outcome
associated with the designated level and the one preceding it (not necessarily final or
terminal schooling levels). Let Yj 0 denote the outcome (including continuation value)
of choosing more schooling at a particular node. Let Yj be the outcomes when no
additional schooling is chosen at the particular node. Terminal schooling levels (GED
certification and college graduation) do not provide any continuation value. At each
node, ATE presents E(Yj 0 − Yj |Qj,j 0 = 1). ATE (high) and ATE (low) are the ATEs
for different ability groups. The high- (low-) ability group is defined for individuals
with both cognitive and socioemotional endowment above (below) the overall median
of the full population. The table below the figure displays the fraction of individuals at
each educational choice who are in the high- or low-ability group. The ATE is for the
population who reaches the decision node. The ATE estimates for the entire population
are reported in the Web Appendices J and K.
The panels in Figure 9 show that the estimated average treatment effect of getting
a four-year degree depends on the latent ability of individuals for log wages, smoking,
self-esteem and physical health. The figures display how treatment effects of graduating
from college vary by decile of both cognitive and socioemotional endowments for each
outcome. Unlike the previous graphs, these show average benefits by decile over the full
population, rather than for the population that reaches each node. This makes deciles
comparable across figures.

52

We use the margin of indifference to be || Ij,j 0 /σj ||≤ .02.

39

Figure 8: Treatment Effects of Outcomes by Decision Node
Treatment Effects: Daily Smoking (age 30)

0
−.1

Average TE

−.2

.1
−.1

−.3

0

Average TE

.2

.1

.2

.3

Treatment Effects: Log Wages (age 30)

Graduate HS

Earn GED
Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

Graduate Coll.

Graduate HS

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

Graduate Coll.
ATE (low)
p < 0.01

−.4

.2
−.2

−.2

0

0

.2

Average TE

.4

.4

.6

Treatment Effects: Physical Health (PCS−12) (age 40)

.6

Treatment Effects: Self−Esteem (Rosenberg) (age 40)

Average TE

Earn GED
Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node

Graduate HS

Earn GED
Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

Graduate Coll.

Graduate HS

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

Earn GED
Enroll in Coll.
Decision Node

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

Graduate Coll.
ATE (low)
p < 0.01

Notes: Let Yj and Yj 0 denote the outcomes associated with schooling levels j and j 0 , respectively. Importantly, each
schooling level might provide the option to pursuing higher schooling levels. Only final schooling levels do not provide
an option value. The error bars and significance levels for the estimated ATE are calculated using 200 bootstrap samples. Error bars show one standard deviation and correspond to the 15.87th and 84.13th percentiles of the bootstrapped
estimates, allowing for asymmetry. Significance at the 5% and 1% level are shown by hollow and black circles on the
plots respectively. For two schooling levels j and j 0 associated with a particular educational choice, the ATE bar presents
E(Yj − Yj 0 |Qj,j 0 = 1). The estimates for the full population are reported in the Web Appendix. AMTE presents the
average (Yj − Yj 0 ) for those who reach that decision node and are indifferent between j and j 0 . To be exact, the nodeRR
D
specific ATE is defined as, AT Ej,j
Tj,j 0 [Y |X = X, θ = θ] dFX,θ (X, θ | Qj,j 0 = 1), where the individual’s treat0 ≡
ment effect is defined as Tj,j 0 [Y |X = X, θ = θ] ≡ E(Y |X = X, θ = θ, F ix Qj,j 0 = 1, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1) − E(Y |X =
X, θ = θ, F ix Qj,j 0 = 1, F ix Dj,j 0 = 0) and the expectations of future outcomes are weighted by the probability of future ed





P
ucational choices: E Y |X = X, θ = θ, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1 ≡
s Pr s|X = X, θ = θ, F ix Dj,j 0 = 1 × E Ys |X = X, θ = θ .
The figure also presents the estimated ATE conditional upon endowment levels. The high- (low-) ability group is defined as
those individuals with cognitive and socioemotional endowment above (below) the overall median. The fraction of individuals
with low and high ability levels visiting each node are:

D1 :
D2 :
D3 :
D4 :

Dropping from HS vs. Graduating from HS
HS Dropout vs. Getting a GED
HS Graduate vs. College Enrollment
Some College vs. 4-year college degree

In this table, final schooling levels are highlighted using bold letters.

40

Low Ability
0.31
0.61
0.22
0.14

High Ability
0.31
0.06
0.38
0.51

Figure 9: Average Treatment Effect of Graduating from a Four-Year College by
Outcome.

B. Daily Smoking

4

6

8

10

0.1

-0.1
-0.2

0

-0.2

0.05

2

4

6

Decile of Cognitive

8

2

4

6

0.05

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Cognitive

0

-0.2
2

4

6

8

0

10

Decile of Socio-Emotional

j'

j

0

0.05

-0.2

8

10

0.1

Fraction

Fraction

0

0.05

2

4

6

8

10

0

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
10
De 9 8 7
cile 6
9 10
of 5 4
6 7 8
So 3 2
3 4 5 le of Cognitive
cio
-Em 1 1 2
Deci
otio
na
l

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

j

0.15

0.2

0.1
0.1

0

0.15

-0.2
-0.3

0.15

j'

0.4

0.2

Fraction

Fraction

0.25

y - y (SF-12 Physical)

0.15

0.3

0.6

j
j'

j'

0.2

y - y (Rosenberg)

0.4
0.2

yj' - y j (SF-12 Physical)

yj' - y j (Rosenberg)

0.25

j

y - y (Rosenberg)

0.3

0.2

-0.1

D. Physical Health

1
4 3 2
7 6 5
10 9 8 Cognitive
f
o
Decile
0.35

0.25

0

Decile of Cognitive

C. Self-Esteem

0.6

j

0.05

-0.3

0

10

0.1

Decile of Socio-Emotional

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
De
cile
1
of S 2 3
oci 4 5 6
o-E
mo 7 8 9
tion 10
al

0.3

0.1

0.1
0.05

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Cognitive

0

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

2

4

6

8

10

Decile of Socio-Emotional

Notes: Each panel in this figure studies the average effects of graduating with a four-year college degree on the outcome of interest. The effect is defined as the differences in the outcome between those with a four-year college degree and those with some
college. For each panel, let Ysomecoll and Y4−yr degree denotes the outcomes associated with attaining some college and graduating with a four-year degree, respectively. For each outcome, the first figure (top) presents E(Y4−yr degree −Ysomecoll |dC , dSE )
where dC and dSE denote the cognitive and socioemotional deciles computed from the marginal distributions of cognitive
and socioemotional endowments. The second figure (bottom left) presents E(Y4−yr degree − Ysomecoll |dC ) so that the
socioemotional factor is integrated out. The bars in this figure display, for a given decile of cognitive endowment, the
fraction of individuals visiting the node leading to the educational decision involving graduating from a four-year college.
The last figure (bottom right) presents E(Y4−yr degree − Ysomecoll |dSE ) and the fraction of individuals visiting the node
leading to the educational decision involving graduating from a four-year college for a given decile of socioemotional endowment.

41

0

Fraction

2

0.2

-0.1

Fraction

-0.2

0.25

0.15

0

0.05

0.3

0

j'

0.15

0.1

-0.1

0.35

0.1

1
4 3 2
7 6 5
10 9 8 of Cognitive
Decile

y - y (SF-12 Physical)

0.15

0

ile o 1 2 3
f So 4 5
cio- 6 7
Em 8 9
otio 10
nal

j'

j

0.2

0.1

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

y - y (Smoker)

yj' - y j (Smoker)
0.25

0.2

j'

0.2

0.3

0.3

y - y (Smoker)

0.1

j

0.25

Dec

Fraction

0.3

0.2

Fraction

0.35

0.3

y - y (Log-wages)

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
10
De 9 8 7
cile 6
9 10
of 5 4
6 7 8
So 3 2
3 4 5 le of Cognitive
cio
-Em 1 1 2
Deci
otio
na
l

j'

j

y - y (Log-wages)

yj' - y j (Log-wages)

A. (log)Wages

One benefit of schooling is access to further schooling.53 Specifically, the choice to
graduate from high school and the choice to enroll in college open up the doors for
continued education. The continuation value of an educational choice is the probability
of additional education times the benefits of that additional education. For high-ability
individuals, the benefits of college may be large, and the probability of attending may
be close to 1. For such individuals, the continuation value may constitute the bulk
of the return to graduating from high school. For others, the probability or benefit
of college may be much lower. Figure 10 reports the continuation value ratio—the
proportion of the ATE accounted for by the continuation value. The continuation value
ratio is reported both for high school graduation and enrollment in college. In Figure 10,
the ratios are shown for high ability and low ability individuals, as well as the AMTE.
The ratio is only shown if the ATE is statistically significant.54

53

See Weisbrod (1962) and Comay, Melnik, and Pollatschek (1973).
The continuation value ratio is only relevant for treatment effects that are significant. The ratio for
imprecisely estimated numbers often have large, but insignificant values.
54

42

Figure 10: Treatment Effects: Ratio of Continuation Value to Treatment
Effects

1
.5

Average TE

−.5

0

.5
−.5

0

Average TE

1

1.5

Continuation Value Ratio:
Daily Smoking (measured at age 30)

1.5

Continuation Value Ratio:
Log Wages (measured at age 30)

Graduate HS

Enroll in College

Graduate HS

Decision Node
AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

1
.5
0
−.5

−.5

0

.5

Average TE

1

1.5

Continuation Value Ratio:
Physical Health (PCS−12)(measured at age 40)

1.5

Continuation Value Ratio:
Self−Esteem (Rosenberg) (measured at age 40)

Average TE

Enroll in College
Decision Node

Graduate HS

Enroll in College

Graduate HS

Decision Node
AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

Enroll in College
Decision Node

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

AMTE
ATE (high)

ATE
p < 0.05

ATE (low)
p < 0.01

Notes: Estimates which have insignificant ATEs are not shown. (Taking ratios can lead to very large standard errors which
compress the figures.) The ratio of average continuation value to average treatment effect is calculated by dividing the average
continuation value by the average total treatment effect for those that reach the decision.. Continuation Value is the additional
benefit gained through the option of pursuing additional education and is defined in Section 2. High-ability individuals are
those in the top 50% of the distributions of both cognitive and socioemotional endowments. Low-ability individuals are those
in the bottom 50% of the distributions of both cognitive and socioemotional endowments. The error bars and significance levels
for the estimated ATE are calculated using 200 bootstrap samples. Error bars show one standard deviation and correspond
to the 15.87th and 84.13th percentiles of the bootstrapped estimates, allowing for asymmetry. Significance at the 5% and 1%
level are shown by hollow and black circles on the plots respectively.

In general, the differences in outcomes between schooling levels are much larger
when we do not control for observed variables and latent endowments. In most cases,
the gains from education is increasing (in absolute value) with the schooling level, even
after controlling for endowments. However, GED certification does not have significant
causal effects on any of the outcomes.

43

Treatment Effects on Wages When comparing final education levels, the treatment effect for log wages is statistically significant for graduating from high school,
some college achievement, and attaining a four-year college degree. The GED confers
no benefits. About half of the observed difference in wages at age 30 are explained by
observed variables and latent endowments.
When looking at the node-specific treatment effects on wages, higher educational
attainment results in gains in wages, though low-endowment individuals gain very little
from getting a four-year college degree. Figure 9 shows that it is individuals with
high cognitive ability that capture most of the gains from a four-year degree. The
GED confers no benefit except for individuals with large cognitive and socioemotional
endowments – a group of individuals who rarely drop out of high school.
For log wages, the continuation value accounts for over half of the ATE from
graduating from high school. While the total effect is relatively constant across
treatment effects and endowment levels, low-endowment individuals benefit through the
direct effect of being a high school graduate (see Figure 10). For the decision to enroll
in college, less than half of the AMTE and ATE are continuation value, though more
than half of the benefit for high-endowment individuals comes from continuation value.

Treatment Effects on Smoking Aside from the GED, education causally reduces
smoking, even after accounting for unobserved heterogeneity. The latent endowments
and observables account for one-third of the observed effect of education. Looking
at the node-specific treatment effects, each educational decision also causally reduces
smoking and it has an only weak dependence on latent endowments (see Figure 8 and
Figure 9).
More than half of the average treatment effect of graduating high school and enrolling
in college is derived from the continuation value for high-endowment individuals, while
almost all of the treatment effect is coming from the direct effect for low-endowment
individuals.

44

Treatment Effects on Self-Esteem When considering treatment effects by final
schooling level, there is no statistically significant causal effect of schooling on self
esteem. The estimates are more precise when looking at the dynamic treatment effects
from specific educational decisions. Graduating from High School or obtaining the GED
does not increase self-esteem, while enrolling in college and graduating with a four-year
degree does. Interestingly, the gain is heterogeneous by ability, with the low-ability
individuals getting larger gains. Figure 9 shows it is individuals with low socioemotional
ability that capture most of the gains from a four-year degree. The improvements in
self-esteem and self-mastery from enrolling in college are explained almost completely by
the direct effect of having attended college, though a small and statistically significant
portion of the gains are from continuation value for the low-endowment ATE and the
AMTE (see Figure 10).

Treatment Effects on Physical Health The estimated effects by final schooling
level are imprecise. There is no statistically significant effect from final education level
on physical health. On the other hand, the estimated causal effects of most educational
decisions are statistically significant. Graduating from High School and graduating
with a four-year degree both show statistically significant improvements in physical
health. There is no evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects by ability. Finally, the
continuation value accounts for a portion of the average physical health benefits from
graduating from high school and enrolling in college.

6.3

Policy Relevant Treatment Effects

While estimating the returns to particular educational choices is informative, it does
not correspond to any particular policy. The PRTE allows us to identify who would
be induced to change educational choices under a particular policy change, and how
these individuals would benefit on average. As an example, we simulate the response
to a policy intervention that provides a one standard deviation subsidy towards early
college tuition (approximately $7, 500 dollars per year). Column 1 of Table 5 provides

45

the average treatment effect for those that are induced to change education levels by
the tuition subsidy. Since tuition at age 17 only enters the choice to enroll in college,
the subsidy will only induce high school graduates to change their college enrollment
decisions. Those induced to enroll may then go on to choose to graduate with a four
year degree.55 Columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 decompose the PRTE into the average gains
for those induced to enroll that then go on to earn 4 year degrees and the average gains
for those that do not. Except for self-esteem, the PRTE is larger for those that then go
on to earn 4 year degrees.
Figure 11 shows which individuals are induced to enroll in college within the deciles
of the distribution of 1,3 = θα1,3 − ν1,3 , conditional on Q1,3 = 1, the unobserved components of heterogeneity acted upon by the agent but unobserved by the econometrician.
The policy induces some individuals in every decile to switch, but places more weight
on those in the middle deciles of the distribution. The figure further decomposes the
effect of those induced to switch into the effect for those who go on to graduate with
four year degrees and the effect for those who do not. We see that those induced to
switch in the top deciles are more likely to go on to graduate.56

Table 5: PRTE: Standard Deviation Decrease in Tuition

Log Wages
PV Log Wages
Physical Health
Self-Esteem
Smoking

PRTE

4-year degree

no 4-year degree

0.12
0.13
0.10
0.22
-0.13

0.14
0.13
0.13
0.15
-0.16

0.11
0.12
0.09
0.27
-0.11

Notes: Table shows the policy relevant treatment effect (PRTE) of reducing early tuition by a standard deviation (approx.
$7,500). The PRTE is the average treatment effect of those induced to change educational choices as a result of the policy:
RR
0
P RT Ep,p0 ≡
E(Y p − Y p |X = X, θ = θ), dFX,θ (X, θ|S(p) 6= S(p0 )}. Column 1 shows the overall PRTE. Column 2 shows
the PRTE for those induced to enroll by the policy who then go on to complete 4-year college degrees. Column 3 shows the
PRTE for individuals induced to enroll but who do not complete 4-year degrees.

55

Models were estimated that include tuition as a determinant of the high school graduation decision.
However, estimated effects of tuition on high school graduation are small and statistically insignificant.
56
Note that there is little evidence of forward-looking behavior in terms of tuition.

46

0

.05

.1

.15

Figure 11: PRTE: Who is induced to switch

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

deciles of ε1,3
Enrolled (graduates)

Enrolled (does not graduate)

Notes: The figure plots the proportion of individuals induced to switch from the policy that lay in each decile of 1,3 , where
1,3 = θα1,3 − ν1,3 . 1,3 is the unobserved component of the educational choice model. The deciles are conditional on Q1,3 = 1,
so 1,3 for individuals who reach the college enrollment decision. The bars are further decomposed into those that are induced
to switch that then go on to earn 4-year degrees and those that are induced to switch but do not go on to graduate.

The $7,500 subsidy induces 13% of high school graduates who previously did not
enroll to enroll in college. Of those induced to enroll, more than a third go on to
graduate with a 4 year degree. For outcomes such as smoking, the benefits are larger
for those who graduate with a 4-year degree, while for outcomes such as self-esteem,
those that enroll, but choose not to earn 4 year degrees have larger benefits.
Using the estimated benefits, we can calculate if the policy is cost effective. As a
limitation of our model, we can only estimate the monetary costs and cannot estimate
psychic costs. We can determine if the monetary gains in the present value of wages at
age 18 is greater than the $7,500 subsidy. Given a PRTE of 0.13 for log present value
of wage income, the average gains for those induced to enroll was $11,275.57 If the
subsidy was given for the first two years of college, then the policy is not cost-efficient
on average. If the subsidy must also be offered to those already enrolled, then monetary
costs greatly outweigh the estimated earnings benefits, never mind any psychic costs.
57

Wages are divided by $10,000 prior to taking logs

47

While the intervention does not pay for itself through increased income, there are
benefits for several other life-outcomes such as reduced smoking, improved self-esteem,
and improved physical health.

6.4

The Channels of Influence of Cognitive and Socioe-

motional Skills
The traditional literature focuses on cognitive ability as a major determinant of schooling
and the outcomes of schooling. Much less is known about the importance of socioemotional factors, although a growing literature establishes their predictive power. We
present new evidence on the channels through which cognitive and socioemotional skills
operate. As shown in Figure 5 and Table 4, both factors are important in explaining
schooling choices at all decision nodes with the exception of socioemotional skills in
explaining the decision of dropouts to obtain GEDs.
Controlling for selection into schooling levels, we can determine if, after fixing
schooling, there are additional effects of cognitive and socioemotional skills on outcomes.
Is the main effect of these skills through educational attainment or are there additional
effects of the traits on outcomes beyond their effects on schooling?
The models for outcomes are estimated twice: (a) excluding any effect of the latent
factors on outcomes except through their effects on schooling and (b) allowing the
latent factors to have additional effects beyond their effects on schooling. A comparison
of the estimates is informative.
Table 6 reports, for each set of outcomes, tests of whether the loadings on the latent
factors at all schooling levels (HS Dropout—Coll. Graduate) are all zero (column a)
or whether they are equal to their levels in the unconditional model (column b). For
most outcomes, cognition has a statistically significant effect beyond its educational
attainment. For physical health and self-esteem, the effects of socioemotional skills
are not precisely estimated. We cannot reject the hypothesis that across all s, the
socioemotional loadings are jointly equal to 0. We also cannot reject that they are the

48

Table 6: Estimated Factor Loadings on Cognitive and Socioemotional Factors
by Outcome and Schooling Level
Variables

Tests
p-val(a)
p-val(b)

Log Wages
Cognitive
Socioemotional
Smoking (Age 30)
Cognitive
Socioemotional
Physical Health (Age 40)
Cognitive
Socioemotional
Self-Esteem
Cognitive
Socioemotional

0.000
0.221

0.001
0.006

0.133
0.037

0.002
0.007

0.155
0.513

0.047
0.275

0.000
0.465

0.004
0.469

Notes: (a) shows p-values from a likelihood ratio test against the null hypothesis that the
factor loadings for the conditional models are jointly equal to zero. (b) shows the p-value from
a likelihood ratio test against the null hypothesis that the factor loadings for the conditional
models are jointly equal to the factor loading of the unconditional model. A table reporting
the factor loadings for the unconditional and conditional models and the results for other
outcomes can be found in Section C.5 in the Web Appendix.

same as the loadings for the factors on outcomes that do not control for s. However, in
the case of smoking, it appears that the socioemotional trait has a statistically significant
effect beyond its effect on schooling. Finally, in terms of wages, socioemotional trait
operates primarily through its affect on schooling.

49

7

Summary and Conclusions

This paper formulates and estimates a sequential model of educational choices and
their consequences for wages, health and healthy behaviors, allowing for heterogeneity
among agents in both observed and unobserved characteristics. We estimate the
causal impact of education on health and labor market outcomes when responses to
treatment vary among observationally identical persons who select into schooling levels
on the basis of their idiosyncratic responses. We proxy the unobservables producing
dependence between choices and outcomes using a variety of measurements. We adjust
for the measurement error arising from using proxies. We use multiple sources of
identification to secure our estimates. Each educational choice has exclusion restrictions
that affect choices but not the outcomes produced from the choice. These can be
used as instruments to identify the model. They allow us to control for unobservables
that generate dependence between choices and outcomes that are not proxied by our
measurements.
Unlike most of the literature on the treatment effects of education, we analyze a
model with multiple schooling choices that recognizes the fundamentally nonlinear effect
of schooling on a variety of outcomes. Our paper defines and estimates a variety of novel
treatment effects, including treatment effects that account for the continuation values
associated with future educational choices which we find to be empirically important
for most transitions.
Our empirical results show that there is strong sorting into schooling levels on
both cognitive and socioemotional endowments. Overall, we find that wages and the
health and healthy behaviors of persons is enhanced by high school graduation, college
enrollment, and graduation from a 4-year college. We find that the causal effects
of schooling differ by ability level. For example, when considering the benefits of a
four-year degree, only high-ability individuals gain higher wages, while only low-ability
individuals gain higher self-esteem. In general, observed differences by educational
attainment diminish when we control for observables and latent abilities.
The model estimated in this paper is a halfway house between the treatment effect

50

literature and the structural literature on dynamic discrete choice. By modeling the
latent variable structure, we improve on LATE by identifying the groups affected by
variations in instruments and policies. We find strong evidence that agents select into
schooling based on their idiosyncratic responses to schooling. Our model requires no
assumptions about how agents form expectations or what they seek to maximize that
are routinely invoked in the structural economics literature.58
By estimating a sequential model of schooling in a single framework, we are able
analyze the ex post returns to education for people at different margins of choice and
to analyze a variety of interesting policy counterfactuals. We are able to characterize
who benefits from education across a variety of market and nonmarket outcomes. We
decompose these benefits into direct components and indirect components arising from
continuation values that we estimate to be substantial. Standard estimates of the
benefits of education based on direct components underestimate the full benefit of
education.

58

This generality comes at a cost. Agent information sets are not precisely specified or identified and we
cannot estimate psychic costs or net returns.

51

References
Abbott, B., G. Gallipoli, C. Meghir, and G. L. Violante (2013): “Education Policy and Intergenerational Transfers in Equilibrium,” Working Paper 18782,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Abbring, J. H., and J. J. Heckman (2007): “Econometric Evaluation of Social
Programs, Part III: Distributional Treatment Effects, Dynamic Treatment Effects,
Dynamic Discrete Choice, and General Equilibrium Policy Evaluation,” in Handbook
of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6B, pp. 5145–5303. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Adams, S. J. (2002): “Educational Attainment and Health: Evidence from a Sample
of Older Adults,” Education Economics, 10(1), 97–109.
Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011): “Personality
Psychology and Economics,” in Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. by E. A.
Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann, vol. 4, pp. 1–181. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Altonji, J. G. (1993): “The Demand for and Return to Education When Education
Outcomes are Uncertain,” Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1), 48–83.
Anderson, T. W., and H. Rubin (1956): “Statistical Inference in Factor Analysis,”
in Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
Probability, 5, ed. by J. Neyman, pp. 111–150. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Angrist, J. D., and G. W. Imbens (1995): “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of
Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 90(430), 431–442.
Arcidiacono, P., and P. B. Ellickson (2011): “Practical Methods for Estimation
of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models,” Annual Review of Economics, 3, 363–394.

52

Arendt, J. N. (2005): “Does education cause better health? A panel data analysis
using school reforms for identification,” Economics of Education Review, 24(2),
149–160.
Arkes, J. (2003): “Does Schooling Improve Adult Health?,” Unrestricted Draft
DRU-3051, RAND, Santa Monica, CA.
Auld, M. C., and N. Sidhu (2005): “Schooling, Cognitive Ability and Health,” Health
Economics, 14(10), 1019–1034.
Becker, G. S. (1964): Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, With
Special Reference to Education. National Bureau of Economic Research, New York.
Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008):
“The Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits,” Journal of Human Resources,
43(4), 972–1059.
Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011):
“Identification Problems in Personality Psychology,” Personality and Individual Differences, 51(3: Special Issue on Personality and Economics), 315–320.
Bound, J., D. A. Jaeger, and R. M. Baker (1995): “Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation When the Correlation between the Instruments and the
Endogenous Explanatory Variable Is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90(430), 443–450.
Cameron, S. V., and J. J. Heckman (1987): “Son of CTM: The DCPA Approach
Based on Discrete and Factor Structure Models,” Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
(1993): “The Nonequivalence of High School Equivalents,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 11(1, Part 1), 1–47.
(2001): “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and
White Males,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(3), 455–499.

53

Card, D. (1999): “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor
Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 5, pp. 1801–1863. North-Holland,
New York.
(2001): “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems,” Econometrica, 69(5), 1127–1160.
Carneiro, P., K. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003): “Estimating Distributions of
Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement
of the Effects of Uncertainty on College Choice,” International Economic Review,
44(2), 361–422.
Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2010): “Evaluating Marginal
Policy Changes and the Average Effect of Treatment for Individuals at the Margin,”
Econometrica, 78(1), 377–394.
Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2011): “Estimating Marginal
Returns to Education,” American Economic Review, 101(6), 2754–2781.
Cawley, J., and C. J. Ruhm (2012): “The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors,”
Handbook of Health Economics, 2, 95–199.
Chen, X. (2007): “Large Sample Sieve Estimation of Semi-Nonparametric Models,”
in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6B. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Comay, Y., A. Melnik, and M. A. Pollatschek (1973): “The Option Value of
Education and the Optimal Path for Investment in Human Capital,” International
Economic Review, 14(2), 421–435.
Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, P. Pinger, and A. Zanolini (2009): “Intergenerational
Transmission of Inequality: Maternal Skills, Prenatal Risk Behavior and Child Birth
Weight,” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

54

Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, and S. Urzúa (2010): “The Education-Health Gradient,”
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100(2), 1–5.
Cunha, F., and J. J. Heckman (2008): “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating
the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Journal of Human
Resources, 43(4), 738–782.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005): “Separating Uncertainty from
Heterogeneity in Life Cycle Earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture,” Oxford Economic
Papers, 57(2), 191–261.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010): “Estimating the
Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica, 78(3),
883–931.
Cutler, D. M., and A. Lleras-Muney (2010): “Understanding Differences in
Health Behaviors by Education,” Journal of Health Economics, 29(1), 1–28.
Duckworth, A. L., P. D. Quinn, and E. Tsukayama (2010): “What No Child Left
Behind Leaves Behind: The Roles of IQ and Self-Control in Predicting Standardized
Achievement Test Scores and Report Card Grades,” Under review, Journal of
Educational Psychology.
Duckworth, A. L., and M. E. P. Seligman (2005): “Self-Discipline Outdoes IQ
in Predicting Academic Performance of Adolescents,” Psychological Science, 16(12),
939–944.
Eckstein, Z., and K. I. Wolpin (1989): “The Specification and Estimation of
Dynamic Stochastic Discrete Choice Models: A Survey,” Journal of Human Resources,
24(4), 562–598.
Eisenhauer, P., J. J. Heckman, and S. Mosso (2013): “Estimation of Dynamic
Discrete Choice Models by Maximum Likelihood and the Simulated Method of
Moments,” Under review, International Economic Review.

55

Eisenhauer, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2014): “Generalized Roy
Model and Cost-Benefit Analysis of Social Programs,” Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Gandek, B., J. E. Ware, N. K. Aaronson, G. Apolone, J. B. Bjorner, J. E.
Brazier, M. Bullinger, S. Kaasa, A. Leplege, L. Prieto, and M. Sullivan
(1998): “Cross-Validation of Item Selection and Scoring for the SF-12 Health Survey in
Nine Countries: Results from the IQOLA Project,” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology,
51(11), 1171–1178.
Geweke, J., and M. Keane (2001): “Computationally Intensive Methods for Integration in Econometrics,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. J. Heckman, and
E. Leamer, vol. 5, pp. 3463–3568. North-Holland, New York.
Grossman, M. (1972): “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,”
Journal of Political Economy, 80(2), 223–255.
(2000): “The Human Capital Model,” in Handbook of Health Economics, ed.
by A. J. Culyer, and J. P. Newhouse, vol. 1, pp. 347–408. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
(2006): “Education and Nonmarket Outcomes,” in Handbook of the Economics
of Education, ed. by E. Hanushek, and F. Welch, vol. 1, chap. 10, pp. 577–633.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
(2008): “The Relationship between Health and Schooling: Presidential Address,” Eastern Economic Journal, 34(3), 281–292.
Grossman, M., and R. Kaestner (1997): “Effects of Education on Health,” in
The Social Benefits of Education, ed. by J. R. Behrman, and N. Stacey, pp. 69–124.
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.
Gullone, E., and S. Moore (2000): “Adolescent risk-taking and the five-factor
model of personality,” Journal of Adolescence, 23(4), 393–407.

56

Haavelmo, T. (1943): “The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous
Equations,” Econometrica, 11(1), 1–12.
Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004): “The Effect of Schooling
and Ability on Achievement Test Scores,” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1–2), 39–98.
Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (1980): “Formulating and Estimating Dynamic
Linear Rational Expectations Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
2(1), 7–46.
Heckman, J., and R. Pinto (2013): “Econometric Mediation Analyses: Identifying the Sources of Treatment Effects from Experimentally Estimated Production
Technologies with Unmeasured and Mismeasured Inputs,” Forthcoming, Econometric
Reviews.
Heckman, J. J. (1981): “The Empirical Content of Alternative Models of Labor
Earnings,” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
(1997): “Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions
Used in Making Program Evaluations,” Journal of Human Resources, 32(3), 441–462,
Addendum published vol. 33 no. 1 (Winter 1998).
(2008): “The Principles Underlying Evaluation Estimators with an Application
to Matching,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistiques, 91–92, 9–73.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (2014): “The Economic and
Social Benefits of GED Certification,” in The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED
and the Role of Character in American Life, ed. by J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries,
and T. Kautz. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Heckman, J. J., and T. Kautz (2012): “Hard Evidence on Soft Skills,” Labour
Economics, 19(4), 451–464, Adam Smith Lecture.

57

(2014): “Fostering and Measuring Skills: Interventions That Improve Character
and Cognition,” in The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of
Character in American Life. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, Forthcoming.
Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006): “Earnings Equations and
Rates of Return: The Mincer Equation and Beyond,” in Handbook of the Economics
of Education, ed. by E. A. Hanushek, and F. Welch, vol. 1, chap. 7, pp. 307–458.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Heckman, J. J., and S. Mosso (2014): “The Economics of Human Development
and Social Mobility,” Forthcoming, Annual Reviews of Economics.
Heckman, J. J., and S. Navarro (2007): “Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic
Treatment Effects,” Journal of Econometrics, 136(2), 341–396.
Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013): “Understanding the
Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult
Outcomes,” American Economic Review, 103(6), 1–35.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzúa (2006): “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 24(3), 411–482.
Heckman, J. J., and S. Urzúa (2010): “Comparing IV With Structural Models:
What Simple IV Can and Cannot Identify,” Journal of Econometrics, 156(1), 27–37.
Heckman, J. J., S. Urzúa, and E. J. Vytlacil (2006): “Understanding Instrumental Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88(3), 389–432.
Heckman, J. J., and E. J. Vytlacil (1999): “Local Instrumental Variables and
Latent Variable Models for Identifying and Bounding Treatment Effects,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(8), 4730–4734.

58

(2005): “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects and Econometric Policy
Evaluation,” Econometrica, 73(3), 669–738.
(2007a): “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part I: Causal Models,
Structural Models and Econometric Policy Evaluation,” in Handbook of Econometrics,
ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6B, pp. 4779–4874. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
(2007b): “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part II: Using the
Marginal Treatment Effect to Organize Alternative Economic Estimators to Evaluate
Social Programs and to Forecast Their Effects in New Environments,” in Handbook
of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6B, chap. 71, pp. 4875–5143.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Herrnstein, R. J., and C. A. Murray (1994): The Bell Curve: Intelligence and
Class Structure in American Life. Free Press, New York.
Imbens, G. W. (2010): “Better LATE Than Nothing: Some Comments on Deaton
(2009) and Heckman and Urzua (2009),” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2),
399–423.
Keane, M. P., P. E. Todd, and K. I. Wolpin (2011): The Structural Estimation of
Behavioral Models: Discrete Choice Dynamic Programming Methods and Applications,
vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics. Elsevier.
Keane, M. P., and K. I. Wolpin (1997): “The Career Decisions of Young Men,”
Journal of Political Economy, 105(3), 473–522.
Lleras-Muney, A. (2005): “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality
in the United States,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), 189–221.
Lochner, L. (2011): “Nonproduction Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good
Citizenship,” in Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. by E. A. Hanushek,
S. Machin, and L. Woessmann, vol. 4, pp. 183–282. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

59

Mincer, J. (1958): “Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution,”
Journal of Political Economy, 66(4), 281–302.
(1974): Schooling, Experience and Earnings. Columbia University Press for
National Bureau of Economic Research, New York.
Oreopoulos, P., and K. G. Salvanes (2011): “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits
of Schooling,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1), 159–184.
Quandt, R. E. (1958): “The Estimation of the Parameters of a Linear Regression System Obeying Two Separate Regimes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
53(284), 873–880.
Silles, M. A. (2009): “The causal effect of education on health: Evidence from the
United Kingdom,” Economics of Education Review, 28(1), 122–128.
Spasojevic, J. (2003): “Effects of Education on Adult Health in Sweden: Results
from a Natural Experiment,” Unpublished manuscript, City University of New York
Graduate Center.
Ware, John E., J., M. Kosinski, and S. D. Keller (1996): “A 12-Item ShortForm Health Survey: Construction of Scales and Preliminary Tests of Reliability and
Validity,” Medical Care, 34(3), 220–233.
Weisbrod, B. A. (1962): “Education and Investment in Human Capital,” Journal of
Political Economy, 70(5, Part 2: Investment in Human Beings), 106–123.
Williams, B. (2011): “Notes on Identification of Factor Models,” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

60

