                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   UNCERTAINTY TRAPS

                                      Pablo Fajgelbaum
                                       Edouard Schaal
                                Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel

                                      Working Paper 19973
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19973


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2014




We thank the editor Robert Barro and two anonymous referees for valuable suggestions. Liyan
Shi and Chunzan Wu provided superb research assistance. We are grateful to Andrew Abel,
Andrew Atkeson, Michelle Alexopoulos, Jess Benhabib, Harold Cole, Michael Evers, João
Gomes, William Hawkins, Patrick Kehoe, Lars-Alexander Kuehn, Ali Shourideh, Laura
Veldkamp, Pierre-Olivier Weill and seminar participants for useful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Pablo Fajgelbaum, Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncertainty Traps
Pablo Fajgelbaum, Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
NBER Working Paper No. 19973
March 2014, Revised May 2016
JEL No. E32

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop a theory of endogenous uncertainty and business cycles in which short-lived shocks
can generate long-lasting recessions. In the model, higher uncertainty about fundamentals
discourages investment. Since agents learn from the actions of others, information flows slowly
in times of low activity and uncertainty remains high, further discouraging investment. The
economy displays uncertainty traps: self-reinforcing episodes of high uncertainty and low
activity. While the economy recovers quickly after small shocks, large temporary shocks may
have long-lasting effects on the level of activity. The economy is subject to an information
externality but uncertainty traps may remain in the efficient allocation. Embedding the
mechanism in a standard business cycle framework, we find that endogenous uncertainty
increases the persistence of large recessions and improves the performance of the model in
accounting for the Great Recession.



Pablo Fajgelbaum                                Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
Department of Economics                         Wharton Finance Department
University of California, Los Angeles           3620 Locust Walk
8283 Bunche Hall                                2320 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095                           Philadelphia, PA 19104-6368
and NBER                                        mathieu@wharton.upenn.edu
pfajgelbaum@gmail.com

Edouard Schaal
New York University
Department of Economics
19 W 4th St., 6FL
New York, NY 10012
edouard.schaal@gmail.com
1    Introduction
    We develop a theory of endogenous uncertainty and business cycles. The theory combines two
forces: higher uncertainty about economic fundamentals deters investment, and uncertainty evolves
endogenously because agents learn from the actions of others. The unique rational expectation
equilibrium of the economy features uncertainty traps: self reinforcing episodes of high uncertainty
and low economic activity that cause recessions to persist. Because of uncertainty traps, large but
short-lived shocks can generate long-lasting recessions. We first build and characterize a model
that only includes the essential features that give rise to uncertainty traps. Then, we embed
these features into a standard real business cycle model and quantify the impact of endogenous
uncertainty during the Great Recession.
    In the model, firms decide whether to undertake an irreversible investment whose return depends
on an imperfectly observed fundamental that evolves randomly according to a persistent process.
Firms are heterogeneous in the cost of undertaking this investment and hold common beliefs about
the fundamental. Beliefs are regularly updated with new information, and, in particular, firms
learn by observing the return on the investment of other producers. We define uncertainty as the
variance of these beliefs.
    This environment naturally produces an interaction between beliefs and economic activity.
Firms are more likely to invest if their beliefs about the fundamental have higher mean, but also if
they have smaller variance (lower uncertainty). At the same time, the laws of motion for the mean
and variance of beliefs depend on the investment rate. In particular, when few firms invest, little
information is released, so uncertainty rises.
    The key feature of the model is that this interaction between information and investment leads to
uncertainty traps, formally defined as the coexistence of multiple stationary points in the dynamics
of uncertainty and economic activity. Without shocks, the economy converges to either a high
regime (with high economic activity and low uncertainty) if the current level of uncertainty is
sufficiently low, or to a low regime (with low activity and high uncertainty) if the current level of
uncertainty is sufficiently high. Because of the presence of these multiple stationary points, the
economy exhibits non-linearities in its response to shocks: starting from the high regime, it quickly
recovers after small temporary shocks, but it may shift to the low-activity regime after a large
temporary shock. Once it has fallen in the low regime, only a large enough positive shock can push
the economy back to the high-activity regime.
    An important feature of the model is that, despite the presence of uncertainty traps, there is a
unique recursive competitive equilibrium. That is, multiplicity of stationary points does not mean
multiplicity of equilibria. Therefore, unlike other macro models with complementarities, there is
no room in our model for multiple equilibria or sunspots.1
    The model features an inefficiently low level of investment because agents do not internalize the
effect of their actions on public information. This inefficiency naturally creates room for welfare-
    1
      For recent examples of business cycle models with multiple equilibria see Farmer (2013), Kaplan and Menzio
(2013), Benhabib et al. (2015) and Schaal and Taschereau-Dumouchel (2015).


                                                       2
enhancing policy interventions. We therefore study the problem of a constrained planner that is
subject to the same informational constraints as private agents. The socially constrained-efficient
allocation can be implemented with a subsidy to investment. But, perhaps surprisingly, the optimal
policy does not necessarily eliminate uncertainty traps. Therefore, while policy interventions are
desirable, they do not eliminate the adverse feedback loop between uncertainty and economic
activity.
    To evaluate the quantitative implications of uncertainty traps, we embed the key features of
the baseline model into a standard general equilibrium framework and then compare its predictions
with an RBC model and the data. To isolate the impact of endogenous movements in uncertainty,
we also compare our full model to a “fixed θ-uncertainty” version in which uncertainty about the
fundamental productivity θ is fixed over time. We discipline the key parameters of the model, those
that determine option-value effects and the evolution of uncertainty, by targeting moments from
the distribution of uncertainty about real GDP growth from the Survey of Professional Forecasters
(SPF).
    We first show that our calibrated model performs as well as the RBC and fixed θ-uncertainty
models in terms of traditional business cycle moments. Therefore, incorporating endogenous uncer-
tainty in a standard business cycle model does not impair its ability to predict well-known patterns
of business cycle data.
    Then, we demonstrate that the non-linearities generated by uncertainty traps, studied in the
baseline theory, are active in the calibrated model. Specifically, we compute the economy’s response
to one-period negative shocks to beliefs of different magnitudes. We find that i) recessions are longer
and deeper under the full model than under the fixed θ-uncertainty model, and ii) the difference
between both models is more important for large shocks than for small ones. In response to a
-1% shock, the ensuing recession is 22% deeper (in terms of the peak-to-trough fall in output) and
40% longer (in terms of quarters until the economy has recovered half of the peak-to-trough fall
in output) in the full model than in the fixed θ-uncertainty model. However, in response to a
larger -5% shock, the recession is 35% deeper and 66% longer in the full model than in the fixed
θ-uncertainty model. Therefore, in the calibrated model, the endogenous uncertainty mechanism,
whose impact is captured by the difference between the full and fixed θ-uncertainty models, makes
recessions deeper and longer for shocks of any magnitude, but relatively more so for larger shocks.
    Finally, our main quantitative exercise evaluates the predictions of our calibrated model for past
U.S. recessions. Since our mechanism provides amplification and persistence to large shocks, we
expect that it might help explain particularly severe recessions observed in the data. We therefore
investigate the largest recession in our sample, the Great Recession. To do so, we feed each of
the three models (our full model, the RBC model, and the fixed θ-uncertainty model) with the
observed TFP series and signals such that each model replicates the time series of forecasts about
output growth from the SPF during the first part of the recession. We then contrast each model’s
response with the data.
    Our main quantitative finding is that, during the Great Recession, our model generates declines


                                                  3
in output, consumption, employment, and investment which are clearly more protracted, and closer
to patterns observed in the data, than what the alternative models predict. Endogenous uncertainty
adds 1.8 percentage points in terms of recession’s depth and slows the recovery by about two years
relative to the fixed θ-uncertainty model.2 The corresponding numbers are 5.2 percentage points
and five years when comparing to the RBC model. We also evaluate the performance of the three
models against the data in terms of one key statistic that summarizes both the depth and the
length of the recession: the cumulative output loss between the start of the recession and 2015. We
find that our model generates 93% of the Great Recession’s cumulative output lost, relative to the
70% and 30% generated by the fixed θ-uncertainty and RBC models, respectively. Reassuringly,
the model also generates patterns for the evolution of uncertainty about output growth that are
roughly consistent with the data.
    We demonstrate the robustness of these conclusions by replicating this exercise under alterna-
tive assumptions about the shocks hitting the economy, the source of the TFP data, the detrending
strategy, and the preferences of the household. In each case, we find that the model with endoge-
nous uncertainty performs better than its alternatives. To make sure that the full model does not
generate counterfactual amounts of persistence for milder recessions, we also replicate the second
largest recession in our sample, the 1981-1982 recession, which was characterized by a relatively
rapid recovery. We find that our model behaves similarly to the RBC and to the fixed θ-uncertainty
models in that case. We conclude that the inclusion of uncertainty traps in a standard macroeco-
nomic model of business cycles improves its performance during the Great Recession and that it
leads to similar predictions than standard models for smaller recessions.
    The remainder of the introduction contains the literature review followed by a discussion of our
notion of uncertainty and its business cycle properties. The paper is then structured as follows.
Section 2 presents the baseline model and the definition of the recursive equilibrium. Section 3
characterizes the investment decision of an individual firm and demonstrates the existence and
uniqueness of the equilibrium. Section 4 shows the existence of uncertainty traps, examines the
non-linearities that they generate, and characterizes the planner’s problem. Section 5 describes the
quantitative model, shows how uncertainty traps influence the response of the economy to shocks
and compares the dynamic properties of our model to an RBC model, a fixed θ-uncertainty model
and the data over the Great Recession. Section 6 concludes. The full statement of the proposition
and the proofs can be found in the appendix.

1.1    Relation to the Literature
    The theory is motivated by an empirical literature that investigates the impact of uncertainty
on economic activity using VARs, as in Bloom (2009) and Bachmann et al. (2013), or using in-
strumental variables, as in Carlsson (2007), and finds that increases in uncertainty typically slow

   2
    This measure refers to the time the economy takes to recover 20% of its peak-to-trough decline. We use the
20% threshold instead of the usual half-life since, in the data, detrended output has only recovered about 20% of its
peak-to-trough decline by the end of our sample in 2015.


                                                         4
down economic activity. It also relates to the uncertainty-driven business cycle literature that ana-
lyzes the impact of uncertainty through real option effects as in Bloom (2009), Bloom et al. (2012),
Bachmann and Bayer (2013) and Schaal (2015), or through financial frictions as in Arellano et al.
(2012) and Gilchrist et al. (2014).3
    Our analysis also relates to a theoretical literature in macroeconomics that stud-
ies environments with learning from market outcomes such as Veldkamp (2005), Ordoñez
(2009) and Amador and Weill (2010).                  Closely related to our paper is the analysis of
Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006). They focus on explaining business-cycle asymmetries
in an RBC model with incomplete information in which agents receive signals with procyclical pre-
cision about the economy’s fundamental. During recessions, agents discount new information more
heavily and the mean of their beliefs recovers slowly. Their paper provides a theory of endogenous
pessimism that can explain business cycle asymmetries. Our model introduces a similar learning en-
vironment in a model of irreversible investment under uncertainty in the spirit of Dixit and Pindyck
(1994) and Stokey (2008). The resulting feedback loop between endogenous uncertainty and real
option effects, specific to our approach, offers a novel propagation mechanism that can lead to
persistent episodes of high uncertainty and low economic activity.
    The interaction of endogenous uncertainty and real option effects in our model is also reminiscent
of the literature on learning and strategic delays as in Lang and Nakamura (1990), Rob (1991),
Caplin and Leahy (1993), Chamley and Gale (1994), Zeira (1994) and Chamley (2004). Our paper
differs from this literature in its attempt to evaluate and quantify the role of uncertainty and delays
in a standard business cycle framework. In a recent paper in which learning and economic activity
interact, Straub and Ulbricht (2015) propose a theory of endogenous uncertainty in which financial
constraints impede learning about firm-level fundamentals. Financial crises cause uncertainty to
rise, leading to a further tightening of financial constraints that amplifies and propagates recessions.4
In another recent paper considering the role of learning during the Great Recession, Kozlowski et al.
(2015) suggest that the Great Recession was the result of an unlikely shock that caused agents to
substantially revise their beliefs about the probability of lower-tail events. They find that the
resulting increase in pessimism may account for part of the long-lasting downturn.
    This paper is also related to the literature on fads and herding in the tradition of Banerjee (1992)
and Bikhchandani et al. (1992) . Articles in that tradition consider economies with an unknown
fixed fundamental and study a one-shot evolution towards a stable state, whereas we study the full
cyclical dynamics of an economy that fluctuates between regimes.
    The dynamics generated by the model, with endogenous fluctuations between regimes, is remi-
niscent of the literature on static coordination games such as Morris and Shin (1998, 1999) and the
dynamic coordination games literature as Angeletos et al. (2007) and Chamley (1999). These pa-
pers study games in which a complementarity in payoffs leads to multiple equilibria under complete

   3
      Another literature studying time-varying risk is the literature on rare disasters (Barro, 2006) and time-varying
disaster risk as in Gabaix (2012) and Gourio (2012), and surveyed in Barro and Ursúa (2012).
    4
      Some recent papers discuss alternative channels that give rise to endogenous volatility over the business cycle.
See Bachmann and Moscarini (2011) and Decker and D’Erasmo (2016).


                                                          5
information. The introduction of strategic uncertainty through noisy observation of the fundamen-
tal leads to a departure from common knowledge that eliminates the multiplicity. In contrast, the
complete-information version of our model does not feature multiplicity, and complementarity only
arises under incomplete information through social learning. Uniqueness does not obtain through
strategic uncertainty, but by limiting the strength of the complementarities.

1.2    Bayesian Uncertainty and the Business Cycle
    Throughout the paper, we adopt the concept of Bayesian uncertainty: in our theory, all agents
have access to the same information It at time t and use Bayes’ rule to form beliefs about the fun-
damental of the economy θt , which is, in our context, the aggregate productivity process. We define
uncertainty as the variance Var (θt | It ) of the probability distribution that describes these com-
mon beliefs. In contrast, the uncertainty-driven business cycle literature that we referenced above
defines uncertainty as time-varying volatility in exogenous aggregate or idiosyncratic variables.
    These two definitions of uncertainty are related, but they are not identical. They are related
because time-varying volatility may generate uncertainty about the future fundamentals of the
economy, giving rise to Bayesian uncertainty. However, they are different because Bayesian uncer-
tainty may fluctuate without the presence of time-varying volatility. In our model, the variance of
beliefs varies over time through learning, while the volatility of exogenous variables is constant.
    A basic and well known feature of the data which motivates our theory is that uncertainty
increases during recessions. Instead of direct measures of time-varying volatility, we present, in
Figure 1 , the evolution of four measures that capture our notion of Bayesian uncertainty to the
extent that they reflect uncertainty in subjective beliefs.5 Panel (a) shows the VXO, a measure
of stock market volatility as perceived by market participants; Panel (b) shows the uncertainty
measure proposed by Jurado et al. (2015), which captures a Bayesian notion of ex-ante forecast
error in a statistical model of the macroeconomy; Panel (c) shows the standard deviation of the
average perceived distribution of output growth from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF);
and Panel (d) shows the fraction of respondents who answer “uncertain future” as a reason for why
it is a bad time to buy major household goods from the Michigan Survey of Consumers. While these
series attempt to measure distinct objects, they all capture the notion of subjective uncertainty.
All these measures support the key implication of our mechanism, that uncertainty rises during
recessions. In the quantitative section of the paper, we use the SPF measure to calibrate and
evaluate the performance of our model because it has a natural counterpart in our framework.




   5
      The uncertainty-driven business cycle literature measures aggregate uncertainty by the conditional heteroskedas-
ticity of various aggregates such as TFP (Bloom et al., 2012). Time-varying volatility in idiosyncratic variables is
typically proxied by cross-sectional dispersions in sales growth rates (Bloom, 2009), output and productivity (Kehrig,
2011), prices (Vavra, 2014), employment growth (Bachmann and Bayer, 2014), or business forecasts (Bachmann et al.,
2013). All these measures have been shown to be countercyclical. Since all agents have the same beliefs about θ,
these cross-sectional measures are uninformative about uncertainty in our model.


                                                          6
                             (a) VXO                                            (b) Jurado et al. (2015)

      70                                                           1.3
      60
                                                                   1.2
      50
      40                                                           1.1
      30                                                            1
      20
                                                                   0.9
      10
       0                                                           0.8
               1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                                      1970     1980    1990     2000     2010

                              (c) SPF                                               (d) Michigan Survey

     1.6                                                           25
     1.5
                                                                   20
     1.4
     1.3                                                           15
     1.2
     1.1                                                           10
       1
                                                                    5
     0.9
     0.8                                                            0
              1995       2000      2005       2010      2015                 1970     1980    1990     2000     2010


Notes: (a) The CBOE’s VXO series is a measure of market expectations of stock market volatility over the next 30 days
constructed from S&P100 option prices. We present monthly averages of the series over 1986-2014. (b) Jurado et al. (2015)
estimate a large-scale structural model with time-varying volatility on the US economy and use it compute an implied measure
of ex-ante forecast error. The series we present corresponds to the H12 measure, i.e., an equal-weighted average of the 12-month
ahead standard deviations over 132 macroeconomic series. (c) The SPF series is the standard deviation of the “mean probability
forecast”: an average of the probability distribution provided over forecasters, of one-year ahead output growth in percentage
terms. (d) The Michigan Survey series correspond to the percent fraction of all respondents that reply “uncertain future” to
the question why people are not buying large household items. Shaded areas correspond to NBER recessions.

                             Figure 1: Various measures of subjective uncertainty




                                                               7
2       Baseline Model
    We begin by presenting a stylized model that only features the necessary ingredients to generate
uncertainty traps. The intuitions from this simple model as well as the laws of motion governing the
dynamics of uncertainty carry through to the extended model that we use for numerical analysis.

2.1     Population and Technology
   Time is discrete. There is a fixed number of firms N , chosen large enough that firms behave
                            
atomistically. Each firm j ∈ 1, . . . , N holds a single investment opportunity that produces output
θ, common to all firms. We refer to θ as the economy’s fundamental. and assume that it follows
the autoregressive process

                                  θ ′ = ρθ θ + εθ , εθ ∼ iid N 0, 1 − ρ2θ σθ2 ,
                                                                          
                                                                                                                   (1)

where 0 < ρθ < 1 is the persistence of the process and σθ2 the variance of its ergodic distribution.
To produce, a firm must pay a fixed cost f , drawn each period from the continuous cumulative
distribution F with mean µf and standard deviation σf . Once production has taken place, the firm
exits the economy and is immediately replaced by a new firm holding an investment opportunity.
This assumption ensures that the mass of firms in the economy remains constant.6
    Upon investment, the firm receives the payoff θ. Firms have constant absolute risk-aversion,7

                                                        1        
                                              u (θ) =     1 − e−aθ ,
                                                        a
where a > 0 is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.

2.2     Timing and Information
    Firms do not know the true value of the fundamental θ and decide whether to invest or not
based on their beliefs. As time unfolds, they learn about θ in various ways. First, they learn from
a public signal Z with precision γz > 0 observed at the end of each period,

                                        Z = θ + εZ , εz ∼ iid N (0, γz−1 ).                                        (2)

This signal captures the information released by statistical agencies or the media. Second, agents
acquire information through social learning. When firm j invests, a noisy signal about its return,
xj = θ + εxj , is sent to all firms.8 The noise εxj is normally distributed with precision γx /N > 0,

    6
      This assumption is made for tractability and is relaxed in the quantitative section.
    7
      Here, agents can be thought of as entrepreneurs with risk averse preferences. In our quantitative model, firms
use the representative household’s stochastic discount factor.
    8
      Social learning captures the idea that firms learn from each other about various common components that affect
their revenues such as productivity, demand, regulations, etc. Social learning has been found to influence economic
decisions in various contexts. Foster and Rosenzweig (1995) estimate a model of the adoption of high-yielding seeds
in India and find it consistent with social learning. Guiso and Schivardi (2007) find that peer-learning effects matter


                                                          8
independent over time and across investors, but common to all observers.9 We denote by N ∈

  0, . . . , N the endogenous number of firms that invest and n = N/N the fraction of investing
firms. Because of the normality assumption, a sufficient statistic for the information provided by
investing firms is the public signal

                                                      1 X
                                              X≡          xj = θ + εX
                                                                    N,                                               (3)
                                                      N
                                                          j∈I


where I is the set of such firms, and

                                                  1 X x               
                                           εX
                                            N ≡      εj ∼ N 0, (nγx )−1 .
                                                  N
                                                    j∈I


Importantly, the precision nγx of this signal increases with the fraction of investing firms n.
    The timing of events is summarized in Figure 2.

           t                                                                                           t+1
                                                                                                             ...
                N firms decide to invest          Production takes place;       Beliefs are updated
                 based on beliefs and             Public signals X and Z
                    investment costs                   are observed
                                             Figure 2: Timing of events



2.3    Beliefs
    Under the assumption of a common initial prior, and because all information is public, beliefs are
common across firms. In particular, there is no cross-sectional dispersion in beliefs. The normality
assumptions about the signals and the fundamental imply that beliefs are also normally distributed

                                                   θ | I ∼ N µ, γ −1 ,
                                                                    


where I is the information set at the beginning of the period. The mean of the distribution µ
captures the optimism of agents about the state of the economy, while γ represents the precision of
their beliefs about the fundamental. Precision γ is inversely related to the amount of uncertainty.
As γ increases, the variance of beliefs decreases, and uncertainty declines.
    Firms start each period with beliefs (µ, γ) and use all the information available to update their
beliefs. By the end of the period, they have observed the public signals X and Z. Therefore, using
Bayes’ rule, the beliefs about next period’s fundamental θ ′ are normally distributed with mean and


for the behavior of Italian industrial firms. Bikhchandani et al. (1998) survey the empirical social learning literature.
     9
       We assume that the precision of each individual signal xj is inversely proportional to N to prevent the signals
to be fully revealing when we take the limit N → ∞, while preserving the positive relationship between economic
activity and the amount of information. This captures the idea that uncertainty may subsist even when the number
of firms is large, either because their information is correlated and arises from the same sources, or because large
economies are more complex and subject to more shocks, preventing the learning problem from becoming trivial.


                                                                9
precision equal to

                                             γµ + γz Z + nγx X
                        µ ′ = ρθ                               ,                                       (4)
                                               γ + γz + nγx
                                                                               −1
                                                  ρ2θ
                                         
                            ′
                                                          + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                   
                        γ           =                                                ≡ Γ (n, γ) .      (5)
                                             γ + γz + nγx

These standard updating rules have straightforward interpretations: the mean of future beliefs µ′
is a precision-weighted average of the present belief µ and the new signals, X and Z, whereas γ ′
depends on the precision of current beliefs, the precision of the signals, and the variance of the
shock to θ. Importantly, the precision of future beliefs does not depend on the realization of the
public signals, but only on n and γ. The higher is n, the more precise is the public signal X, and
the lower is uncertainty in the next period. We define Γ (n, γ) in (5) as the law of motion of the
precision of information.

2.4   Firm Problem
   We now describe the problem of a firm. In each period, given its individual fixed cost f and
the common beliefs about the fundamental, a firm can either wait or invest. It solves the Bellman
equation


                                V (µ, γ, f ) = max V W (µ, γ) , V I (µ, γ) − f ,
                                                  
                                                                                                       (6)

where V W (µ, γ) is the value of waiting and V I (µ, γ) is the value of investing after incurring the
investment cost f .
   If a firm waits, it starts the next period with updated beliefs (µ′ , γ ′ ) about the fundamental
and a new draw of the fixed cost f ′ . Therefore, the value of waiting is
                                                      ˆ                                      
                                    W                          ′   ′   ′         ′
                                                                                    
                                V       (µ, γ) = βE        V µ , γ , f dF f              | µ, γ .      (7)

In turn, upon investment, a firm receives output θ and exits the economy. Therefore,
                                                                                 2
                                                                                    
                                    I                         1            −aµ+ a2γ
                                V (µ, γ) = E [u (θ) | µ, γ] =           1−e           .                (8)
                                                              a

   The firm’s optimal investment decision takes the form of a cutoff rule f c (µ, γ) such that a firm
invests if and only if f ≤ f c (µ, γ). The cutoff is defined by the following indifference condition

                                          f c (µ, γ) = V I (µ, γ) − V W (µ, γ) .                       (9)




                                                             10
2.5    Law of Motion for the Number of Investing Firms N
    We now aggregate the individual decisions of the firms. As the investment decision follows the
cutoff rule f c (µ, γ), the process for the number of investing firms N satisfies

                                                  XN
                                N µ, γ, {fj }1≤j≤N =   1I (fj ≤ f c (µ, γ)) .                                     (10)
                                                            j=1


Since investment depends on a random fixed cost, the number of investing firms is a random
variable that depends on the realization of the shocks {fj }1≤j≤N . As these costs are i.i.d., the
ex-ante probability of investment is identical across firms and equal to F (f c (µ, γ)). Therefore, the
ex-ante distribution of N , as perceived by firms, is binomial,

                                       N | µ, γ ∼ Bin N , F (f c (µ, γ)) .
                                                                        
                                                                                                                  (11)

Note that N is only a function of the beliefs (µ, γ) and the individual shocks {fj }1≤j≤N . Since
these shocks are independent from the fundamental θ and the investment decisions are made before
the observation of returns, there is nothing to learn from the non-investment of firms, nor from the
realization of N itself.

2.6    Recursive Competitive Equilibrium
    Focusing on the limiting case when N → ∞, the fraction of investing firms n becomes deter-
ministic,
                                                 N a.s
                                            n=     −→ F (f c (µ, γ)) .
                                                 N
We define a recursive competitive equilibrium as follows.10

Definition 1. A recursive competitive equilibrium consists of a cutoff rule f c (µ, γ), value functions
V (µ, γ, f ), V W (µ, γ), V I (µ, γ), laws of motions for aggregate beliefs {µ′ , γ ′ }, and a fraction of
investing firms n (µ, γ) , such that

   1. The value function V (µ, γ, f ) solves (6), with V W (µ, γ) and V I (µ, γ) defined according to
      (7) and (8), yielding the cutoff rule f c (µ, γ) in (9);
   2. The aggregate beliefs (µ, γ) evolve according to (4) and (5), under the perceived fraction of
      investing firms n (µ, γ) = F (f c (µ, γ)).




    10
       Fluctuations in N due to finite sampling are irrelevant for our purpose. Our results nonetheless carry on to the
finite N case. Our existence and uniqueness proof for that case is available upon request.


                                                          11
3       Equilibrium Characterization
    We first characterize the evolution of beliefs. We then show the existence and uniqueness of an
equilibrium, and provide conditions under which firms are less likely to invest when uncertainty is
high.

3.1     Evolution of Beliefs
    The optimal investment rule f c (µ, γ) depends on how beliefs evolve. We begin by establishing
two simple lemmas about the dynamics of aggregate beliefs.

3.1.1    Evolution of the Mean of Beliefs

    Using (4), we can characterize the stochastic process for the mean of beliefs as follows.

Lemma 1. For a given n, the mean of beliefs µ follows an autoregressive process with time-varying
volatility s,
                                                     ′
                                                    µ = ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε,
                                             1
                          1           1        2
where s (n, γ) = ρθ       γ   −   γ+γy +nγx        and ε ∼ N (0, 1).

    The mean of beliefs captures the optimism of agents about the fundamental and evolves stochas-
tically due to the the arrival of new information. It inherits the autoregressive property of the fun-
damental, and its volatility s (n, γ) is time-varying because the amount of information that firms
collect over time is endogenous. The volatility is decreasing with γ and increasing with n. In times
of low uncertainty (γ high) agents place more weight on their current information and less on new
signals, making the mean of beliefs more stable. In contrast, in times of high activity (n high) more
information is released, making beliefs more likely to fluctuate.

3.1.2    Evolution of Uncertainty

    The precision of beliefs γ reflects the inverse of uncertainty about the fundamental and its
dynamics play a key role for the existence of uncertainty traps. Its law of motion satisfies the
following properties.

Lemma 2. The law of motion Γ (n, γ) increases with n and γ. For a given fraction of investing
firms n, the law of motion for the precision of beliefs γ ′ = Γ (n, γ) admits a unique stable stationary
point in γ.

    The thin solid curves on Figure 3 depict Γ (n, γ) for different constant values of n. An increase
in the level of activity raises the next period precision of information γ ′ for each level of γ in the
current period. Since n is between 0 and 1, the support of the ergodic distribution of γ must lie
between the bounds γ and γ defined by γ ≡ Γ(0, γ) and γ̄ ≡ Γ(1, γ). In other words, γ is the
stationary level of precision when no firm invests, while γ is the one when all firms invest.

                                                             12
                     1


                   0.8
                                                                     γ
                               n=1
                   0.6
                               n = 0.5
            γ′




                   0.4
                                    0         γ
                               n=
                   0.2
                                                                                  
                                                                   Γ n(µ, γ), γ
                     0
                         0          0.2           0.4        0.6           0.8         1
                                                         γ

                         Figure 3: Example of dynamics for beliefs precision γ


    In equilibrium, n varies with µ and γ. Suppose, as an example, that n is an increasing step
function of γ that takes the values 0, 0.5 or 1, and let us keep µ fixed for the moment. Figure 3
illustrates how the feedback from uncertainty to investment opens up the possibility of multiple
stationary points in the dynamics of the precision of beliefs, and therefore uncertainty. In this
example, the function γ ′ = Γ (n (µ, γ) , γ), depicted by the solid curve, has three fixed points. We
formally establish, in Section 4, that this type of multiplicity can happen in equilibrium.

3.2     Existence and Uniqueness
    We have described in Lemmas 1 and 2 how beliefs depend on the fraction of investing firms. We
now characterize the equilibrium decision rule and provide existence and uniqueness conditions.

Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 1-3, stated in Appendix F, and for γx sufficiently small, the
equilibrium exists and is unique. Under some additional conditions satisfied when γx is small and
risk aversion “a” is large enough, the equilibrium cutoff f c is increasing in µ and γ.

    This proposition establishes the monotonicity of the equilibrium cutoff rule. Anticipating higher
returns, a more optimistic firm (higher µ) is more likely to invest. In turn, uncertainty (lower γ)
reduces the incentives to invest for two reasons. First, risk averse firms dislike uncertain payoffs.
Second, since investment is costly and irreversible, there is an option value of waiting: in the face of
uncertainty, firms prefer to delay investment to gather additional information and avoid downside
risk.
    It is essential for our mechanism that uncertainty discourages investment, a feature typical


                                                    13
of optimal stopping time models of investment. Assumption 3, satisfied if the persistence of the
fundamental is high enough and its volatility is sufficiently low, ensures that the fundamental does
not vary too much over time, so that firms have an incentive to wait in order to collect more
information.11 This condition alone, however, is not sufficient in our context. The monotonicity
of the cutoff f c in γ requires additional restrictions because of the endogeneity of beliefs, which
gives rise to ambiguous feedback effects. For instance, the variation in n implied by fluctuations
in µ or γ affect the volatility of next period’s mean beliefs µ’ (Lemma 1). This, in turn, can have
ambiguous effects on firms’ current incentives to invest. To ensure that the first-order effects of
risk aversion and option value dominate, we must bound these feedback effects. Since they operate
solely through social learning, we can do so by imposing an upper bound on the informativeness of
this channel, γx . When γx is small enough, the equilibrium cutoff is guaranteed to be increasing in
µ and γ, as one would expect in the absence of social learning.
    Establishing the existence of an equilibrium is relatively straightforward, because the problem
is continuous and general fixed point theorems apply. Showing uniqueness is more challenging
because our economy features complementarities in information: the more firms invest, the more
uncertainty declines, encouraging further investment. If these complementarities are strong enough,
they can lead to multiple equilibria. To prevent this, we use again the insight that the magnitude of
this feedback is governed by the precision γx of the social learning channel. We show, in particular,
that the main fixed point problem that characterizes the optimal cutoff rule is a contraction, and
that it is therefore unique, when γx is small.12 The uniqueness of the equilibrium is an attractive
feature, as it leads to unambiguous predictions and makes the model amenable to quantitative work.
Despite the uniqueness of the equilibrium, the model features interesting non-linear dynamics and
multiple stationary points, as we show in Section 4.
    Figure 4 illustrates how the investment probability varies as a function of beliefs (µ, γ) when
monotonicity obtains. The fraction of investing firms increases as they are more optimistic (µ high)
or less uncertain (γ high) about the fundamental.




  11
      The law of motion (5) highlights the importance of the persistence of the fundamental ρθ for the dynamics of
uncertainty. As ρθ declines, past observations contain less information about the current value of the fundamental and
learning therefore becomes less relevant. At a result, the option value of waiting becomes smaller and the conditions
for uncertainty traps to exist, provided in the next section, are less likely to be satisfied.
   12
      We show that the mapping that characterizes the optimal cutoff rule is a contraction in the space of Lipschitz
continuous functions for some given moduli, which allows us to put a bound on these feedback effects. We cannot
rule out the existence of equilibrium cutoffs that do not satisfy this property. We can, however, explicitly rule them
out in the case of the planner’s allocation, where Lipschitz continuity is necessarily satisfied.


                                                         14
                      1


          n(µ, γ)


                      0

                              µ
                                                                       γ




                                  Figure 4: Fraction of investing firms n (µ, γ)


4     Uncertainty Traps
    We now examine the interaction between firms’ behavior in the face of uncertainty and social
learning. This interaction leads to episodes of self-sustaining uncertainty and low activity, which
we call uncertainty traps. We provide sufficient conditions on the parameters that guarantee the
existence of such traps and discuss the type of aggregate dynamics that they imply. We find that the
response of the economy to shocks is highly non-linear: it quickly recovers after small shocks, but
large, short-lived shocks may plunge the economy into long-lasting recessions. We also characterize
the constrained planner’s problem and discuss its policy implications.

4.1    Definition and Existence
    We define uncertainty traps as the coexistence of multiple stationary points in the dynamics of
belief precision — a situation similar to the one depicted in Figure 3.

Definition 2. There is an uncertainty trap if there exists an interval (µl , µh ) such that, for every
µ ∈ (µl , µh ), there are at least two locally stable fixed points in the dynamics of the precision of
beliefs γ ′ = Γ (n (µ, γ) , γ).

    We refer to these multiple stationary points as regimes. Note that multiplicity of regimes
does not imply multiplicity of equilibria. This distinction is important because it highlights that
the model is not subject to indeterminacy. While multiple values of γ may satisfy the equation
γ = Γ (n (µ, γ) , γ) for a given µ, the regime that prevails at any given time is unambiguously
determined by the history of past aggregate shocks, summarized by the current beliefs (µ, γ). The
definition of uncertainty traps also emphasizes the notion of stability, which is required for the type



                                                       15
of self-sustaining dynamics that we describe. Notice, however, that we only require local stability
along the dimension γ while µ keeps evolving according to its law of motion.
   The following proposition formally establishes that uncertainty traps exist for a range of mean
of beliefs µ under some condition on the dispersion of investment costs.

Proposition 2. Under the conditions of Proposition 1 and one additional condition satisfied for
σf small enough or risk aversion “a” high enough, the economy features an uncertainty trap with
at least two regimes γl (µ) < γh (µ) for µ ∈ (µl , µh ). Regime γl is characterized by high uncertainty
and low investment, while regime γh is characterized by low uncertainty and high investment.



                                  n=0
                                  n=1
                       n = F (fc (µ, γ))




                                                                        µl
                                                                 µl



                                                                       µ<
                                                h




                                                             µ=
                                           µ=µ
                               µh
              γ′




                              µ>




                                           γl                     γh

                   0

                                                         γ

    Figure 5: Dynamics of the precision of beliefs γ ′ = Γ (n (µ, γ) , γ) for different values of µ

   Figure 5 presents examples for the law of motion of γ when the investment costs f are normally
                                                             ′
distributed. The solid curves represent the function γ = Γ(n(µ, γ), γ) evaluated at five different
values of µ, with the thick solid curve corresponding to an intermediate value of µ. In all cases, for
small γ, uncertainty is high and firms do not invest. As a result, they do not learn from observing
economic activity and the precision of beliefs γ ′ remains low. As the precision γ increases, uncer-
tainty decreases and firms become sufficiently confident about the fundamental to start investing.
As that happens, uncertainty decreases further.
   In our example, the thick curve intersects the 45◦ line three times. The second intersection
corresponds to an unstable regime, but the other two are locally stable. We denote these regimes
by γl and γh . In regime γl , uncertainty is high and investment is low, while the opposite is true in
regime γh .
   Proposition 2 shows that this situation is a generic feature of the equilibrium when the disper-
sion of investment costs σf is small. This condition ensures that the feedback of investment on

                                                    16
information is strong enough to sustain distinct stationary points.

4.2   Dynamics: Non-linearity and Persistence
   We now describe the full dynamics of the economy by taking into account the evolution of µ
in response to the arrival of new information. Figure 5 shows that, as long as µ stays between the
values µl and µh , defined in Proposition 2, the two regimes γl (µ) and γh (µ) preserve their stability.
As a result, uncertainty and the fraction of active firms n are relatively unaffected by changes in
µ. In contrast, for values of µ above µh , a large enough fraction of firms invest, so the dynamics
of beliefs only admits the high-activity regime as a stationary point. Similarly, for values below
µl , the economy only admits the low-activity regime. Therefore, sufficiently large shocks to µ can
make one regime disappear and trigger a regime switch.



                          µ0
            µt




                          γ
            γt




                          γ


                          1
            n(µt , γt )




                          0
                               0            5                10              15       20
                                                             t
                                   Figure 6: Persistent effects of temporary shocks

   The economy displays non-linear dynamics: it reacts very differently to large shocks in compar-
ison to small ones. Figure 6 shows various simulations to illustrate this feature using the example
from Figure 5. The top panel presents three different series of shocks to the mean of beliefs µ. The
three series start from the high-activity/low-uncertainty regime. At t = 5, the economy is hit by a
negative shock to µ, due to a bad realization of either the public signals or the fundamental. The
mean of beliefs then returns to its initial value at t = 10. Across the three series, the magnitude of
the shock is different.
   The middle and bottom panels show the response of beliefs precision γ and the fraction of
investing firms n. The solid gray line represents a small temporary shock, such that µ remains


                                                          17
within (µl , µh ). Despite the negative shocks to the mean of beliefs, all firms keep investing and
the precision of beliefs is unaffected. When the economy is hit by a temporary shock of medium
size (dashed line), some firms stop investing, leading to a gradual increase in uncertainty. As
uncertainty rises, investment falls further and the economy starts to drift towards the low regime.
However, when the mean of beliefs recovers, the precision of information and the number of active
firms quickly return to the high-activity regime. In contrast, when the economy is hit by a large
temporary shock (dotted line), the number of firms delaying investment is large enough to produce
a self-sustaining increase in uncertainty. The economy quickly shifts to the low-activity regime and
remains there even after the mean of beliefs recovers.




                          µ0
            µt




                          γ
            γt




                          γ


                          1
            n(µt , γt )




                          0
                               0   5       10      15      20     25       30     35      40
                                                           t
                                       Figure 7: Escaping an uncertainty trap

   We now discuss how the economy escapes from the trap in which it fell in Figure 6. Figure 7
shows the effect of positive shocks when the economy starts from the low regime. The economy
receives positive signals that lead to a temporary increase in mean beliefs between periods 20 and 25,
possibly because of a recovery in the fundamental. When the temporary increase in average beliefs
is not sufficiently strong, the recovery is interrupted as µ returns to its initial value. However,
when the temporary increase is sufficiently large, the economy reverts back to the high-activity
regime. Once again, temporary shocks of sufficient magnitude to the fundamental may lead to
nearly permanent effects on the economy.

4.3   Additional Remarks
   A number of additional lessons can be drawn from these simulations. First, in our frame-
work, uncertainty is a by-product of recessions.              This result echoes the empirical findings of

                                                         18
Bachmann et al. (2013) who show that uncertainty is partly caused by recessions and conclude,
by that, that it is of secondary importance for the business cycle. We show, however, that un-
certainty may still have a large impact on the economy by affecting the persistence and depth of
recessions, even if it is not what triggers them.
   Second, as in models with learning in the spirit of Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006),
our theory provides an explanation for asymmetries in business cycles. In good times, since agents
receive a large flow of information, they react faster to shocks than in bad times.
   Third, our economy may feature high uncertainty without volatility. For instance, in the low
regime, agents are highly uncertain about the fundamental but the volatility of economic aggregates
is low. Therefore, according to our theory, subjective uncertainty may affect economic fluctuations
even if no volatility is observed in the data. This distinguishes our approach from the existing
uncertainty-driven business cycle literature in the spirit of Bloom (2009). In particular, direct
measures of subjective uncertainty rather than measures of volatility are important to capture the
full amount of uncertainty in the economy.
   Finally, a recent literature (Bachmann et al., 2013; Orlik and Veldkamp, 2013) uses survey data
to derive measures of uncertainty based on ex-ante forecast errors. Our model highlights a potential
shortcoming of this approach, as uncertainty about fundamentals differs from uncertainty about
endogenous variables, such as output or investment. For example, when the economy is trapped in
the low activity regime, firms know that all firms are uncertain, and therefore that investment is
likely to be low, such that the economy is less exposed to aggregate risk. As a result, their forecasts
about economic aggregates are accurate, even though their uncertainty about the fundamental is
high. As implied by the model, forecast errors about variables like output may not always be a
good proxy for uncertainty about fundamentals.

4.4   Policy Implications
   The economy is subject to an information externality: in the decentralized equilibrium, firms
invest less often than they should because they do not internalize the release of information to
the rest of the economy caused by their investment. In Proposition 3, we solve the problem of a
constrained planner subject to the same information technology as individual agents. We show that
the decentralized economy is constrained inefficient, and that an investment subsidy is sufficient to
restore constrained efficiency.

Proposition 3. Under Assumptions 1-3, stated in the Appendix, the recursive competitive equilib-
rium is constrained inefficient. The efficient allocation can be implemented with positive investment
subsidies τ (µ, γ) and a uniform tax.

   The subsidy that implements the optimal allocation takes a simple form to align social and
private incentives. As shown in the proof of the proposition, it is simply the sum of the social value
of releasing an additional signal to the economy and the private value of delaying investment.



                                                    19
    The optimal policy being a subsidy, Proposition 3 implies that firms are more likely to invest in
the efficient allocation than in the laissez-faire economy. However, uncertainty traps can still arise
in the efficient allocation. Proposition 4 below establishes the result.

Proposition 4. Under Assumptions 1-2 and γx small enough, the planner’s allocation is subject
to an uncertainty trap for σf low enough and risk aversion “a” high enough.

    The existence of uncertainty traps in the planner’s allocation may be surprising if one thinks
of the planner as a coordinator that should always prefer the high regime, as one might expect in
a model with multiple equilibria. As it turns out, transitioning from one regime to the other is
costly and risky. If the planner does not have more information than individual agents, it is still
optimal to wait when uncertainty is high enough. Hence, there may still exists a sufficiently strong
feedback from beliefs to actions in the constrained-efficient allocation to generate uncertainty traps.
However, while uncertainty traps remain present in the efficient allocation, they are less likely to
arise than in the laissez-faire economy because firms have stronger incentives to invest.


5     Quantitative Evaluation
    To evaluate the quantitative importance of uncertainty traps, we now embed the mechanism
into a general equilibrium macroeconomic framework. We first describe the quantitative framework
and its parametrization. We then compare the model’s implications for standard business cycle
moments with the data and two alternative models: the RBC model and a restricted version of our
model in which uncertainty about the fundamental is fixed over time. Finally, we present our main
quantitative exercise, in which we compare the behavior of economic aggregates in the data against
the predictions from our model and alternative models in the context of the Great Recession.

5.1   Quantitative Model with Uncertainty Traps
    We extend the baseline model along several dimensions. First, firms are now long-lived, use
both capital and labor to produce, and accumulate capital over time. They enter the economy
endogenously depending on economic conditions and exit exogenously. Second, firms are owned by
a risk-averse representative household that maximizes utility over consumption and leisure. Third,
factor and goods prices are endogenously determined in general equilibrium. As in the baseline
model, firms must pay an irreversible fixed cost to operate and social learning takes place when a
firm begins to produce. As a result, the number of entering firms responds to uncertainty about
the fundamental, and uncertainty depends on economic activity.




                                                  20
5.1.1    Preferences and Technology

    The representative household chooses consumption Ct and labor Lt to maximize the expected
discounted sum of future utility
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                                                E         β t U (Ct , Lt ) ,                                      (12)
                                                    t=0

where 0 < β < 1 is the discount rate. The household supplies labor in a perfectly competitive
market at a wage wt . It also owns the firms in the form of claims to their dividends.
    A single good used for consumption and investment is produced by a continuum of firms of
measure m. Each firm j ∈ [0, m] produces the final good by operating a Cobb-Douglas technology,
                                                   ω
                                 A (1 + θ) kjα lj1−α , 0 < α < 1, 0 < ω < 1,

using lj units of labor and kj units of capital. The parameter 0 < α < 1 controls the capital intensity.
The firm-level returns to scale, or span-of-control (Lucas Jr, 1978), parameter ω is assumed to be
strictly less than one to deliver a well-defined notion of firm size. The fundamental θ follows the
AR(1) process θ ′ = ρθ θ + εθ , with εθ ∼ iid N 0, 1 − ρ2θ σθ2 .13 The total mass of firms m evolves
                                                           

endogenously. Each period, a mass Q > 0 of potential entrants has the option to start production,
but only an (endogenous) fraction n of them does so. The mass Q remains fixed over time. Firms
exit at an exogenous rate δm > 0.
    Each period, firms pay a fixed cost
                                       f common
                                                across firms and denominated in units of the
final good. We assume that f ∼ N µf , σf is drawn independently over time.14 Due to the
                                            2

irreversibilities created by these fixed costs, fewer firms enter in times of heightened uncertainty.

5.1.2    Information and Timing

    As in the baseline model, agents do not observe the true value of the fundamental θ but learn
about it from two sources. First, they learn from a public signal Z. In contrast to the baseline model,
where this signal captured exogenous information released by media and statistical agencies, we now
explicitly model the signal Z as a summary of the information collected through the observation of
certain economic aggregates. As in any model with information frictions, restrictions about what
agents observe must be imposed to avoid perfectly revealing the fundamental. Agents cannot, for
instance, perfectly observe output as this would reveal θ. We assume instead that agents are able
to observe the value added of each firm, as well as its aggregate counterpart, but are unable to
perfectly distinguish between its individual components: revenue and fixed cost.15 As a result, a
   13
      The additive specification of TFP, 1 + θ, ensures that the variance of beliefs about θ does not affect expected
output directly. As in our calibration the standard deviation of the ergodic distribution of θ is much smaller than 1,
productivity is always positive in our simulations.
   14
      The baseline theory included an idiosyncratic component to these fixed costs, which we ignore here for simplicity.
Appendix E.4 performs sensitivity analysis on this assumption. We assume, however, that f is subject to aggregate
shocks to be consistent with our information structure, as we explain in the next subsection.
   15
      This assumption is in the spirit of Lucas (1972), where firms cannot distinguish between real and nominal
shocks. A previous version of the paper assumed that firms cannot distinguish between aggregate and idiosyncratic


                                                             21
high level of value added may reflect either a high value of the fundamental θ or a low value of
the fixed costs.16 Second, and more specific to the channel we study in this paper, agents also
learn from signals emanating from others. As in the N → ∞ case of the baseline model, the entry
of an infinitesimal measure of firms dj releases a normally distributed signal xj about θ, observed
by everyone, with a precision γx dj, proportional to the mass of entrants. Again, the information
collected through this social learning channel can be summarized by a public signal X with precision
nQγx .17 All signals being public, beliefs are common across firms and the representative household.
    In each period, events unfold as follows:

   1. Incumbent firms, potential entrants and the household start with the same prior distribution
      over the fundamental, θ | I ∼ N µ, γ −1 . The fundamental θ and the fixed cost f are drawn
                                             

        but unobserved.

   2. The Q potential entrants decide whether to enter or not. A fraction n of them enters and
        start producing next period.

   3. The m incumbent firms choose labor and investment. The household decides how much labor
        to supply and the labor market clears.

   4. Fixed costs are paid, and production takes place. All agents observe the signal Z, which
        captures the information contained in value added, and the signal X from new entrants, and
        update their beliefs. A fraction δm of firms exogenously exits.

5.1.3     Firm-Level Problem
                                                                                            ´m
    The aggregate state space of the economy is (µ, γ, K, m) where K =                       0   kj dj is the aggregate
capital stock. Realized individual profits for a firm operating with k units of capital and l units of
labor are18
                   π (k, l; µ, γ, K, m, θ, f ) = A (1 + θ) k αω l(1−α)ω − w (µ, γ, K, m) l − f.                    (13)

The value of an incumbent firm that has accumulated k units of capital is then

                                 
          I
                                E Uc (C, L) π (k, l; µ, γ, K, m, θ, f ) + (1 − δK ) k − k ′
                                                                                           
        V (k; µ, γ, K, m) = max
                             ′   k ,l
                                                                                                            
                                        + δm Uc (C, L) k ′ + β (1 − δm ) V I k ′ ; µ′ , γ ′ , K ′ , m′ |µ, γ ,
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   (14)

productivity shocks. The benefit of our current approach is to allow for a simple aggregation of the economy.
   16
      Despite this restriction on the observability of gross output and θ, all other economic aggregates are observed
and agents use all the available information to make their decision. However, as the timing will make clear, observing
other variables such as the wage rate w, consumption C, the aggregate capital stock K, aggregate employment L,
aggregate value added, the measure of entrants n, or the measure of incumbents m does not reveal any additional
information.
   17
      A formal derivation of this information aggregation result is in Subsection 5.1.5.
   18
      Note that the presence of fixed operating costs could lead to negative profits. Since f is small relative to output
in our calibration, this virtually never happens.


                                                            22
subject to the laws of motion for the aggregate state variables {µ, γ, K, m}, described in the follow-
ing sections. The parameter 0 < δK < 1 is the depreciation rate of capital. This firm chooses labor
l and next-period capital k ′ to maximize the expected sum of profits, discounted by the marginal
utility Uc (C, L), which plays the role of the stochastic discount factor. When a firm exits, which
happens with probability δm , its accumulated capital is scrapped and returned to the household at
the end of the period.
    Consider now the problem of a potential entrant. In each period, a potential entrant decides
between waiting and entering. Its value is

                                                         V W (µ, γ, K, m) , V E (µ, γ, K, m) .
                                                     
                        V (µ, γ, K, m) = max                                                                  (15)

If a potential entrant waits, it preserves the option of entering next period; hence the value of
waiting is
                          V W (µ, γ, K, m) = βE V µ′ , γ ′ , K ′ , m′ |µ, γ .
                                                                         
                                                                                             (16)

If, instead, the potential entrant decides to enter, its value is

                                                              ′          ′     ′ ′      ′     ′
           V E (µ, γ, K, m) = max                                    I
                                                                                                      
                                  (1 − δm ) E   −U c (C, L) ke  + βV   ke  ; µ  , γ , K   , m     |µ, γ   .   (17)
                               ′   ke


The definition of V E indicates that a potential entrant chooses the amount of capital ke′ , carried
into the next period if it survives the δm shock or returned to the household at the end of the
period otherwise. Upon entry, its value next period is equal to the value of an incumbent firm that
has accumulated ke′ units of capital, V I (ke′ ; µ′ , γ ′ , K ′ , m′ ).

5.1.4    Aggregates

    Incumbent and entrants face the same investment problem and choose the same next-period
capital level k ′ (µ, γ, K, m). Therefore, next-period’s aggregate capital stock is

                               K ′ (µ, γ, K, m) = m′ (µ, γ, K, m) k ′ (µ, γ, K, m) ,                          (18)

where m′ (µ, γ, K, m) is the mass of incumbents next period, given by

                              m′ (µ, γ, K, m) = (1 − δm ) (m + n (µ, γ, K, m) Q) .                            (19)

The fraction of entering firms among the Q potential entrants n (µ, γ, K, m) must be consistent
with individual entry decisions, in the sense that
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                         1               if V E (µ, γ, K, m) > V W (µ, γ, K, m)
                                        
                    n (µ, γ, K, m) =      ∈ [0, 1]        if V E (µ, γ, K, m) = V W (µ, γ, K, m)              (20)
                                        
                                        
                                        0                if V E (µ, γ, K, m) < V W (µ, γ, K, m) .
                                        



                                                             23
In turn, aggregate labor demand is
                                                                                    
                                                                       K
                                     L (µ, γ, K, m) = m × l              ; µ, γ, K, m ,                             (21)
                                                                       m

where l (k; µ, γ, K, m) is the firm-level labor demand resulting from (14).

5.1.5       Information and Beliefs

    We now characterize the information contained in the signals observed by the agents. First, as
in the baseline model, the information diffused through social learning can be aggregated into a
single signal X which averages the individual signals released by entrants,19

                                              nQ
                                 1
                                        ˆ                                             
                             X=                    xj dj = θ + εX , εX ∼ N 0, (nQγx )−1 ,                           (22)
                                nQ        0

where nQγx , the endogenous precision of the social learning channel, changes with economic activ-
ity. Second, the information conveyed
                                      by observing
                                                   value added is equivalent to the information
conveyed by the signal Z ∼ N θ, (γz (K, L, m))−1 with precision20

                                                          "                  !ω        #2
                                                               K α L(1−α)          1
                                     γz (K, L, m) = A                                       .
                                                                   m              σf

In contrast to the benchmark model, the precision γz of this signal now changes with economic
activity — a natural implication of assuming that agents observe economic aggregates instead of
the fundamental directly. In our calibrated economy, we find that fluctuations in γz , which depend
on the stock m of incumbent firms, are considerably smaller than fluctuations in the precision of
X, which depends on the flow n of incumbent firms. Therefore, the endogenous uncertainty in the
economy largely evolves as a function of the X signal.21
    As in the baseline model, agents are fully rational and use all information available to update
their beliefs according to Bayes’ Law. The laws of motion for the mean and the precision of beliefs




   19
        As in the infinite N case in the baseline model, X in expression (22) is to be
                                                                                      understood   as the distributional
                                                                       PN                         −1 
limit of the average of N signals with precisions γx /N , i.e., lim N1    1 x j ∼  N   0, γ x N/N       as N → ∞ and
N/N → nQ.
  20
                                                                                    αω L (1−α)ω
     Since all incumbent firms are identical, individual value added is A (1 + θ) K
                                                                                  m      m
                                                                                                   − f . Since K, L,
                                                                                                   ω
m and the distribution of f are known, observing value added is equivalent to observing θ − AK αωmL(1−α)ω (f − µf ) ∼
   h                      i−2 
N θ, Am−ω K αω L(1−α)ω        σf2 .
   21
     In our calibrated economy, fluctuations in γz only accounts for 2.7% of the total fluctuation in uncertainty while
social learning through X accounts for the rest.


                                                              24
are

                                            γµ + γz Z + nQγx X
                                 µ ′ = ρθ                      ,                                           (23)
                                              γ + γz + nQγx
                                                                         −1
                                                 ρ2θ
                                       
                                  ′
                                                         + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                  
                                 γ =                                           .                           (24)
                                           γ + γz + nQγx

5.1.6     Recursive Competitive Equilibrium

      We are now ready to define a competitive equilibrium for this economy.

Definition 3. A recursive competitive equilibrium is a collection of value functions V (µ, γ, K, m),
V W (µ, γ, K, m), V E (µ, γ, K, m) and V I (k; µ, γ, K, m) individual policy functions k ′ (µ, γ, K, m),
ke′ (µ, γ, K, m) and l (k; µ, γ, K, m), aggregate policy functions K ′ (µ, γ, K, m), m′ (µ, γ, K, m),
µ′ (µ, γ, K, m), γ ′ (µ, γ, K, m), n (µ, γ, K, m), L (µ, γ, K, m) and C (µ, γ, K, m, θ, f ), and wages
w (µ, γ, K, m) such that

   1. The value functions V (µ, γ, K, m), V W (µ, γ, K, m), V E (µ, γ, K, m) and V I (k; µ, γ, K, m),
        and the associated policy functions k ′ (µ, γ, K, m), ke′ (µ, γ, K, m) and l (k; µ, γ, K, m), solve
        the Bellman equations (14)-(17) under the entry schedule n (µ, γ, K, m) and the laws of motion
        K ′ (µ, γ, K, m), m′ (µ, γ, K, m), µ′ (µ, γ, K, m) and γ ′ (µ, γ, K, m) given by (18), (19), (23) and
        (24);
   2. The fraction of entering firms n (µ, γ, K, m) satisfies the consistency equation (20);
   3. The policy functions L (µ, γ, K, m) and C (µ, γ, K, m, θ, f ) solve the household’s first order
        condition on labor supply,

                          E [UL (C (µ, γ, K, m, θ, f ) , L (µ, γ, K, m))]
                                                                          = w (µ, γ, K, m) ;
                          E [UC (C (µ, γ, K, m, θ, f ) , L (µ, γ, K, m))]

   4. The aggregate resource constraint is satisfied:
                                                                                                   ω
        C (µ, γ, K, m, θ, f )+K ′ (µ, γ, K, m)−(1 − δK ) K+mf = A (1 + θ) m1−ω K α L (µ, γ, K, m)1−α .


5.2     Calibration
5.2.1     Standard Parameters

      The time period is one quarter. Most of the moments that we target are computed starting
in 1978:Q1, when the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) that we use for firm-level moments
begins, and stopping in 2007:Q3, at the onset of the 2007-2009 recession, allowing us to evaluate
the out-of-sample properties of the model in our Great Recession exercise. In our benchmark
specification, we assume GHH preferences, U = log C − L1+ν / (1 + ν) , and we also report the
                                                                    

results of our main quantitative exercise under CRRA preferences in Appendix C as robustness.22
    22
       GHH preferences are common in the information frictions literature. We adopt them in our benchmark spec-
ification because the usual CRRA preferences generate a counterfactual correlation between economic activity and


                                                       25
We set the Frisch elasticity ν = 2.84 which corresponds to the average aggregate Frisch elasticity
of hours reported by Chetty et al. (2011). The discount rate β is chosen to match an annual value
of 0.95. The depreciation rate is set to an annual value of 0.1.
    For the production function parameters, we normalize A = 1 and set the returns-to-scale pa-
rameter ω to 0.89, which corresponds to the weighted average across 2-digit SIC estimates of the
returns to scale from Basu and Fernald (1997).23 We set the capital intensity parameter α so that
(1 − α) ω = 0.645 to match the average labor compensation over GDP from 1978-2007 according
to annual data from the Penn World Table (Feenstra et al., 2015).24
    We set δm = 2.6%, which corresponds to the employment-weighted firm exit rate for all firms
in the Longitudinal Business Database between 1978 and 2007. The mass of potential entrants Q
is normalized to 1.25
                              ρθ , σθ2
                          
    The parameters                       of the fundamental process θ are estimated using the quarterly
utilization-adjusted TFP series from Fernald (2014) over 1978Q1-2007Q3 after removing a linear
trend. This yields σθ = 0.028 and ρθ = 0.964.

5.2.2    Information and Fixed-Cost Distribution

    With all the above parameters calibrated, it only remains to set values for nthe precision
                                                                                           o     of
individual signals γx and the mean and variance of the distribution of fixed costs µf , σf2 . These
parameters govern the option-value effects and the evolution of Bayesian uncertainty about TFP.
To the best of our knowledge, no direct empirical measure exists for this concept of uncertainty.
The variance of beliefs about θ, however, is tightly related in our model to the ex-ante forecast
variance about endogenous variables like output. We thus target moments of the distribution of
uncertainty in output growth forecast provided by the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF)
and use this series as our main empirical proxy for uncertainty.
    The SPF asks a panel of forecasters to provide the distribution of their beliefs about the growth
rate of real output in percentage terms between the current year and the last, and these distributions
are averaged across forecasters.26 We compute the standard deviation of this averaged distribution
in every year, and use moments of its time series to calibrate the model. To fit the parameters,
we compute the exact same object in a long-run simulation of our model. We pick the values
of {γx , µf , σf } by targeting the mean, the 5th percentile and the 95th percentile of the empirical
distribution of uncertainty over the 1992-2007 period, corresponding to the time period over which

positive signals (see Beaudry and Portier (2006) for a VAR estimation of the impact of news shocks). Upon receiving
a positive signal about the economy, the wealth effect on the labor supply leads to a decline in output on impact.
See Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) for a discussion of the role of preferences in the news-shocks literature.
   23
      Our parametrization corresponds to the γ v parameter for the private economy estimated using OLS from Table
2 in Basu and Fernald (1997).
   24
      Specifically we use the series LABSHPUSA156NRUG from the FRED database.
   25
      For any given Q, we can replicate the aggregate allocation, albeit with a different measure of firms m, by rescaling
A, γx , µf and σf .
   26
      Specifically, at the beginning of each quarter, the SPF asks each forecaster to report the probability that growth
between the previous year and the current year will fall within each of several bins. We use forecast reported in the
4th quarter, which represents a measure of uncertainty over just one quarter, because it maps easily into our model.


                                                           26
data on the distribution of real GDP growth is available in the SPF up to the beginning of the
Great Recession.
    These three moments are directly informative about the three parameters that we need to
calibrate. The 95th percentile corresponds to periods of high uncertainty about real output growth,
which in the model correspond to periods with low firm entry when uncertainty is mostly driven
by the aggregate public signal Z, as opposed to the social learning signal X. Therefore, the
95th percentile is useful to identify σf which governs the informativeness of Z. Similarly, the 5th
percentile corresponds to periods of low uncertainty, which in the model correspond to periods of
high firm entry, when γx is the main driver of uncertainty. The average fixed cost µf affects the
average fraction of entrants n and relates to the average level of uncertainty.
    The parameters are estimated by minimizing an equal-weighted distance between the empirical
and simulated moments. The numerical algorithm used to solve the model is described in Appendix
B. Table 1 reports the fit. The calibrated parameters are γx = 450, µf = 0.0115 and σf = 0.0155.
As the table shows, the calibrated model cannot match all moments at the same time. In particular,
because TFP is the only source of uncertainty while the SPF forecasters may worry about other
shocks, we have difficulty matching the upper tail of uncertainty in the data and there is on average
less uncertainty in our model. We thus view our results as conservative on the role of uncertainty
in the economy.

                         Uncertainty About GDP Growth                 Data (%)       Model (%)
                         Mean                                           0.60           0.55
                         5th percentile                                 0.45           0.50
                         95th percentile                                0.73           0.64
Notes. Uncertainty is computed as the standard deviation of the SPF distribution over 1992Q4 to 2007Q4 of current year’s
annual over last year’s annual real GDP stated in the last quarter of the current year. Growth rates and standard deviations
are stated in percentage terms. We use the 5% and 95% percentiles, instead of the min and the max, for robustness against
outliers. Uncertainty in our model is computed over a simulation of 50,000 periods using the same definition as in the data.

               Table 1: Calibrated Moments from the Survey of Professional Forecasters


5.3     Business-Cycle Moments
    We now evaluate the performance of our model in explaining standard business cycle moments.
For that, we compare the benchmark model that we have just described against the data and
against two alternative models. The first alternative model (“RBC”) is the standard real business
cycle model under complete information, identically parametrized. The second model (“fixed θ-
uncertainty”) is a version of our model in which firms update their beliefs about the mean of the
fundamental θ (i.e., they update µ using (23)) but uncertainty (i.e., the inverse of the precision
of beliefs γ) remains constant at its long-run average in our benchmark model. Comparing our
full framework to the fixed θ-uncertainty model highlights the specific role played by endogenous
uncertainty.
    Before comparing the models to the data, we must detrend the empirical time series. We note
that the cyclical properties we are interested in, in particular the persistence and depth of the Great

                                                            27
Recession, are sensitive to the specific detrending strategy. In Appendix A.2, we investigate the
implications of three filters: the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) (HP) filter, a linear detrending, and
a linear detrending allowing for a structural break in the trend. As shown in Figure 12a in that
appendix, the HP-filtered data suggests that the Great Recession was a mild economic downturn
and that the economy promptly recovered to its long-run trend after the trough. Both conclusions
contradict essential features of the raw output data shown in Figure 11a in Appendix A.2.27 We also
find that a purely linear trend exaggerates the severity and persistence of the recession by ignoring
low-frequency changes in the trend. Therefore, we choose a linear trend with a structural break
estimated by least squares (Hansen, 2000) as our benchmark, and we also report the sensitivity of
our results to using a standard linear trend.28 See Appendix A for a more detailed discussion of
the data and the detrending strategies.
    We compute standard business cycle moments using the detrended data covering the period
between the first quarter of 1978 and the last quarter of 2014. For each of the three models,
we generate ten thousand simulations of the same length as the data (148 quarters), and then
average each moment across all simulations. Panel A of Table 2 reports the results for the standard
deviation of output (Y ), consumption (C), employment (L), investment (I), the number of firms
(m) and uncertainty about real output growth (U ). Panel B reports the correlation between each
of these variables and output, and Panel C reports their autocorrelation.
    Because of the absence of learning, the RBC model generates more volatility in every variable
than our full model. However, their performances are overall similar. Regarding the volatility
of uncertainty about real output growth, our model is able to explain only a fraction of what is
observed in the data, suggesting that other shocks — possibly exogenous uncertainty shocks —
may be needed to fully account for the total fluctuations in uncertainty. Note that uncertainty
about current-quarter real output growth is 0 in the RBC model under full information. Panels B
and C show that the benchmark, the fixed θ-uncertainty model and the RBC model are roughly
comparable in terms of the correlations with output and the autocorrelations.




   27
       See King and Rebelo (1993) and Cogley and Nason (1995a) for a discussion of various drawbacks of the HP
filter.
    28
       An additional advantage of the linear trends is that they allow us to cleanly interpret the (unfiltered) prediction
of forecasters reported in the SPF data used to calibrate the model. For instance, a 2% growth forecast for this year
relative to the previous year can be directly mapped to the model by removing the long-run growth rate in output
from the linear filter. It is unclear how the analog exercise would be done if the data is HP filtered and detrended
with a bandpass filter. See Appendix A.2 for a detailed discussion of the filters.


                                                           28
                                                         Y          C         L          I        m          U
               A. Standard Deviation
                 Data                                  0.039     0.031      0.066     0.132     0.038      0.253
                 Benchmark                             0.035     0.030      0.027     0.072     0.020      0.053
                 Fixed θ-uncertainty                   0.036     0.031      0.027     0.076     0.019      0.027
                 RBC                                   0.044     0.036      0.033     0.093       –          –
               B. Correlation w.r.t Y
                 Data                                     1      0.588      0.921     0.523     0.646     -0.443
                 Benchmark                                1      0.967      0.884     0.855     0.459     -0.644
                 Fixed θ-uncertainty                      1      0.966      0.888     0.858     0.480     -0.619
                 RBC                                      1      0.987        1       0.944       –          –
               C. Autocorrelation (1st lag)
                 Data                                  0.981     0.982      0.993     0.962     0.995      0.762
                 Benchmark                             0.956     0.943      0.942     0.918     0.991      0.931
                 Fixed θ-uncertainty                   0.957     0.943      0.941     0.915     0.989      0.869
                 RBC                                   0.934     0.949      0.934     0.907       –          –
Notes. All series are computed in log deviation from trend. Each of the 10,000 replications of the simulated series are linearly
detrended. The annual series for m is interpolated to quarterly data. Uncertainty U is the standard deviation of current year
real output growth expressed in the last quarter of the current year. Because it is only available annually and, by definition,
cannot simply be interpolated, the moments we report about uncertainty are computed using observations from the 4th quarter
of every year. Its annual autocorrelation is expressed in quarterly terms. C is gross of fixed costs for comparison across models.
Employment and output are perfectly correlated in the RBC model as a consequence of the GHH preferences.

                  Table 2: Business-Cycle Moments: Data, RBC, and Benchmark Model

    The key conclusion from Table 2 is that a standard calibration of our model performs similarly to
the RBC model in terms of standard business-cycle moments. Therefore, incorporating endogenous
uncertainty in a standard business cycle model does not impair its ability to predict well-known
patterns of business cycle data. This result should not be surprising. As we saw in the baseline
model, the uncertainty trap mechanism kicks in only for large shocks, which are rare in these
simulations. In the next section, we show that the key difference between our model and standard
models, and the value added of modeling uncertainty traps, lies in terms of predicting how the
economy responds to large shocks.

5.4     Policy Function and Impulse Responses
    We now examine the role of endogenous uncertainty in propagating shocks. First, we ask
whether the key implication of the uncertainty trap mechanism identified in the baseline theory
— generating protracted recessions out of sufficiently negative shocks — is also at work in the full
calibrated model. In the next section, we ask whether this feature of the model can help explain
the behavior of macro aggregates during the Great Recession.

Firm Entry and Beliefs                In Proposition 1 we showed that, under certain conditions, the mass
of producing firms increases with the mean of beliefs µ and decreases with uncertainty (increases


                                                               29
with γ). We verify that these properties are inherited by the calibrated quantitative model. Figure
8 plots the fraction of entering firms n (µ, γ, K, m) as a function of mean beliefs µ, for three levels of
uncertainty. Similarly to Figure 4 in the baseline theory, we find that, for any level of uncertainty,
firms are more likely to enter when beliefs are more optimistic and that, for any level of mean
beliefs, firms are more likely to enter when uncertainty is lower. Therefore, the entry decision of
the quantitative model inherits the key feature of the baseline theory leading to uncertainty traps.
                Mass entering ﬁrms




                                      1



                                     0.5                                            High uncertainty
                                                                                    Medium uncertainty
                                                                                    Low uncertainty
                                      0
                                           -0.06   -0.04              -0.02              0
                                                            Mean of beliefs

Notes. This figure was generated with K and m at their steady-state values when shocks are set to zero.

  Figure 8: Investment decision n(µ, γ, K, Q) for K and m constant at their steady-state level.



Response to Small and Large Shocks                         A central feature of uncertainty traps is the non-linear
response to shocks, shown in Figure 6 in the context of the baseline theory. For shocks leading
to large negative drops in the mean of beliefs, endogenous uncertainty leads to recessions which
are relatively deeper and last relatively longer than for small shocks. We ask whether the full
quantitative model inherits this feature. Figure 9 shows the evolution of the mean of beliefs µ, the
precision of beliefs γ, and output Y after a one-period drop in mean beliefs of 1% (left column)
and 5% (right column) in both the full model and the fixed θ-uncertainty model.29 In the fixed-
information model, the economy starts to recover immediately after the initial shock regardless of
the size of the shock. In contrast, in the full model, output continues to decline after the mean
of beliefs has started to recover. Moreover, the duration of this decline is longer the larger is the
shock. Reaching the trough in output takes 6 quarters in response to the small shock, and 15
quarters in response to the larger one. As in the baseline model, this non-linearity is driven by the
endogenous evolution of uncertainty. The fall in mean beliefs drives down the incentives to enter.
As a result, fewer signals are released and the precision of beliefs falls (panels (c) and (d)). After
the shock, agents receive signals suggesting an improvement in the fundamental, and beliefs recover
(panels (a) and (b)). However, the recovery in output is delayed in the full model by the feedback
between high uncertainty (panels (e) and (f)) and slow entry.




   29
      Fundamental shocks affect the policy functions only through beliefs. Falls in beliefs may result from shocks to
the fundamental θ or to the signals, X and Z.


                                                              30
                  (a) Small shock - mean beliefs µ                                     (b) Large shock - mean beliefs µ
       0
                                                                           0


                                         Fixed uncertainty
                                         Full model
   -0.01                                                                -0.05
           0        10      20     30      40      50        60                 0        10      20     30      40      50     60
                                  Lags                                                                 Lags


               (c) Small shock - precision of beliefs γ                             (d) Large shock - precision of beliefs γ

    3000                                                                3000


    2000                                                                2000


           0        10      20     30      40      50        60                 0        10      20     30      40      50     60
                                  Lags                                                                 Lags


                    (e) Small shock - output Y                                           (f) Large shock - output Y
       0                                                                   0

  -0.005                                                               -0.025

   -0.01                                                                -0.05
  -0.015
           0        10      20     30      40      50        60                 0        10      20     30      40      50     60
                                  Lags                                                                 Lags
Notes: The left column shows the response of the economy to a -1% one-period shock to µ. The right column shows the
response of the economy to a -5% one-period shock to µ. The solid curves show the evolution of the economy according to the
full model, while the dashed curves show the evolution of a control economy in which the flow of public information is fixed at
the steady-state level of the full model. Figures (e) and (f) are in log deviation from trend, the other figures are in level.

      Figure 9: Mean beliefs, precision of beliefs and output in response to a one-period shock



    Table 3 summarizes the properties of the recessions depicted in Figure 9. For both shocks, the
table reports the ensuing recession’s depth (the magnitude of the peak-to-trough fall in output) and
the half-life of the recovery (the number of quarters for the economy to recover half of the peak-to-
trough fall in output). The table highlights two key features of uncertainty traps: i) endogenous
uncertainty makes recessions deeper and longer for shocks of any magnitude (recessions’ depth and
duration are larger in the full than in the fixed θ-uncertainty model), and ii) the differential effect
of endogenous uncertainty is relatively larger for large than for small shocks. The recession is 22%
deeper and 40% longer in the full model than in the fixed θ-uncertainty model under a negative 1%
shock to beliefs, but 35% deeper and 66% longer under a negative 5% shock. Therefore, in the full
calibrated model, endogenous uncertainty leads to amplification and persistence of shocks driving
down beliefs.

                                                    Small shock (-1%)                      Large shock (-5%)
                                                  Depth 50% recovery                     Depth 50% recovery
                      Full model                  -1.1%         42                       -6.2%         58
                      Fixed θ-uncertainty         -0.9%         30                       -4.6%         35
Notes. The depth of the recession corresponds to the lowest value of output reached since the official beginning of the recession.
The “50% recovery” column is the number of quarters before the economy recovers 50% of the peak-to-trough drop in output.

     Table 3: The impact of shock sizes on the depth and duration of recessions across models




                                                                  31
5.5     Endogenous Uncertainty in U.S. Recessions
    Our previous discussion established that, within our calibrated model, endogenous uncertainty
amplifies and lengthens the decline in economic activity relatively more for large than for small
shocks. We now evaluate the role of endogenous uncertainty in explaining the U.S. experience
during past recessions. Specifically, we ask whether it can help explain the observed depth and
persistence of a recession when there is a large enough shock and if, indeed, the mechanism only
“kicks in” for sufficiently large shocks.
    To implement this exercise we must first take a stand on the exogenous shocks that hit the
U.S. economy in each recession. Within our model, the only exogenous shocks are the innovations
to the signals {Xt , Zt } and to the fundamentals {θt }. The shocks to fundamental {θt } are taken
directly from the data. To discipline the evolution of {Xt , Zt }, we choose their innovations such
that our model and the fixed θ-uncertainty model exactly reproduce, as equilibrium outcomes, the
forecast of current year’s real output from the SPF during the first part of each recession.30 We
then compute the response of the three models we have introduced – our full quantitative model,
the fixed θ-uncertainty model, and the RBC model – and contrast them with the data. Importantly,
among the variables that we simulate and contrast against the data we include uncertainty about
output growth from the SPF and the number of firms, both of which are directly related to the
forces in the model.
    We implement this exercise in the context of the largest and second-largest recessions in terms
of decline in output within our sample, the Great Recession and the 1981-1982 recession. Since we
expect uncertainty traps to be more important after large shocks, the Great Recession — the most
important downturn since the Great Depression — is a historical episode where we would expect
endogenous uncertainty to play a role. However, we also verify that endogenous uncertainty does
not transform every downturn into a deeply protracted recession. For that, we also consider the
impact of the mechanism during the 1981-1982 recession, which was characterized by a large but
brief decline in productivity and was followed by a relatively rapid recovery in output. We expect
the impact of endogenous uncertainty to be relatively weaker during this episode.

5.5.1    Great Recession

    We start by considering the Great Recession. According to the NBER, the recession took place
over the period 2007:Q4-2009:Q2. We first feed the model with the observed TFP shocks over
the corresponding period.31 We then feed each model with a series of signals that allows them to

   30
      Note that we do not need to specify exactly the combination of Xt and Zt shocks that is needed to match output
forecasts. Only the time series of µt is relevant for our purpose. In the case of the RBC model we only introduce
shocks to θt , as there is no degree of freedom to match the forecast about real output.
   31
      We pick 2007:Q2 as our start date to be consistent with the dates at which we match output forecasts. However,
we stop feeding the series in 2008:Q4 because the TFP series from Fernald (2014) displays a large increase at the
beginning of 2009, which leads to a strong counterfactual expansion in the RBC economy (the other models fare
better). For robustness, we fit the full TFP series in Figure 13 of Appendix C and experiment with other TFP series
in Figures 15 and 16. In all cases, the full model generates a deeper and longer recession than the fixed θ-uncertainty
and RBC models.


                                                          32
replicate output forecasts from the SPF over that period. Specifically, the SPF surveys forecasters
every quarter about their point expectations for the level of real output for the current year. Since
the trough in output forecast from the SPF was reached in 2009:Q2, we focus on second quarter
forecasts and match expectations about current year output in 2007:Q2, 2008:Q2, and 2009:Q2.32
    Figure 10 shows the evolution of TFP, real output forecasts, output, investment, employment,
consumption, the number of firms, and uncertainty about real GDP growth. The solid lines in the
left column represent the data. The right column shows the predictions of the three models: the full
quantitative model (solid blue curves), the fixed θ-uncertainty model (dashed brown curves), and
the RBC model (dot-dash pink curves). The diamonds in panel (b) and (d) of Figure 10 indicate
the data that the models are calibrated to match. All shocks and innovations are set to zero after
2009:Q2, and the economy is left to recover.
    The central finding of this exercise, is that for all macro aggregates that we consider (output,
investment, consumption, employment, number of firms and uncertainty about GDP growth), our
model generates dynamics which are closer to the data than the fixed θ-uncertainty model and the
RBC model. Panel (f) of Figure 10 shows that the decline in output is clearly deeper and more
protracted in our model than in the alternative models.
    Table 4 summarizes the key properties of the recession in the data and as predicted by the three
models. The first column shows the depth of the recession, measured as the percentage drop in
output from the beginning of the recession to its lowest value. The full model is able to explain
almost all of the depth, while the fixed θ-uncertainty model and the RBC model account for 76%
and 33% of the fall, respectively. The second column of the table shows the earliest date at which
output has recovered 20% of the depth.33 In the full model, output recovers 20% of the lost ground
in 2015:Q1, close to corresponding date in the data (2014:Q3). In contrast, in the fixed θ-uncertainty
and in the RBC models this event happens in 2012:Q4 and 2009:Q3, respectively. These results
imply that, within our model, endogenous uncertainty adds 1.8 (5.2) percentage points in terms of
depth and about two (five) years until the 20% recovery relative to the fixed θ-uncertainty (RBC)
model. Finally, the third column shows the cumulative loss in output, measured as the sum of the
percentage deviations from trend from 2007:Q4 to 2015:Q1, the end of our sample. This measure
combines the depth and the persistence of the recession into a single statistic. If we normalize
this measure by the output produced in quarter 2007:Q4 at the onset of the recession, the U.S.
economy lost a cumulated 1.84 quarters of output since that date. Our full model explains 93% of
this loss, while the fixed θ-uncertainty and RBC models can account for 73% and 30% of the loss,

   32
       Forecasts in the first, third or fourth quarters in the SPF are about the current year and thus correspond to
forecasts at different horizons. We focus on a single horizon with second-quarter forecasts to avoid using four different
definitions of forecast in our model. Since we do not use forecast data in Q1, Q3 and Q4, we linearly interpolate
the series of µt at these points. Note finally that the empirical output forecast series stops in 2009:Q2 because of a
change in variable definition.
    33
       We cannot use the standard half-life measure of persistence since output has not recovered half of the way from
its trough in the data. We pick the 20% threshold as it roughly corresponds to the level attained by output in the
data at the end of the sample. The full model also generates a longer recession measured in terms of the number of
quarters from peak to trough relative to alternative models. The exact date for the trough is however hard to identify
in the data because of high-frequency noise.


                                                           33
respectively. According to these various measures, our full model is better able to account for the
overall severity of the recession.


                                                    Depth       20% recovery        Cumulative loss
                     Data                           -7.9%         2014:Q3              -184%
                     Full model                     -7.8%         2015:Q1              -171%
                     Fixed θ-uncertainty            -6.0%         2012:Q4              -134%
                     RBC                            -2.6%         2009:Q3               -56%
Notes. We compute the depth, persistence, and cumulative loss of the recession from the official beginning of the recession in
2007:Q4 as determined by the NBER. The depth of the recession corresponds to the lowest value of output reached since the
official beginning of the recession. The “20% recovery” column is the earliest date at which output recovers 20% of the depth.
Cumulative loss is the sum of the percentage deviation of output from trend from 2007:Q4 to 2015:Q1.

           Table 4: Depth, persistence, and cumulative output loss of the Great Recession




    Besides output, endogenous uncertainty can also help explain the behavior of other aggregates.
As shown in panels (g) and (h), even though our model does not generate as pronounced a decline
in investment, it does generate more persistence than the alternative models. Panels (m) and (n)
of Figure 10 show that the number of firms also falls. By construction, the RBC model does not
have predictions in this regard. Our full quantitative model does well in predicting the persistence
and the amplitude of the fall in the number of active firms. Since entry and the number of firms
govern the dynamics of uncertainty within the full model, the good performance of the model along
that dimension is reassuring. Our model generates as large a fall in consumption as it is observed
in the data (panels (k) and (l)). Relative to the alternative models, it also predicts a larger fall
and a more protracted recovery in employment (panels (i) and (j)), better reflecting the empirical
patterns. Even though for most variables the fall in economic aggregates happens faster in the
data, our model is closer to the empirical series than the alternative models for all the variables
reported in the figure.
    We also highlight that our model is relatively successful at explaining the shape of the uncer-
tainty response. As observed in panels (o) and (p) of Figure 10, the uncertainty in output growth
follows an inverted-U shape relationship that our model reproduces, although in our model the
peak in uncertainty is delayed relative to the data. In contrast, the alternative models generate
little variation in uncertainty in GDP forecasts.




Sensitivity

    We demonstrate the robustness of our findings by replicating the Great Recession exercise under
alternative assumptions: i) fitting the whole TFP series instead of only its beginning; ii) using a
simple linear detrending instead of allowing for a structural break; iii) using TFP data from the Penn
World Table and the Bureau of Labor Statistics instead of the Fernald time series; and iv) using

                                                             34
                              (a) TFP (data)                                                       (b) TFP (models)


       0                                                                         0


   -0.05                                                                      -0.05
       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015


                        (c) Forecast Y (data)                                                   (d) Forecast Y (models)

       0                                                                         0

   -0.05                                                                      -0.05

    -0.1                                                                       -0.1
       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015            2007   2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015


                        (e) Output Y (data)                                                      (f) Output Y (models)
       0                                                                         0


   -0.05                                                                      -0.05


       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                       (g) Investment I (data)                                                  (h) Investment I (models)

       0                                                                         0

    -0.2                                                                       -0.2

    -0.4                                                                       -0.4

       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015


                         (i) Labor L (data)                                                       (j) Labor L (models)

       0                                                                         0

    -0.1                                                                       -0.1


       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015


                      (k) Consumption C (data)                                              (l) Consumption C (models)

       0                                                                         0

   -0.05                                                                      -0.05


       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015


                  (m) Mass of firms m (data)                                               (n) Mass of firms m (models)

       0                                                                         0


    -0.1                                                                       -0.1

       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



              (o) Uncertainty about growth (data)                                     (p) Uncertainty about growth (models)
     0.4                                                                       0.4

     0.2                                                                       0.2

       0                                                                         0
       2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015

Notes. The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

                                      Figure 10: Great Recession - Data and models
                                                                         35
standard CRRA preferences instead of the GHH preferences assumed in the main exercise. The full
simulations from these robustness exercises are included in Appendix C. Table 5 summarizes these
simulations by showing the cumulative loss in output generated by each model in each exercise,
and comparing it to the data. In all cases, we find that our conclusions are robust. The full model
with endogenous uncertainty gets closer to the data by generating more severe recessions than the
alternative models. Table 7 in the Appendix shows that the full model generates deeper and longer
lasting recessions in all the robustness exercises.


                                                          Cumulative loss in output
                                            Data      Full model Fixed θ-uncertainty               RBC
                Benchmark                  -184%        -166%             -129%                    -56%
                Full TFP fit               -184%         -86%              -38%                   +38%
                Linear detrending          -310%        -173%             -139%                    -72%
                PWT TFP                    -184%        -194%             -175%                   -131%
                BLS TFP                    -184%        -171%             -142%                    -85%
                CRRA Preferences           -184%         -80%              -65%                    -31%
Notes. Cumulative loss is the sum of the percentage deviation of output from trend from 2007:Q4 to 2015:Q1.

                    Table 5: Robustness: Cumulative loss during the Great Recession




5.5.2     1981-1982 Recession

    We now consider the impact of endogenous uncertainty in the less severe recession of 1981Q3-
1982Q4. The purpose of this section is to show that, while endogenous uncertainty generates
amplification and persistence in response to very large shocks, it does not necessarily increase the
depth and persistence of every negative shock. As such, the model does not have counterfactual
implications for the magnitude and persistence of milder recessions.
    Table 6 replicates Table 4 for the 1981-1982 recession.34 We see that the full and the fixed θ-
uncertainty models generate shallower recessions than the data, while output drops more than the
data in the RBC model. In terms of persistence, the three models performs similarly, suggesting
that the economy should have recovered 20% of the loss in output at the beginning of 1984 —
about a year after that threshold was reached in the data. In terms of cumulative loss, all models
predict recessions that are more severe than the data, although the difference between model and
data is larger for the RBC than for the full and fixed θ-uncertainty models. Overall, we find that
for the 1981-1982 recession, characterized by a less severe combination of TFP and beliefs shocks,
endogenous uncertainty does not generate additional persistence. This confirms that the full model
generally behaves as a standard RBC model, except during large unusual downturns, such as the
2007-2009 recession, when the uncertainty trap mechanism kicks in.

   34
      Since the output forecast series is fully available over the period 1981-1985, we fit the whole time series of both
beliefs and TFP. Appendix D shows the model predicted series.


                                                           36
                                                     Depth      20% recovery         Cumulative loss
                     Data                            -5.3%        1983:Q2                -13%
                     Full model                      -4.9%        1984:Q1                -32%
                     Fixed θ-uncertainty             -4.7%        1984:Q1                -32%
                     RBC                             -6.4%        1984:Q2                -44%
Notes. The table is constructed similarly to Table 4. The official beginning of the recession is in 1981:Q3, and the cumulative
loss is computed between that quarter and 1985:Q1.

          Table 6: Depth, persistence and cumulative output loss of the 1981-1982 recession




5.6     Further Applications
    In Appendix E we provide additional exercises that highlight various features of the model.
First, we show that, like other studies of the effects of uncertainty on the economy (Bloom, 2009;
Bloom et al., 2012), exogenous uncertainty shocks generate recessions in our framework. In our
model, these exogenous shocks are propagated endogenously through the endogenous uncertainty
channel.
    Second, we consider the problem of a social planner in Appendix E.2. To do so, we compute the
efficient allocation and consider how it responds to shocks relative to the competitive equilibrium
that we have studied so far. We find that the planner prevents the number of entering firms from
falling too much during the recession in order to prevent uncertainty from rising too much. As a
result, the recession is shorter and shallower in the planner’s allocation, suggesting a potential role
for government policies in mitigating the impact of recessions.
    Third, we show in Appendix E.3 that our benchmark model improves on RBC in terms of
propagation of shocks. As noted by Cogley and Nason (1995b), the RBC model features weak
internal persistence so that the properties of GDP growth mimic those of the exogenous TFP
growth process. In our full model, however, the persistence in output growth is larger than in TFP
growth, and more so at lower lags. Hence, while our model does not replicate the full amount of
autocorrelation observed in the data, it does reproduce the qualitative feature of the data that the
autocorrelation of GDP growth is larger than that of TFP growth at lower lags. We interpret this
finding as evidence that endogenous uncertainty leads to a more persistent series for output growth
relative to TFP growth, in line with the baseline theory.


6     Conclusion
    We develop a theory of endogenous uncertainty and business cycles that combines two forces:
higher uncertainty about economic fundamentals deters investment, and uncertainty evolves en-
dogenously because agents learn from the actions of others. The interaction between investment
and uncertainty leads to uncertainty traps: episodes in which high uncertainty leads firms to delay
investment, further raising uncertainty. In the unique equilibrium of the model, the economy fluc-


                                                              37
tuates between a high-activity/low-uncertainty regime and a low-activity/high-uncertainty regime
and is subject to strong non-linear dynamics in which large shocks can have near permanent effects.
   To quantify the importance of uncertainty traps, we embed the mechanism in a business cycle
model. We calibrate the model to the United States economy and find that endogenous uncertainty
increases the depth and duration of recessions, particularly after large shocks. We also find that
our full model is able to better explain the behavior of standard macro aggregates during the Great
Recession than alternative models.
   We believe that the novel channel proposed in this paper is important for several reasons.
First, the emphasis on subjective uncertainty — and beliefs about fundamentals in particular —
implies that not only exogenous volatility shocks, but also other sources of uncertainty, matter for
the economy. Thus, we view recent empirical work using survey data on forecasts or consumer
and business expectations as an important step towards a more complete understanding of the
role of uncertainty in business cycles. Second, we believe that our framework may be useful as
a theoretical benchmark for empirical and quantitative studies seeking to estimate the direct and
feedback effects of uncertainty on economic activity. Despite the multiplicity of regimes and strong
non-linearities, the model features a single competitive equilibrium, which makes it amenable to
applied work. Third, we have shown that allowing uncertainty to fluctuate endogenously leads
to a significant propagation and amplification mechanism. The type of non-linearities and the
multiplicity in regimes that we obtain may be of broader interest for business cycle modeling in
general and could also shed light on some particularly large historical downturns.
   For the sake of clarity, we have exposited the mechanism in a purposely simple framework, but
a number of generalizations may be worth investigating. In particular, it would be interesting to
understand how uncertainty traps interact with frictions that could magnify their impact, such as
financial frictions, demand externalities, or belief heterogeneity. We leave these questions to future
research.




                                                 38
References
Amador, M. and P.-O. Weill (2010): “Learning from Prices: Public Communication and
  Welfare,” Journal of Political Economy, 118.

Angeletos, G.-M., C. Hellwig, and A. Pavan (2007): “Dynamic global games of regime
  change: Learning, multiplicity, and the timing of attacks,” Econometrica, 75, 711–756.

Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. Kehoe (2012): “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in Un-
  certainty,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and NBER; Arizona State
  University; University of Minnesota and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bachmann, R. and C. Bayer (2013): “Wait-and-See Business Cycles?” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 60, 704–719.

——— (2014): “Investment Dispersion and the Business Cycle,” The American Economic Review,
  104, pp. 1392–1416.

Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. R. Sims (2013): “Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
  Evidence from Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 217–
  49.

Bachmann, R. and G. Moscarini (2011): “Business cycles and endogenous uncertainty,”
  manuscript, Yale University, July.

Banerjee, A. V. (1992): “A simple model of herd behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  107, 797–817.

Barro, R. J. (2006): “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 823–866.

Barro, R. J. and J. F. Ursúa (2012): “Rare Macroeconomic Disasters,” Annual Review of
  Economics, 4, 83–109.

Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (1997): “Returns to scale in US production: Estimates and impli-
  cations,” Journal of political economy, 105, 249–283.

Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2006): “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,” The
  American Economic Review, 96, 1293–1307.

Benhabib, J., P. Wang, and Y. Wen (2015): “Sentiments and Aggregate Demand Fluctua-
  tions,” Econometrica, 83, 549–585.

Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch (1992): “A theory of fads, fashion, custom,
  and cultural change as informational cascades,” Journal of political Economy, 992–1026.



                                                 39
——— (1998): “Learning from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cas-
  cades,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12, pp. 151–170.

Bloom, N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77, 623–685.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2012): “Re-
  ally Uncertain Business Cycles,” Nber working paper no.18245, NBER.

Canova, F. (1998): “Detrending and business cycle facts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 41,
  475 – 512.

Caplin, A. and J. Leahy (1993): “Sectoral shocks, learning, and aggregate fluctuations,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 60, 777–794.

Carlsson, M. (2007): “Investment and Uncertainty: A Theory-based Empirical Approach,” Ox-
  ford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 69, 603–617.

Chamley, C. (1999): “Coordinating regime switches,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114,
  869–905.

——— (2004): “Delays and equilibria with large and small information in social learning,” European
  Economic Review, 48, 477 – 501.

Chamley, C. and D. Gale (1994): “Information revelation and strategic delay in a model of
  investment,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1065–1085.

Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011): “Are micro and macro labor
  supply elasticities consistent? A review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins,” The
  American Economic Review, 101, 471–475.

Cogley, T. and J. M. Nason (1995a): “Effects of the Hodrick-Prescott filter on trend and
  difference stationary time series Implications for business cycle research,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and control, 19, 253–278.

——— (1995b): “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle Models,” The American Economic
  Review, 85, pp. 492–511.

Decker, R. A. and P. N. D’Erasmo (2016): “Market exposure and endogenous firm volatility
  over the business cycle,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8, 148–198.

Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994): Investment under uncertainty, Princeton university
  press.

Dontchev, A. L. and R. T. Rockafellar (2009): “Implicit functions and solution mappings,”
  Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer, 194.



                                                40
Farmer, R. (2013): “Animal Spirits, Financial Crises and Persistent Unemployment,” Economic
  Journal, 123, 317–340.

Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015): “The Next Generation of the Penn
  World Table,” American Economic Review, 105, 3150–3182.

Fernald, J. G. (2014): “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity,”
  Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (1995): “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
  Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, pp.
  1176–1209.

Gabaix, X. (2012): “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
  Macro-Finance*,” The Quarterly journal of economics, 127, 645–700.

Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajšek (2014): “Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
  investment dynamics,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gourio, F. (2012): “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, 102, 2734–
  66.

Guiso, L. and F. Schivardi (2007): “Spillovers in Industrial Districts,” The Economic Journal,
  117, pp. 68–93.

Hansen, B. E. (2000): “Testing for structural change in conditional models,” Journal of Econo-
 metrics, 97, 93–115.

Hodrick, R. J. and E. C. Prescott (1997): “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
  Investigation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29, 1–16.

Jaimovich, N. and S. Rebelo (2009): “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?”
  American Economic Review, 99, 1097–1118.

Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015): “Measuring uncertainty,” American Econon-
  mic Review, 105, 1177–1216.

Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2013): “Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unemployment
  Fluctuations,” .

Kehrig, M. (2011): “The cyclicality of productivity dispersion,” US Census Bureau Center for
  Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-11-15.

Kim, T. (1993): “Differentiability of the Value Function,” .

King, R. G. and S. T. Rebelo (1993): “Low frequency filtering and real business cycles,”
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 207 – 231.

                                                41
Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2015): “The Tail that Wags the
  Economy: Belief-Driven Business Cycles and Persistent Stagnation,” Working paper.

Lang, W. W. and L. I. Nakamura (1990): “The dynamics of credit markets in a model with
  learning,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 26, 305 – 318.

Lucas, R. E. (1972): “Expectations and the neutrality of money,” Journal of Economic Theory,
  4, 103 – 124.

Lucas Jr, R. E. (1978): “On the size distribution of business firms,” The Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 508–523.

Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (1998): “Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency
  attacks,” American Economic Review, 587–597.

——— (1999): “A theory of the onset of currency attacks,” The Asian Financial Crisis, 230.

Ordoñez, G. L. (2009): “Larger crises, slower recoveries: the asymmetric effects of financial
  frictions,” Tech. rep., Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Orlik, A. and L. Veldkamp (2013): “Understanding Uncertainty Shocks and the Role of Black
  Swans,” working paper.

Ravn, M. O. and H. Uhlig (2002): “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the Frequency
  of Observations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 371–376.

Rob, R. (1991): “Learning and capacity expansion under demand uncertainty,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 58, 655–675.

Schaal, E. (2015): “Uncertainty and Unemployment,” working paper, New York University.

Schaal, E. and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2015): “Coordinating Business Cycles,” working
  paper.

Stokey, N. L. (2008): The Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control models with fixed costs,
  Princeton University Press.

Stokey, N. L., E. C. Prescott, and R. E. Lucas (1989): Recursive methods in economic dy-
  namics / Nancy L. Stokey and Robert E. Lucas, Jr., with Edward C. Prescott, Harvard University
  Press Cambridge, Mass.

Straub, L. and R. Ulbricht (2015):            “Endogenous Uncertainty and Credit Crunches,”
  manuscript.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2006): “Learning asymmetries in real business
  cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 753–772.


                                               42
Vavra, J. (2014): “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss
  Interpretation*.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129.

Veldkamp, L. L. (2005): “Slow boom, sudden crash,” Journal of Economic Theory, 124, 230–257.

Zeira, J. (1994): “Informational cycles,” The Review of Economic Studies, 61, 31–44.




                                              43
A     Data and detrending
    This appendix details the sources of data used throughout the paper and the way in which the
data is detrended.

A.1    The sources of data
    This section lists the data sources that we use for the measurement of uncertainty and for the
quantitative exercises. As one the main time series we use, the number of firms, begins in 1978, we
limit our analysis to the post-1978 period.

    • Our benchmark series for Total Factor Productivity in the US is the quarterly Business Sector
      TFP, adjusted for capacity utilization, from Fernald (2014) over the period 1978:Q1-2015:Q1
      and seasonally adjusted.

    • From the Bureau of Economic Analysis, we use the quarterly Real Gross Domestic Product
      (Fred: GDPC1), Real Gross Private Domestic Investment (Fred: GPDIC1) and the Real
      Personal Consumption Expenditure (Fred: PCECC96) over the period 1978:Q1-2015:Q3 and
      seasonally adjusted.

    • Our measure of total labor is the quarterly Nonfarm Business Sector: Hours of All Persons
      (Fred: HOANBS) measure from the Bureau of Labor statistics over the period 1978:Q1-
      2015:Q1 and seasonally adjusted.

    • For data about firm dynamics, we use the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census
      Bureau. This data is available at an annual frequency from 1978 to 2013.

    • We use two series from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). First, as a proxy for un-
      certainty, we use the mean probability forecasts (PRGDP) which provides an average across
      forecasters for the probability that the current annual-average over past annual-average per-
      cent change in real GDP falls in a particular bin. We compute the standard deviation of
      this probability distribution. The time series covers the period 1992:Q1-2015:Q1. Second, to
      calibrate the beliefs during the Great Recession, we use the mean forecasts for the level of
      real GDP.

    • We use the uncertainty series H1, H3 and H12 constructed by Jurado et al. (2015) over the
      period 1960:Q3-2014:Q4.

    • We use the VXO time series from the Chicago Board Options Exchange over the period
      1986:Q1-2014:Q2 averaged over monthly periods.

    • We use the Michigan Survey of Consumers over the period 1960:Q1-2015:Q1 and construct
      series with the number of respondents answering “Uncertain Future” as the main reason why
      it is a bad time to purchase big household goods.


                                                 44
   • To verify the robustness of our empirical exercise about the 2007-2009 US recession we also
       use two alternative measures of total factor productivity. The first one is the Penn World
       Table Total Factor Productivity at Constant National Prices for the United States (Fred:
       RTFPNAUSA632NRUG). This data is currently only available at an annual frequency and
       until 2011. The second productivity times series we use is the Bureau of Labor Statistics Net
       Multifactor Productivity for the Private Business Sector. This data is currently only available
       at an annual frequency from 1987 to 2014.

A.2     Discussion of the Detrending Strategy
    We consider how alternative ways of detrending the data affect the observed persistence of the
Great Recession and discuss our choice for the filter used in Sections 5.3 and 5.5.
    Figure 11 shows four of the main data series used in Section 5: output, TFP, labor and the
number of firms. For each series, we show the trends generated by three different filters: i) the
brown dashed line is the trend generated by a standard Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter;35 ii) the
dot-dashed pink line is the best-fitting linear trend between 1978:Q1 and the last quarter before
the beginning of the Great Recession in 2007:Q3; and iii) the solid blue line is the best linear fit
generated by a least-square estimation with a structural break in the coefficients (see details below).
Figure 12 shows the detrended data corresponding to each trend.




  35
     We follow Ravn and Uhlig (2002) and use a filter with smoothing parameter of 1600 for quarterly data and 6.25
for annual data. A bandpass filter provides results similar to the HP filter (see Canova (1998)).


                                                       45
                           (a) Real output                                     (b) TFP adjusted for capacity utilization




 9.5                                                              0.8




  9                                          Data
                                             HP ﬁlter
                                                                  0.6
                                             Long trend
                                             Structural break


       1980         1990            2000             2010               1980           1990          2000          2010


                           (c) Total hours                                               (d) Number of firms




4.75                                                             15.5




 4.5                                                            15.25




     1980          1990            2000           2010              1980             1990          2000           2010
 Notes: The black solid line represents the data. The solid blue line is the trend from the structural break estimation. The
 dashed blue line represents the estimated fit of the structural break. The brown dashed line represents the trend from the
 Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter with parameter 1600 for quarterly data and 100 for annual data.

                             Figure 11: Raw data and the trends from various filtering




                                                                  46
                       (a) Real output                             (b) TFP Fernald adjusted for capacity utilization

                                                                 0.05

     0



                         HP ﬁlter                                  0
   -0.1                  Long trend
                         Structural break



          1980       1990           2000         2010          -0.05


                                                                        1980       1990         2000          2010


                       (c) Total Hours                                           (d) Number of firms




                                                                   0
     0




   -0.1
                                                                 -0.1




   -0.2
        1980        1990           2000          2010                 1980         1990         2000         2010
Notes: The pink dashed line represents the data detrended with the linear trend from 1978:Q1 to 2007:Q3. The solid blue line
represents the data detrended with the structural break estimation. The brown dashed line represents the data detrended
with the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter with parameter 1600 for quarterly data and 100 for annual data. The shaded area
corresponds to the 2007Q4 - 2009:Q2 NBER recession

                                Figure 12: The data detrended by various filters




    A comparison between raw output data in Figure 11a and the HP-filtered output data in Figure
12a suggests that the HP-filtered data does not properly reflect either the depth or the persistence
of the Great Recession. The HP-filtered data implies that the Great Recession was a mild economic
downturn and that the economy promptly recovered to its long-run state. These features of the
HP-filtered data clearly miss the important characteristics of the Great Recession that make it
unique by historical standards, as the raw data shows in Figure 12a.36 Therefore, we consider that
the alternative linear filters better reflect the depth and persistence of the recession observed in the
raw data.

    36
       See King and Rebelo (1993) and Cogley and Nason (1995a) for a discussion of various drawbacks of the HP
filter.


                                                            47
    The raw data also suggests the possibility of a change in the trend at the time of the Great
Recession. This observation is confirmed by the fact that the economy keeps moving away from
its historical linear trend over the period 2009-2015, as seen in Panel (a). We therefore consider a
third linear filter that authorizes a break in the trend. The estimation (Hansen, 2000) finds that a
structural break in output occurred during the second quarter of 2008. We use the same break point
to detrend the other time series.37 This filtering strategy delivers a middle ground between the
very fast recovery suggested by the HP filter and the very protracted and ongoing decline implied
by the linear trend. We thus use the linear detrending with a structural break as our benchmark,
and we replicate the Great-Recession exercise using the simple linear trend in one of the sensitivity
checks of Section C.

A.3      Filters used in various part of the paper
    • In accordance with our calibration strategy which targets moments over 1978:Q1 to 2007:Q3,
        we use the Fernald TFP data adjusted for capacity utilization and linearly detrended over
        the same period.

    • For the benchmark Great Recession exercise of Section 5.5 we use the data detrended with the
        structural break approach described in the previous section. We compute the linear trend of
        the data before and after the 2008:Q2 structural break estimated from the output time series.
        Using balanced-growth path arguments, we detrend consumption and investment using the
        same trend as output.38 Since the data about the number of firms is at an annual frequency
        and that very few data points are after the break date, we detrend the number of firms using
        the linear trend from 1978:Q1 to 2007:Q3.39

    • In the robustness exercises of section C in which we use different TFP series, we detrend all
        series as in the benchmark exercise except the PWT and BLS data. These data are annual
        and have very few data points after the structural break such any trend estimation would be
        meaningless. We instead detrend these data using the 1978:Q1-2007:Q3 linear trend.




   37
       As a robustness, we have also estimated structural break points independently on each variable. In most cases,
the estimation suggests that the break occurred around the time of the recession. An exception is the time series for
hours, which implies a break around 2000. We do not use the structural break detrending for the number of firms,
the Penn World Table TFP and the Bureau of Labor Statistics TFP. See the next section for details.
    38
       By the resource constraint, the long-run growth rate of consumption and investment should be the same. We
have also done the whole Great Recession exercise with consumption and investment data detrended independently.
The differences with the benchmark are small. In both case, the mechanism generates substantial amplification and
persistence over the RBC and fixed θ-uncertainty models.
    39
       We have also replicated the Great Recession exercise using the number of firms data detrended with the structural
break procedure. The only difference is that m recuperates slightly in this case, as seen in figure 12d. The mechanism
still generates substantial amplification and persistence over the RBC and fixed θ-uncertainty models.


                                                          48
B      Numerical Algorithm
    This appendix describes the numerical algorithm used to compute the equilibrium in the quan-
titative model. The algorithm combines two loops. The outer loop iterates over the laws of motion
for beliefs and the aggregate mass of entering firms. The inner loop iterates over the capital accu-
mulation decision of the firms. We index outer loop iterations by k and inner loop iterations by l.
The steps are as follows:

    1. Initialize k = 0.

    2. Guess a law of motion for entry n(k) (µ, γ, K, m)

    3. Beginning of the outer loop

        (a) From n(k) , compute the laws of motion of m and of the beliefs µ′ and γ ′ .
        (b) Beginning of the inner loop. Set l = 0.
               i. Guess aggregate consumption C(l) (µ, γ, K, m, θ, f )
              ii. Compute the right-hand-side of the firms’ first-order condition for capital accumu-
                 lation as a function of K ′40
                             h                                                           i
                 RHS K ′ = βE Uc C(l)
                                  ′
                                      , L′ αωA 1 + θ ′ m1−ω K ′αω−1 L′(1−α)ω + 1 − δK | µ, γ
                                                     


             iii. Using a nonlinear solver, find the value K ′ that solves the firms’ first-order condition
                 for capital accumulation
                      h                                                           i
                     E Uc A (1 + θ) K αω L(1−α)ω + (1 − δK ) K − mf − K ′ , L | µ, γ = RHS K ′
                                                                                               


             iv. Using the resource constraint, compute the corresponding current consumption
                 C(l+1) , move to the next inner iteration l → l + 1 and return to step i) with the new
                 guess for consumption. Repeat until C converges.
        (c) Compute the value of waiting and the value of entering for the firms. Find the equilibrium
            entry decision n(k+1) (µ, γ, K, m). Move to the next outer iteration k → k + 1 and return
            to step a) with the new guess on n.
        (d) Repeat until n converges.


C      Sensitivity Analysis on the Great Recession Exercise
    This appendix evaluates the robustness of the Great Recession exercise of Section 5 by relaxing
or modifying various assumptions. In Figure 13, we repeat the exercise by matching the full time

    40
       GHH preferences give us an analytical solution from labor supply as a function of the state space. Also, since
all firms make the same decision we already use K = mk.


                                                         49
                                                     Full        Fixed θ-uncertainty           RBC
                     A. Depth
                       Benchmark                    -7.8%                 -6.0%               -2.6%
                       Full TFP fit                 -6.2%                 -3.8%               -2.6%
                       Linear detrending            -7.3%                 -6.2%               -2.9%
                       PWT TFP                      -8.0%                 -7.2%               -5.5%
                       BLS TFP                      -7.3%                 -6.2%               -3.5%
                       CRRA Preferences             -3.9%                 -3.9%               -1.9%
                     B. 20% Recovery
                       Benchmark                  2015:Q1              2012:Q4               2009:Q3
                       Full TFP fit               2012:Q1              2009:Q4               2009:Q1
                       Linear detrending         >2015:Q1              2013:Q3               2013:Q3
                       PWT TFP                   >2015:Q1              >2015:Q1              2014:Q1
                       BLS TFP                   >2015:Q1              2015:Q1               2014:Q2
                       CRRA Preferences           2012:Q2              2010:Q3               2008:Q3
Notes: We compute the depth and the duration of the recession from its official beginning in 2007:Q4 as determined by the
NBER. The depth of the recession corresponds to the fall in output and the duration to the number of quarters until output
reaches its lowest value.

Table 7: The depth and duration of the Great Recession as predicted by the three models in each
of robustness exercise


series of TFP instead of only the NBER recession period 2007-2009. In Figure 14, we use a standard
linear detrending on the data instead of relying on a linear detrending with a structural break. In
Figure 15, we use the TFP data from the Penn World Table instead of the capacity adjusted
measure of Fernald. In Figure 16, we use the TFP data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics instead
of the capacity adjusted measure of Fernald. In Figure 17, we use standard CRRA preferences
instead of the GHH preferences. In all cases, we find that our full model generates a deeper and
longer recession than the fixed θ-uncertainty and RBC alternatives. Table 7 shows the depth and
the duration of the recession in the three models under all alternative exercises. Table 5 shows the
cumulative losses.
    The last exercise makes clear the reasons that pushed us to adopt GHH preferences as our
benchmark. As in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009), negative signals have peculiar implications in a
model with wealth effects on the labor supply. Here, as the agents receive bad signals about the
fundamental, they supply more labor relative to the economy with GHH preferences, and cut down
on investment. As a result, consumption counterfactually rises for a short period of time. Other
aggregates behaves roughly as in the data. In particular, our full model still explains a deeper and
longer recession in output than the fixed θ-uncertainty and RBC alternatives.




                                                            50
                               (a) TFP                                                                  (b) TFP

       0                                                                       0


   -0.05                                                                    -0.05
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (c) Forecast Y                                                           (d) Forecast Y
    0.05                                                                    0.05

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015            2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (e) Output Y                                                             (f) Output Y
    0.05                                                                    0.05

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                        (g) Investment I                                                         (h) Investment I

       0                                                                       0
    -0.2                                                                     -0.2
    -0.4                                                                     -0.4

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                             (i) Labor L                                                              (j) Labor L

       0                                                                       0

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (k) Consumption C                                                         (l) Consumption C

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (m) Mass of firms m                                                      (n) Mass of firms m
       0                                                                       0


    -0.1                                                                     -0.1

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                (o) Uncertainty about growth                                             (p) Uncertainty about growth
     0.4                                                                     0.4

     0.2                                                                     0.2

       0                                                                       0
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
Notes: The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

                       Figure 13: Great Recession - Fitting the full time series of TFP




                                                                       51
                               (a) TFP                                                                  (b) TFP

       0                                                                       0


   -0.05                                                                    -0.05
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                            (c) Forecast Y                                                           (d) Forecast Y

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015            2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                            (e) Output Y                                                             (f) Output Y
       0                                                                       0


    -0.1                                                                     -0.1


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                        (g) Investment I                                                         (h) Investment I

       0                                                                       0

    -0.2                                                                     -0.2

    -0.4                                                                     -0.4

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                             (i) Labor L                                                              (j) Labor L
       0                                                                       0


    -0.1                                                                     -0.1


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                      (k) Consumption C                                                         (l) Consumption C

       0                                                                       0

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                      (m) Mass of firms m                                                      (n) Mass of firms m
       0                                                                       0


    -0.1                                                                     -0.1

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags

                (o) Uncertainty about growth                                             (p) Uncertainty about growth
     0.4                                                                     0.4

     0.2                                                                     0.2

       0                                                                       0
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                    Lags
Notes: The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

                 Figure 14: Great Recession - linear detrending over 1978:Q1 to 2007:Q3




                                                                       52
                               (a) TFP                                                                   (b) TFP

       0                                                                        0


  -0.025                                                                    -0.025
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (c) Forecast Y                                                            (d) Forecast Y

       0                                                                        0

   -0.05                                                                     -0.05

    -0.1                                                                      -0.1
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (e) Output Y                                                              (f) Output Y
       0                                                                        0


   -0.05                                                                     -0.05


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                        (g) Investment I                                                          (h) Investment I

       0                                                                        0

    -0.2                                                                      -0.2

    -0.4                                                                      -0.4

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                             (i) Labor L                                                               (j) Labor L

       0                                                                        0

    -0.1                                                                      -0.1


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (k) Consumption C                                                          (l) Consumption C

       0                                                                        0

   -0.05                                                                     -0.05


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (m) Mass of firms m                                                       (n) Mass of firms m
       0                                                                        0


    -0.1                                                                      -0.1

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                (o) Uncertainty about growth                                              (p) Uncertainty about growth
     0.4                                                                       0.4

     0.2                                                                       0.2

       0                                                                        0
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015             2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
Notes: The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

                     Figure 15: Great Recession - TFP data from the Penn World Table




                                                                       53
                               (a) TFP                                                                  (b) TFP
    0.02                                                                    0.02

       0                                                                       0

   -0.02                                                                    -0.02
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (c) Forecast Y                                                           (d) Forecast Y

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015            2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (e) Output Y                                                             (f) Output Y
       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015            2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                        (g) Investment I                                                         (h) Investment I

       0                                                                       0

    -0.2                                                                     -0.2

    -0.4                                                                     -0.4

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                             (i) Labor L                                                              (j) Labor L

       0                                                                       0

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (k) Consumption C                                                         (l) Consumption C

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (m) Mass of firms m                                                      (n) Mass of firms m
       0                                                                       0


    -0.1                                                                     -0.1

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                (o) Uncertainty about growth                                             (p) Uncertainty about growth
     0.4                                                                     0.4

     0.2                                                                     0.2

       0                                                                       0
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
Notes: The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

              Figure 16: Great Recession - TFP data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics




                                                                       54
                               (a) TFP                                                                  (b) TFP

       0                                                                       0


   -0.05                                                                    -0.05
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (c) Forecast Y                                                           (d) Forecast Y

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015            2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                            (e) Output Y                                                             (f) Output Y
       0                                                                       0


   -0.05                                                                    -0.05


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                        (g) Investment I                                                         (h) Investment I

       0                                                                       0

    -0.2                                                                     -0.2

    -0.4                                                                     -0.4

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                             (i) Labor L                                                              (j) Labor L

       0                                                                       0

    -0.1                                                                     -0.1


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (k) Consumption C                                                         (l) Consumption C

       0                                                                       0

   -0.05                                                                    -0.05


       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                      (m) Mass of firms m                                                      (n) Mass of firms m
       0                                                                       0


    -0.1                                                                     -0.1

       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015



                (o) Uncertainty about growth                                             (p) Uncertainty about growth
     0.4                                                                     0.4

     0.2                                                                     0.2

       0                                                                       0
       2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
Notes: The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

                                    Figure 17: Great Recession - CRRA preferences




                                                                       55
D       The 1981-1982 Recession
Figure 18 repeats the Great Recession exercise for the 1981-1982 recession. We do not include the
behavior of uncertainty about real output growth as that period is not covered by the SPF data.41



                           (a) TFP                                                         (b) TFP

       0                                                                0

  -0.025                                                            -0.025

              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985



                        (c) Forecast Y                                                  (d) Forecast Y
    0.05                                                             0.05

       0                                                                0

    -0.05                                                            -0.05

              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985



                        (e) Output Y                                                     (f) Output Y
    0.05                                                             0.05

       0                                                                0

    -0.05                                                            -0.05

              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985



                      (g) Investment I                                                  (h) Investment I

       0                                                                0

     -0.2                                                             -0.2

              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985



                         (i) Labor L                                                      (j) Labor L
    0.05                                                             0.05


       0                                                                0


    -0.05                                                            -0.05
              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985



                     (k) Consumption C                                              (l) Consumption C
    0.05                                                             0.05

       0                                                                0

    -0.05                                                            -0.05
              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985



                     (m) Mass of firms m                                            (n) Mass of firms m
    0.05                                                             0.05


       0                                                                0


    -0.05                                                            -0.05
              1982          1983          1984          1985                 1982           1983           1984    1985

Notes: The left column shows the data while the right column shows the models. In the right column, the solid curves show
the full model, the dashed brown curves show fixed θ-uncertainty model and the dot-dash pink curves show the RBC model.
All figures are in log deviation from trend. The scales are the same in both columns.

                                           Figure 18: 1981-1982 Recession
   41
      The SPF does have data about GNP growth over that period but a change from nominal to real GNP growth
in the middle of the sample (1981Q3) prevents us from using this series.


                                                               56
E       Further Applications
E.1         Uncertainty shocks
    Figure 19 displays the impact of an uncertainty shock on the economy. We model this shock as
an exogenous zero-probability event that raises uncertainty and that agents do not anticipate. The
shock corresponds to a 100% increase in the standard deviation of the beliefs about the growth of
output one year ahead.42

                   (a) Precision of beliefs γ                                         (b) Output Y

    3000                                                              0

    2000

    1000
                                                                   -0.01

            0    10       20      30      40       50    60                0   10      20      30      40      50       60

Notes: Evolution of the economy in the full model after an exogenous 100% increase in the standard deviation of the beliefs
about the output growth one year ahead. Figure (a) is in level while Figure (b) is in log deviation from trend.

                               Figure 19: Impact of an exogenous uncertainty shock



E.2         Social planner
    Figure 20 shows the response of the economy to a 5% negative shock to µ in the competitive
equilibrium and in the planner’s allocation.


                      (a) Mean beliefs µ                                        (b) Precision of beliefs γ
       0
                                                                   3000



    -0.05                                                          2000

            0    10       20      30      40       50    60                0   10      20      30      40      50       60




                         (c) Output Y                                               (d) Mass of firms m
       0                                                              0


                                                                   -0.05
    -0.05
                                                                    -0.1

            0    10       20      30      40       50    60                0   10      20      30      40      50       60

Notes: The solid curves show the evolution of the economy according to competitive equilibrium of the full model, while the
dashed curves show the evolution of the economy under the social planner’s allocation. Figures (c) and (d) are in log
deviation from trend, the other figures are in level.

Figure 20: Response of the competitive equilibrium and the planner’s allocation to a one period
-5% shock to µ.



   42
      Uncertainty shocks of this magnitude is not uncommon in the uncertainty-driven business cycle literature. See
Bloom et al. (2012).


                                                              57
   E.3         Autocorrelograms of output and TFP growth
            Our benchmark model improves on the RBC model in terms of the propagation of shocks. As
   noted by Cogley and Nason (1995b), the RBC model features weak persistence in GDP growth.
   We repeat their exercise in Figure 21. Panel (a), showing the autocorrelograms of output and TFP
   growth in US data, implies that output growth is more persistent than TFP growth for smaller
   lags. The difference is also statistically significant at the 95% level. Panel (b) displays the same
   autocorrelograms in data generated by the RBC model and by our full model; because of the
   very long simulations, the error bands from model-generated autocorrelograms are essentially zero.
   Similarly to Cogley and Nason (1995b), the autocorrelogram of output growth in the RBC model
   mirrors that of TFP growth. In our full model, however, the persistence in output growth is larger
   than in TFP growth, and more so at lower lags. Hence, even though our model replicates only a
   fraction of the autocorrelation observed in the data, it does reproduce the qualitative feature of the
   data that the autocorrelation of GDP growth is larger than that of TFP growth at various lags.
   We interpret this finding as evidence that endogenous uncertainty leads to a more persistent series
   for output growth relative to TFP growth, in line with the baseline theory.


 0.5                                                                 0.5
                                   TFP growth
                                                                                                    TFP growth model
                                   GDP growth
                                                                                                    Output growth model
                                   GDP: 95% error bands at 0
0.25                                                                0.25                            TFP growth RBC
                                   TFP: 95% error bands at 0
                                                                                                    Output growth RBC



   0                                                                    0




-0.25                                                              -0.25
        1       2    3      4          5    6       7          8            1   2    3       4          5    6       7      8
                                Lags                                                             Lags

   Notes. (a) The solid line is the autocorrelogram of the log GDP growth. We use the seasonally adjusted real GDP series from
   1978:Q1 to 2015:Q1 from the Bureau of Economic Analysis after linearly detrending with a structural break in 2008:Q2 (see
   Appendix (A)). The dashed line is the autocorrelogram of the log of TFP growth using the capacity-adjusted measure from
   Fernald (2014), similarly detrended. The error bands show the 95% confidence interval at 0; (b) For comparison, both the RBC
   and the benchmark models are simulated with θ shocks only.

                                   Figure 21: Autocorrelogram of output and TFP



   E.4         Heterogeneous cost of entry
       We consider the impact of heterogeneous costs of entry on the dynamics of the model. To do
   so, we assume that firms must pay a cost fh ∼ N 0, σh2 when they enter. As a result, the entry
                                                          

   decision is characterized by an equilibrium threshold such that only firms with fixed costs lower
   than the threshold enter. Figure 22 shows how changes in the dispersion of these fixed costs affect
   the response of the economy to a −5% shock to µ. When the dispersion of these shocks is relatively

                                                                   58
small, as in the left panel, the economy behaves similarly to the benchmark model. However,
when the dispersion gets bigger, as in the right panel, the importance of aggregate uncertainty as a
determinant of firm entry is reduced, as firms pay more attention to their idiosyncratic cost shock.
In this case, the endogenous uncertainty about aggregate productivity is less important.

          (a) Output under small dispersion of costs σh                           (b) Output under large dispersion of costs σh
          0                                                                      0

  -0.025                                                                     -0.025

    -0.05                                       Fixed uncertainty             -0.05                               Fixed uncertainty
                                                Full model                                                        Full model

              0    10      20           30      40        50       60                 0        10    20    30     40      50      60

Notes: Evolution of output in the full model and the fixed θ-uncertainty model after a -5% shock to µ. The small shock is such
that σh /f¯ = 2% while the large shock is such that σh /f¯ = 4%.

                                    Figure 22: Impact of heterogenous costs of entry



F         Proofs
     This section presents the proofs of the various lemmas and propositions stated in the paper.
These proofs consider the limit version of the model as N → ∞, so that the fraction of investing
firms is deterministic, i.e., n = F (f c ).43

F.1           Lemmas 1 and 2
     We start with the proofs of Lemmas 1 and 2, which characterize the laws governing the evolution
of beliefs.
Lemma 1 (Full). For a given fraction of investing firms n, the mean of beliefs µ follows an AR(1)
process with time-varying volatility s,

                                                               ′
                                                          µ = ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε,
                                                    1
                                1           1         2
where s (n, γ) = ρθ             γ   −   γ+γz +nγx         and ε ∼ N (0, 1). In addition, sn > 0, sγ 6 0, snn 6 0,
                                                                                      1
sγγ 6 0, while the sign of snγ (n, γ) is positive for γ 6                             2   (γz + nγx ) and negative otherwise.
Proof. We use (2), (3) and (4) to compute the mean and the variance of the next period mean
beliefs µ′ given current-period information (µ, γ), and the fraction of investing firms n,

                                             E µ′ |µ, γ, n = ρθ µ,
                                                         
                                                                                 
                                                                   1       1
                                             V µ′ |µ, γ, n = ρ2θ
                                                         
                                                                     −              .
                                                                   γ γ + γz + nγx

Being the sum of normally distributed variables, µ′ is also normally distributed and can therefore
                                           1
                 ′             1      1      2
be expressed as µ = ρθ µ + ρθ γ − γ+γz +nγx    ε with ε ∼ N (0, 1). The sign of the first and second
    43
         Proofs in the finite N case are available upon request.


                                                                        59
derivatives of s (n, γ) are derived in Lemma 3 in the Online Appendix. In particular,
                                                                           1
                                                 ρθ γx                    γ2
                       sn (n, γ) =                         1                           3   > 0,
                                           2 (γz + nγx ) 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2
                                                                  1
                                             ρθ (γz + nγz ) 2 2γ + γz + nγx
                       sγ (n, γ) = −                           3                 3 6 0.
                                                    2        γ 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2



Lemma 2 (Full). The law of motion of the precision γ,
                                                                                           −1
                                                     ρ2θ
                                            
                                                             + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                      
                               Γ (n, γ) =                                                        ,             (5)
                                                γ + γz + nγx

satisfies the following:

  1. Γ is infinitely differentiable over R2+ and increases with n and γ: Γn > 0 and Γγ > 0. In
      addition, Γnn 6 0, Γnγ 6 0 and Γγγ 6 0.

  2. For a given n, there exists a unique positive fixed point γ (n) in the precision of beliefs such
      that γ (n) = Γ (n, γ (n)). The function γ (n) is strictly increasing in n.

Proof. 1. The infinite differentiability follows from inspection of equation 5. The first and second
derivatives of Γ are derived in Lemma 3 in the Online Appendix. In particular, we have

                                                         ρ2θ γx                    2
                                   Γn (n, γ) =                        2 Γ (n, γ)       > 0,
                                                 (γ + γz + nγx )

                                                          ρ2θ
                                   Γγ (n, γ) =                            Γ (n, γ)2 > 0,
                                                 (γ + γz + nγx )2
as well as Γnn 6 0, Γγγ 6 0, and Γnγ 6 0.
   2. Given n, existence and uniqueness of a positive fixed point follows from noting that all the
fixed points γ must satisfy
                                                           
                               2            1                             1
                       0 = γ + γ γz + nγx − 2                     −           (γz + nγx ) .
                                           σθ                         1 − ρ2θ σθ2

Because the quadratic function of γ on the right-hand side is convex in γ and negative at γ = 0, it
necessarily has a unique positive root γ (n). Differentiating the above equation with respect to n,
we obtain
                                                                                                     !
                           ′           ′          1                                          1
              0 = 2γ (n) γ (n) + γ (n) γz + nγx − 2                       + γx   γ (n) −                   ,
                                                                                         1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                                                
                                                 σθ




                                                           60
                                                                                 
                                           γx                   1
which tells us that γ ′ (n) =     2γ(n)+γz +nγx −1/σθ2
                                                                           − γ (n) . To see that γ ′ (n) > 0, note that
                                                             (1−ρ2θ )σθ2

                             1            ρ2θ
                                                    + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2 > 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                          
                                 =
                           γ (n)   γ (n) + γz + nγx

and
                         1            ρ2θ                       ρ2
                                                + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2 < θ + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2 ,
                                                                          
                             =
                       γ (n)   γ (n) + γz + nγx                γ (n)
                 1                    1
which implies   σθ2
                      < γ (n) <                 .
                                  (1−ρ2θ )σθ2

F.2    Reformulation
   To simplify the characterization of an equilibrium, we reformulate the problem of the firm in
terms of a single mapping that characterizes the investment cutoff f c . From the main text, the
optimal investment strategy is to invest if and only if f 6 f c (µ, γ) where

                                          f c (µ, γ) = V I (µ, γ) − V W (µ, γ) .

Substituting the value for V W (µ, γ) from 7,

                 f c (µ, γ) = V I (µ, γ) − βE max V W µ′ , γ ′ , V I µ′ , γ ′ − f ′ .
                                                                               


Subtracting the value V I (µ′ , γ ′ ) − f ′ from the max operator and using the definition of f c (µ, γ),
we obtain that the following recursive mapping must be satisfied by the optimal cutoff

                            f c (µ, γ) = S (µ, γ) − βE max f ′ − f c µ′ , γ ′ , 0 ,
                                                                            
                                                                                                                        (25)

where S (µ, γ) = V I (µ, γ) − βE V I (µ′ , γ ′ ) − f ′ is the opportunity cost of delaying investment for
                                                     

one period gross of the fixed cost f . In particular, using (4), (5) and the law of iterated expectations,
we have
                                                                                         2 1−ρ2
                                                                                                                  
                          1                1 −aµ+ a2γ2                       a(1−ρθ )µ− a2     θ +a
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                        (1−ρ2θ )σθ2 ,
           S (µ, γ) ≡       (1 − β) + βµf − e                        1 − βe                  γ     2                    (26)
                          a                a

where µf is the mean of the fixed cost distribution, as introduced in the main text.
Remark. Note that the equilibrium cutoff function f c (µ, γ) is enough to fully characterize the
equilibrium. Given this function, we can recover all the other equilibrium objects. For all (µ, γ),

                      V W (µ, γ) = V I (µ, γ) − f c (µ, γ) ,
                        V (µ, γ) = βE V I µ′ , γ ′ − f ′ + max f ′ − f c µ′ , γ ′ , 0 .
                                                                               


whereas the fraction of investing firms is n = F (f c ). Therefore, we focus on Bellman equation (25)
for the optimal cutoff for the rest of the proofs.

                                                              61
F.3    Notation
   In what follows, we denote B (C) the set of bounded, continuous functions g : C ⊆ Rl −→ R, for
some l ∈ N, equipped with the sup norm, kgk = supx∈C |g (x)|. We use x to denote an upper bound
for some variable x, and x to denote a lower bound. For a given function g ∈ B (C), we denote gxi (x)
                             ∂g                     g(x+hei )−g(x)
the directional derivative   ∂xi   (x) = lim             h           where ei = (0, . . . , 0, 1(ith), 0 . . .)′ ∈ Rl when
                                            h∈R→0
it exists. The notation g xi and g x is used to denote an upper or lower bound, respectively, on the
                                        i
ith directional derivative or a modulus of Lipschitz continuity whenever it applies.

F.4    Assumptions and Definitions
   Before proving Propositions 1 to 4, we introduce a number of definitions and assumptions that
will be used throughout the proofs. We first impose some regularity conditions on the distribution
F of fixed costs f .

Assumption 1. F is a continuously differentiable cumulative distribution function with bounded
first derivatives. F has infinite support, mean µf and standard deviation σf , satisfies F ′ > 0 and
   |f | dF < ∞. We further assume that its mode argmaxf F ′ (f ) exists and is finite.
´

   We now define the set in which beliefs (µ, γ) lie. Note that because of the monotonicity in Γ
and the existence of stationary points, the precision of beliefs γ remains bounded over time as long
as the economy starts with a precision γ that belongs to [γ (0) , γ (1)]. Indeed, if γ ∈ [γ (0) , γ (1)],
then letting γ ′ = Γ (n, γ), the properties of Γ (n, γ) and γ (n) from Lemma 2 imply that

                 γ (0) = Γ (0, γ (0)) 6 Γ (0, γ) 6 γ ′ 6 Γ (1, γ) 6 Γ (1, γ (1)) = γ (1) .
                                                                                 
We can thus restrict our attention to precisions belonging to the compact set γ, γ = [γ (0) , γ (1)].
   The mean of beliefs µ, on the other hand, has an infinite support. In order to use the contraction
mapping theorem in the space of bounded continuous functions, we restrict the space in which µ
                     
lies to a compact µ, µ . These bounds are chosen to be large enough as to contain almost all the
ergodic distribution of µ. We thus introduce the following bounds:

Definition 4. Define the following bounds and set:

   1. Let γ ≡ γ (1) be the unique strictly positive solution to
                                                                            −1
                                                ρ2θ
                                        
                                                        + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                 
                                   γ=                                             = Γ (1, γ) ,                       (27)
                                            γ + γz + γx

      and γ ≡ γ (0) < γ the unique strictly positive solution to

                                                                         −1
                                                  ρ2θ
                                            
                                                       + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                                      
                                    γ=                                         = Γ 0, γ .                            (28)
                                                γ + γz

                          
   2. Let S = [µ, µ] × γ, γ , where µ and µ are some large bounds on µ.

                                                           62
    Because of the bounded support for µ, we must adapt the process for the evolution of the mean
of beliefs. We do so by assuming that µ′ follows a truncated Markov process.

Assumption 2. The mean of beliefs µ′ follows the truncated Markov process over µ, µ ,
                                                                                  


                                    µ′ = min
                                                                            
                                                      max ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε, µ , µ ,                                             (29)

where s (n, γ) corresponds to the process in Lemma 1 and ε ∼ N (0, 1).

    Notice that as the set µ, µ becomes large, the truncated process µ′ converges to the one
                              

described in Lemma 1.44
    It is also useful for the rest of the proofs to introduce the following bounds on the derivatives
of s and Γ.

Definition 5. Define the following upper and lower bounds derived in Lemma 3 in the Online
Appendix:

   1. The derivatives of s are bounded by
                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    2    2
                                                                  sγ γx−1
                                                                                                 
                  ksγ k =           sup           |sγ (n, γ)| =                 2γ − γz , γ           = ρθ                   ,
                               n∈[0,1],γ∈[γ,γ ]                                                                    3γ
                                                                 γ       ρθ
                                                                     z
                  ksn k =           sup         |sn (n, γ)| = sn 0,    =        3 γx ;
                               n∈[0,1],γ∈[γ,γ ]                     2    (3γz ) 2

   2. The derivatives of Γ are bounded above and below by
                                                                                             2
                                                                                      γ
                                                                                
                               Γγ    =            sup     Γγ (n, γ) = ρ2θ                         ,
                                          n∈[0,1],γ∈[γ,γ ]                          γ + γz
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                         γ
                               Γγ    =            inf       Γγ (n, γ) =   ρ2θ                              ,
                                          n∈[0,1],γ∈[γ,γ ]                          γ + γz + γx

                               Γn =               sup       Γn (n, γ) = γx Γγ ,
                                          n∈[0,1],γ∈[γ,γ ]

                               Γn =               inf       Γn (n, γ) = γx Γγ .
                                          n∈[0,1],γ∈[γ,γ ]


    To simplify our notation for the expectation operator under the truncated process (29), we
define the following operator.
                                          
Definition 6. Let R: g ∈ B (S) → B R × γ, γ be the operator that extends function g to the


  44
      In section F.2, we used the formula for the mean of a log-normal distribution to derive the expression of S. In
the context
             of our truncated process µ, this formula should be understood as an approximation of arbitrary precision
as µ, µ becomes arbitrarily large.


                                                             63
                                             
domain R × γ, γ such that, for (µ, γ) ∈ R × γ, γ :
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                       g (µ, γ)        if µ > µ,
                                                      
                                      [R (g)] (µ, γ) = g (µ, γ)         if µ ≥ µ ≥ µ,
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      g µ, γ 
                                                      
                                                                        if µ < µ.

Remark. It is equivalent to take the expectation of some function g ∈ B (S) under the truncated
                                                                                  
process for µ in (29) or to take the expectation of the function R (g) ∈ B R × γ, γ under the
unrestricted process of (4). I.e., with Φ the CDF of a standard normal, we have:
                              ˆ   (µ−ρθ µ)/s(n,γ)
       E [g | µ, γ, n] =                     g (ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε, Γ (n, γ)) Φ (dε)
                             (µ−ρθ µ)/s(n,γ)
                                 µ − ρθ µ
                                                                                  
                                                                           µ − ρθ µ
                            +Φ                g µ, Γ (n, γ) + 1 − Φ                      g (µ, Γ (n, γ))
                                  s (n, γ)                                   s (n, γ)
                            ˆ ∞
                          =     R (g) (ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε, Γ (n, γ)) Φ (dε) .
                                 −∞

     We now define the mapping T that characterizes the equilibrium investment cutoff as derived
in equation (25).

Definition 7. Let T : f c ∈ B (S) −→ B (S) be the mapping such that, for all (µ, γ) ∈ S,
                                  ¨
[T f c ] (µ, γ) = S (µ, γ) − β            max f ′ − R (f c ) (ρθ µ + s (n (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n (µ, γ) , γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε) ,
                                                                                                                   

                                                                                                                               (30)

where Φ is the CDF of a standard normal, n (µ, γ) = F (f c (µ, γ)), and where S (µ, γ) is defined in
equation (26).

     Under some conditions, we establish later that the mapping T admits a fixed point f c in the
set F0 defined as follows.

Definition 8. Let F0 ⊂ B (S) be the set of bounded continuous functions f c : (µ, γ) ∈ S −→ R
                                      c                                             c              c
such that f c is bounded by f , Lipschitz continuous of modulus f µ in µ and f γ in γ, where
                   "                                                                                                                !#
                                                                                                       2 1−ρ2
                                                   1 −aµ+ a2γ2                                                    2
                                                
                       1
                                         ˆ
 c            −1                                                                        a(1−ρθ )µ− a2        θ +a
                                                                                                                      (1−ρ2θ )σθ2
f = (1 − β)              (1 − β) + β µf + |f | dF + e                           1 − βe                     γ     2
                                                                                                                                         ,
                       a                           a




                                                               64
             
      c     c
and f µ , f γ ∈ R2+ solve the system 45

                                                                                      
                           c                            c                    c        c   c
                                                   + βf µ + β kF ′ k ksn k f µ + Γn f γ f µ ,
                                                   
                        f µ = Sµ µ, γ
                           c                                          c
                                                                                  
                                                                                            c       c
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                                                        (31)
                                             µ, γ + β ksγ k ∆s f + βf γ + β kF ′ k ksn k f µ + Γn f γ f γ ,
                                                 
                        f γ = Sγ

with
                                                                                             2 1−ρ2
                                                                                                                          !
                                                          2                                             2
                                                  −aµ+ a2γ                   a(1−ρθ )µ− a2        θ +a
                                                                                                            (1−ρ2θ )σθ2
                    Sµ µ, γ              = e                    1 − βρθ e                        γ     2



                                                                                                   2 1−ρ2
                                                                                                                                !
                                                   a −aµ+ a2γ2                    a(1−ρθ )µ− a2          θ +a
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                  (1−ρ2θ )σθ2
                                                                            βρ2θ e
                                    
                    Sγ µ, γ              =             e               1−                              γ     2
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                  2γ 2
                                             
               c         1             1
and ∆s f = f           s(0,γ)   +   s(0,γ)3
                                               .

    Later on, under additional parametric restrictions, we will be able to restrict the set in which
the equilibrium cutoff function lies further to a subset F1 ⊂ F0 defined as follows.

Definition 9. Let F1 ⊂ F0 be the subset of functions f c ∈ F0 such that f c is weakly increasing in
µ and γ.

    We finally impose the following condition on parameters throughout the proofs:

Assumption 3. The parameters and bounds are chosen so that

                                                                            2 1−ρ2     2
                                                              a(1−ρθ )µ− a2       θ +a
                                                                                           (1−ρ2θ )σθ2 .
                                                   1 > βe                       γ     2                                                 (32)

    This assumption is a necessary condition to guarantee that the real option channel is active. The
first two terms in the exponential require that the mean reversion in µ and γ is small enough not
to dominate the wait-and-see effects. The last term requires that the variance of the fundamental
σθ2 is not too large to discourage firms from waiting. Note that Condition 32 is satisfied as ρθ → 1.

F.5     Proposition 1
Proposition 1 (Full). Under Assumptions 1-3 and for parameters such that46

                         4β
                                        F′
                                                                                                               
                                2                 ksn k Sµ µ, γ        + Γn Sγ µ, γ               + βΓn ksγ k ∆s f 6 1,                 (33)
                   (1 − β)


   45
      Condition (33) in Proposition 1 is a sufficient
                                                      condition that guarantees that this system of quadratic equations
                                        c   c
admits a strictly positive solution f µ , f γ . In the case where there are multiple solutions (at most two), we pick
the maximal one.
   46
      Note that condition (33) is only a sufficient condition, so that an equilibrium may exist under weaker conditions.
Since ksn k = O (γx ) and Γn = O (γx ) while the other quantities in the condition remain bounded as γx → 0, condition
(33) is always satisfied as long as γx is small enough, implying that the complementarity in information is weak.


                                                                         65
                                               
                  c         1           1
where ∆s f = f            s(0,γ)   + s(0,γ)3
                                                 , there exists a unique equilibrium such that the optimal cutoff f c
belongs to F 0 . If, in         addition,47

                                                                         c
                                       Sµ (µ, γ) > β∆n f F ′ f µ ,                                               (34)
                                                                              
                                                                             c
                                       Sγ (µ, γ) > β ∆s f ksγ k + ∆n f F ′ f γ ,                                 (35)

                            c           c
where ∆n f = ksn k f µ + Γn f γ then the resulting optimal cutoff f c (µ, γ) is increasing in µ and γ.

Proof. Outline: The equilibrium mapping T that we consider corresponds to an inefficient compet-
itive equilibrium subject to an informational externality. Because of the feedback of other investors’
actions on individual beliefs, standard existence/uniqueness arguments do not directly apply. In
particular, a strong enough feedback could potentially lead to equilibrium multiplicity. The magni-
tude of the feedback is, however, governed by the informativeness γx of the social learning channel.
Our proof establishes that this feedback is a O (γx ). Hence, when γx is low, the complementarity
in information is negligible and we prove that the mapping defined in Definition 7 is a contraction.
    We proceed in four steps: 1. We show that T is a well-defined self-map on F0 under condition
(33); 2. We establish that F0 is a Banach space; 3. We show that T is a contraction on F0 when
γx is small enough; 4. Under the additional conditions on parameters (34) and (35), which imply
that various feedback effects are dominated by the first order impact of µ and γ in the objective
function S, we characterize further the monotonicity of the optimal cutoff.

    Step 1. T is a well-defined mapping from F0 to F0 . Under condition 33, Lemma 5 in the
Online Appendix shows that there exists a solution to the system of equations (31) which defines
the moduli of Lipschitz continuity and Lemma 6 in the Online Appendix demonstrates, under the
same conditions, that T maps F0 onto itself. T is thus a well-defined self-map on F 0 .

    Step 2. F0 is a Banach space. F0 is a subset of the Banach space of bounded continuous
functions B (S) equipped with the sup norm k·k. We now show that F0 is closed. Take a Cauchy
sequence {fkc }k∈N ∈ k∈N F 0 . First, since B (S) is a Banach space, it converges to some f c ∈ B (S).
                    Q
                            c                                                 c                    c
Second, the bound f is preserved in the limit (fkc (µ, γ) 6 f → f c (µ, γ) 6 f ). Third, the Lipschitz
property is preserved in the limit. Indeed, we have

                                                                                       c
                                ∀ (µ1 , µ2 ) , k ∈ N, |fkc (µ2 , γ) − fkc (µ1 , γ)| 6 f µ |µ2 − µ1 | .

                                                                                           c
Taking the limit k → ∞, we then have |f c (µ2 , γ) − f c (µ1 , γ)| 6 f µ |µ2 − µ1 |, so that f c is also
                                            c
Lipschitz in µ with modulus f µ . Applying the same argument along γ implies that the limit f c is
                                                c
also Lipschitz in γ of modulus f γ . Hence, F 0 is closed. Being a closed subset of a Banach space,
F0 is a Banach space.

    Step 3. T is a contraction on F0 under condition 33. Let f1c , f2c ∈ F0 . Denote ni = F (fic ) , i =

  47
     Conditions 34 and 35 are satisfied when, for instance, 1) β is small enough, or 2) risk aversion a is high enough
that Sγ is large enough and γx is small enough that ∆n f is small.


                                                                 66
1, 2. We decompose the differential as follows:

                                      T f2c (µ, γ) − T f1c (µ, γ) = β (A + B)

where
                ¨ 
                max f ′ − [R (f1c )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n1 (µ, γ) , γ)) , 0
                                                                                        
        A =
                                                                                      
            −max f − [R (f2 )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n1 (µ, γ) , γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε)
                   ′        c
                                                                                         

            ¨ 
                max f ′ − [R (f2c )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n1 (µ, γ) , γ)) , 0
                                                                                        
        B =
                                                                                      
            −max f − [R (f2 )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n2 (µ, γ) , γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε)
                   ′        c
                                                                                         


We now provide bounds for each term separately. Regarding term A, using Lemma 4.1, we have
                              ˆ
                   |A| 6              R (f2c ) (ρθ µ + s (n1 (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n1 (µ, γ) , γ))

                              −R (f1c ) (ρθ µ + s (n1 (µ, γ) , γ) ε, Γ (n1 (µ, γ) , γ)) Φ (dε)

                          6 kf2c − f1c k .

Turning to term B, using the Lipschitz property along µ and γ, and since the Lipschitz property
is preserved under operator R (Lemma 4.3), the first part of Lemma 8 tells us that

                                  |B| = ∆n f |F (f2c (µ, γ)) − F (f1c (µ, γ))|
                                          6 ∆n f F ′ kf2c − f1c k .

                      c           c
where ∆n f = ksn k f µ + Γn f γ . Note that ∆n f captures the feedback effect that changes in n have
on expectations of future investment returns. From the expressions in Definition 5 we have that
                       c                              c
ksn k → 0, Γn → 0, f µ → (1 − β)−1 Sµ µ, γ , and f γ → (1 − β)−1 Sγ µ, γ + β ksγ k ∆s f
                                                                                           

as γx → 0, hence ∆n f is O (γx ). This reflects that changes in the expectation of n only affect
information through the precision of the social information channel γx . Hence, B is negligible for
γx sufficiently small. As a result, the mapping T is a contraction if

                                                β 1 + F ′ ∆n f < 1,
                                                              


which is satisfied under the same condition (33) guaranteeing that the system (31) has a solution
(see Lemma 5). Indeed, the first row of system (31) tells us that
                                                  c      c
                                   β 1 + F ′ ∆n f f µ = f µ − Sµ µ, γ .
                                                                     




                                                            67
                                                 c
Hence, we have β 1 + kF ′ k ∆n f = 1− Sµ µ, γ /f µ < 1. T is thus a contraction under condition
                                            

(33), so that there exists a unique equilibrium such that f c ∈ F0 .

    Step 4. Monotonicity of the cutoff f c . If, in addition, conditions (34) and (35) are satisfied,
then Lemma 7 applies and T maps F1 onto itself. Because the weak monotonicity properties are
preserved in the limit, F1 is closed. Because T is also a contraction on F1 ⊂ F0 , we conclude that
the equilibrium cutoff f c belongs to F1 . In particular, it is weakly increasing in µ and γ.

F.6     Proposition 2
Proposition 2 (Full). Under Assumptions 1-3 and conditions (33), (34) and (35), if parameters
are such that48
                           1
                              F ′ Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k Γn + Γγ > 1,
                                                        
                                                                                          (36)
                         2−β
                       2                                         
                                                   c
where Γγ = ρ2θ γ+γγz +γx , Γn = γx Γγ and ∆s f = f s(0,γ)
                                                        1       1
                                                           + s(0,γ)3 , then the economy admits

an uncertainty trap. In particular, there exists a non-empty interval (µl , µh ) such that, for all
µ ∈ (µl , µh ), the economy features at least two stationary points γl (µ) < γh (µ) in the dynamics of
belief precision. Regime γl is characterized by high uncertainty and low investment while regime γh
is characterized by low uncertainty and high investment.

Proof. Outline: The purpose of this proof is to establish that there may exist various stationary
points in the dynamics of γ for a range of µ’s. It is therefore useful to introduce the following
function:
                                                                                          −1
                                                               ρ2θ
                                                      
                                                                       + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                                
                      ϕ (n, γ) ≡ Γ (n, γ) − γ =                                                 − γ,                  (37)
                                                          γ + γz + nγx

where Γ is the law of motion for γ defined in (5). By definition, stationary points in the dynamics
of γ satisfy ϕ (n (µ, γ) , γ) = 0. We show that there exists a non-empty set (µl , µh ) such that, for all
µ ∈ (µl , µh ), there exist γl (µ) < γh (µ) such that ϕ (n (µ, γl (µ)) , γl (µ)) = ϕ (n (µ, γh (µ)) , γh (µ)) =
0, i.e., γl (µ) and γh (µ) are two distinct stationary points in the dynamics of γ for some given mean
beliefs µ.
    We proceed in two steps. In step 1, we show that we can find a stationary point (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) with
ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) , γ ∗ ) = 0 such that the function γ 7→ ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) crosses the x-axis at γ ∗ from below.
Note that this condition captures the situation depicted on Figure 5, where the law of motion for γ
crosses the 45◦ line from below at least once. To show this, we establish that the equilibrium cutoff
f c is increasing with γ at a strictly positive rate bounded away from 0 under condition (36). Hence,
when the distribution of fixed cost F is sufficiently concentrated, the number of firms switching
from waiting to investing, after an increase in γ, becomes large enough that ϕ crosses the x-axis
   48
     Condition (36) is satisfied in particular if either 1) the dispersion of the fixed cost distribution σf is small enough
that kF ′ k is large enough, or 2) if the risk aversion parameter a is high enough that Sγ is large enough. Note also
that the set of parameters satisfying conditions (33), (34), (35) and (36) is non-empty for 1) β small enough, or 2)
for kF ′ k and a large enough.


                                                             68
from below. In step 2, we show that this implies that at least two stationary points exist for µ∗ ,
and that uncertainty traps must then also exist in a neighborhood of µ∗ .
    Step 1.     The proof is constructive.          We first establish that there exist a γ ∗ such that
ϕ (F (fm ) , γ ∗ ) = 0, where fm ≡ argmax F ′ is the mode of F . Intuitively, ϕ is more likely to
cross the x-axis from below at a point where a large number of firms switches from waiting to
investing, i.e., when the cutoff f c is close to the mode of the distribution of fixed costs. From the
                                                                                      
definition of γ, γ in (27) and (28) and the monotonicity of Γ in n, we have ϕ n, γ ≥ 0 ≥ ϕ (n, γ)
for all n ∈ [0, 1], in particular for n = F (fm ). Since Γ is continuous in n and γ, ϕ is also continuous,
and there exists γ ∗ ∈ γ, γ such that ϕ (F (fm ) , γ ∗ ) = 0.
                             

    We then establish that there is µ∗ such that n (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) = F (fm ). For γx small enough that the
conditions (33), (34) and (35) are satisfied, we know that the equilibrium cutoff f c belongs to F1 .
In particular, f c is Lipschitz continuous and increasing in µ. In addition, Lemma 7 in the Online
Appendix tells us that the rate at which f c increases in µ is bounded from below and this bound
                                 
is strictly positive for µ ∈ µ, µ under condition (34). By continuity, this implies that there exists
µ∗ ∈ µ, µ such that f c (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) = fm as long as the bounds µ and µ are chosen large enough. By
           

construction, ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) , γ ∗ ) = 0.
    At this stage we have established that there is (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) ∈ S corresponding to a fixed point in
the dynamics of γ at which the investment cutoff corresponds to the mode of the distribution of
fixed costs. It remains to be shown that ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) crosses zero from below at γ = γ ∗ .
    Let ǫ > 0 be arbitrarily small. By continuity of F ′ and the bounds on the derivatives of Γ,
there exists a neighborhood Ω of γ ∗ such that infγ∈Ω F ′ (f c (µ∗ , γ)) > (1 − ǫ) kF ′ k. Using the bound
provided in Lemma 9, we have that, for all γ ∈ Ω,

                                ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) > ϕǫγ (γ − γ ∗ ) , for γ > γ ∗ ,
                                ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) 6 ϕǫγ (γ − γ ∗ ) , for γ 6 γ ∗ ,

                                           −1
                              c
where ϕǫγ ≡ (1 − ǫ) Γn 1 + βf µ kF ′ k ksn k    kF ′ k Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k + Γγ − 1. We now show
                                                                             
                                                                        c
that ϕǫγ > 0 under conditions (33) and (36). Note first that f µ ksn k 6 ∆n f , where ∆n f is defined
in Lemma 8. We know from Proposition 1 that the necessary condition (33) for the existence of an
equilibrium implies β 1 + kF ′ k ∆n f < 1. Hence, 1 + β kF ′ k ∆n f 6 2 − β and we have
                                     


                                       1
                      ϕǫγ > (1 − ε)       F ′ Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k Γn + Γγ − 1,
                                                                    
                                      2−β

which, under condition (36) and for ǫ small enough, implies ϕǫγ > 0. We have thus shown that the
function ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) crosses zero at γ ∗ from below.
    Step 2.     Since ϕ crosses the x-axis from below at γ ∗ , there exists some (γ+ , γ− ) in the
neighborhood of γ ∗ such that γ− < γ ∗ < γ+ and ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ− ) , γ− ) < 0 < ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ+ ) , γ+ ).
By continuity of ϕ, there exists a neighborhood (µl , µh ) of µ∗ such that, for all µ ∈ (µl , µh ),
                                                                       
ϕ (n (µ, γ− ) , γ− ) < 0 < ϕ (n (µ, γ+ ) , γ+ ). From the definition of γ, γ and the monotonic-


                                                        69
ity of f c , we have that, for all µ ∈ (µl , µh ), ϕ n µ, γ , γ > 0 > ϕ (n (µ, γ) , γ). Therefore,
                                                            

by the Intermediate Value theorem, there exists γl (µ) ∈ [γ, γ− ) and γh (µ) ∈ (γ+ , γ] such that
ϕ (n (µ, γl (µ)) , γl (µ)) = ϕ (n (µ, γh (µ)) , γh (µ)) = 0. We have thus found two distinct stationary
points in γ for all µ in a neighborhood (µl , µh ) of µ∗ . From the strict monotonicity of f c in γ,
n (µ, γl (µ)) < n (µ, γh (µ)), which implies that the low regime γl (µ) features lower investment and
higher uncertainty than the high regime γh (µ).

F.7     Proposition 3
    We now introduce the mapping satisfied by the constrained social planner’s problem.

Definition 10. Let T W : B (S) → B (S) be the mapping corresponding to the planning problem
such that, for all (µ, γ) ∈ S,

                                                f SP
                                                              2
                                                                        
                                                1
                                            ˆ
                                                         −aµ+ a2γ
                      W
                                                                    − f F df˜
                                                                      ˜
                           
                  T       W (µ, γ) = max           1−e
                                      f SP      a
                                         ˆ
                                     +β [R (W )] ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ Φ (dε)
                                                                             


where nSP = F f SP .
                  


    The following definition introduces the set W in which the constrained planner’s value function
lies.

Definition 11. Let W ⊂ B (S) be the set of bounded continuous functions W : (µ, γ) ∈
S −→ R such that W is Lipschitz continuous     of modulus      W µ in µ and W γ in γ with W µ =
                   a2                                     a2
              −aµ+                         −1        −aµ+
(1 − βρθ )−1 e        and W γ = 1 − βρ2θ        a
                                         
                   2γ
                                               2γ 2
                                                    e     2γ
                                                             + β ksγ k W µ .

Proposition 3. Under Assumption 1-3, the recursive competitive equilibrium is constrained in-
efficient and the efficient allocation can be implemented with investment subsidies τ (µ, γ) and a
uniform tax.

Proof. Outline: We proceed in two steps. In step 1, after writing down the problem of the social
planner and establishing a few regularity conditions such as differentiability (proved in the Online
Appendix), we derive the formula that characterizes the planner’s optimal cutoff f SP . It differs
from the competitive equilibrium cutoff in two ways. First, the planner internalizes the impact
of investment on information. Second, because the planner internalizes that investing firms are
replaced by new firms, it is not subject to the irreversibility faced by individual firms. We show in
step 2 that the planner’s cutoff can easily be implemented in the competitive equilibrium with an
investment subsidy that captures the social value of information and compensates firms for their
option value of waiting.
    Step 1. Derivation of the socially optimal cutoff. Given the structure of the problem, it is
immediate that the planner’s decision takes the form of a cutoff rule f SP such that the planner


                                                       70
makes the firms with fixed costs f 6 f SP invest. The constrained planner’s problem is
                                                      ˆ    f SP                           
                                                                   E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f˜ dF f˜ + βE W µ′ , γ ′
                                                                                                              
                    W (µ, γ)             =     max                                                                          (38)
                                               f SP

                                                          γµ + γz Z + nSP γx X
                                       s.t µ′ = ρθ
                                                            γ + γz + nSP γx
                                                                                            −1
                                                         ρ2θ
                                                      
                                               ′
                                                                + 1 − ρ2θ σθ2
                                                                         
                                              γ =            SP
                                                  γ + γz + n γx
                                              n = F f SP
                                               SP
                                                          


       ′ = ρ θ + εθ , εθ ∼ N 0, 1 − ρ2 σ 2 , Z = θ + εz , εz ∼ N 0, γ −1 and X = θ + εX , εX ∼
                                                                      
with
    θ      θ                        θ   θ                           z
              −1 
N 0, nSP γx        . Using Assumption 2 for the µ process, the value of the planner is the fixed
point of the mapping T W defined in Definition 10 above. We establish in Lemma 10 in the Online
Appendix that this mapping is a well-defined contraction on the space of continuous bounded
functions B (S) equipped with the sup norm. Moreover, Lemma 11 shows that T W is a self-
map on W, which, being a closed subset of a Banach space is itself a Banach space. Hence,
the planner’s value – the unique fixed point of mapping T W , must belong to W and is therefore
Lipschitz continuous in µ and γ. Finally, Lemma 12 establishes that the planner’s value function
is differentiable. The first order condition with respect to the cutoff is
                                                                                                      
           ′        SP
                                                         SP        d              SP
                                                                                              SP
                                                                                                    
       F        f                E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f          + β SP E W ρθ µ + s n , γ ε, Γ n , γ      = 0,
                                                                  dn

where ε is a standard normal. Since F ′ > 0 under Assumption 1, the efficient cutoff is

                                                                      d
                    f SP (µ, γ) = E [u (θ) | µ, γ] + β                    E W ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ
                                                                                                          
                                                                       SP
                                                                                                                .           (39)
                                                                    dn

   Step 2. Implementation with subsidies. We show that this optimal cutoff is implementable using
belief-dependent investment subsidies τ (µ, γ) and a uniform tax T (µ, γ) levied on all firms at the
beginning of each period to ensure a balanced budget. In the presence of these policy instruments,
the firm’s problem is

               V τ (µ, γ, f ) = max E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f + τ (µ, γ) , βE V τ µ′ , γ ′ , f ′
                                                                                          
                                                                                               − T (µ, γ) ,                 (40)

which yields the individual cutoff rule f c,τ :

                                    f c,τ (µ, γ) = E [u (θ) | µ, γ] + τ (µ, γ) − βE V τ µ′ , γ ′ , f ′ .
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                            (41)

Requiring            that          the       government’s          budget      constraint   balances   implies   T (µ, γ)     =
τ (µ, γ) F     (f c,τ    (µ, γ)).
   Comparing (39) and (41), the subsidy implementing the constrained planner’s allocation nec-



                                                                          71
essarily satisfies

                                  d
                                      E W ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ     + βE V τ µ′ , γ ′ , f ′ .
                                                                                             
                 τ (µ, γ) = β      SP
                                                                                                                         (42)
                                dn

This expression is intuitive. The optimal subsidy compensates investors for the two margins that
they do not internalize. The first term internalizes the social benefits of adding a marginal signal
about θ, which is positive according to Lemma 13. The second term compensates investors for
their option value of waiting: since investing firms are replaced by new firms with an investment
opportunity, the social planner problem is not subject to the irreversibility that individual investors
face. Expression (42) is a functional equation in τ because V τ depends implicitly on τ . Lemma
(14) in the Online Appendix shows that this functional equation admits a unique solution and that
the resulting subsidy τ (µ, γ) and tax T (µ, γ) implement the planner’s allocation.

F.8       Proposition 4
Proposition 4 (Full). Under Assumptions 1-2, when γx is small and if parameters are such that49

                                                     a −aµ+ a2γ2
                                              F′         e       Γn + Γγ > 1,                                            (43)
                                                    3γ 2

then the planner’s allocation is subject to uncertainty traps.

Proof. Outline: The proof closely follows Proposition 2. In step 1, we show that there exists a
stationary point (µ∗ , γ ∗ ), i.e. a point satisfying ϕ nSP (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) , γ ∗ = 0 for ϕ defined in (37),
                                                                             

such that the function γ 7→ ϕ nSP (µ∗ , γ) , γ crosses the x-axis from below. The idea behind the
                                                 

result is identical to Proposition 2: we show that the optimal cutoff f SP increases with γ at some
positive rate bounded away from 0 as long as γx is small enough that the conditions of Lemma 15
are satisfied. This ensures that we can find a point where ϕ F f SP (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) , γ ∗ = 0 and f SP is
                                                                                    

the mode of the distribution of fixed costs. If F is sufficiently concentrated around its mode, the
function ϕ crosses the x-axis from below. Step 2 is identical to Proposition 2, so it is omitted.
    Step 1. We first assume that γx is small enough to satisfy the conditions of Lemma 15, so
                                                                 a  2                                             a  2
                                                          1 −aµ+ 2γ                                        a −aµ+ 2γ
that f SP increases at least at rate f SP
                                       µ
                                          =               3e            in µ and at rate f SP
                                                                                           γ
                                                                                              =           3γ 2
                                                                                                               e         in γ.
We then repeat the same steps as in Proposition 2. Denote fm = argmax               The Theorem of F ′.
                              SP
                                                                       
the Maximum tells us that f      is continuous. From the definition of γ, γ and the continuity of
f , F and and Γ, there exists γ ∗ ∈ γ, γ such that ϕ (F (fm ) , γ ∗ ) = 0. Since f SP increases at
  SP
                                           

least at rate f SP                                                               ∗ ∈ µ, µ such that
                                                                                        
                µ
                   > 0 and is Lipschitz continuous, we know that  there exists µ
f SP (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) = fm as long as the bounds µ and µ are chosen large enough. By construction, γ ∗ is
a stationary point in the dynamics of γ at µ = µ∗ , i.e., ϕ nSP (µ∗ , γ ∗ ) , γ ∗ = 0. We now show
                                                                                 

that the function γ 7→ ϕ nSP (µ∗ , γ) , γ crosses the x-axis at γ ∗ from below. As in Proposition
                                           

2, pick ǫ > 0 arbitrarily small; by continuity, there exists a neighborhood Ω of γ ∗ such that
  49
       Condition (43) is satisfied if the dispersion σf of the fixed cost distribution is small enough that kF ′ k is large or
                                                                   a2
                                                          a −aµ+ 2γ
if the risk aversion parameter a is high enough that      γ2
                                                             e          is large.


                                                              72
infγ∈Ω F ′ f SP (µ∗ , γ) > (1 − ε) kF ′ k. Hence, for all γ ∈ Ω,
                        


                            ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) > ϕSP,ǫ
                                                  γ
                                                       (γ − γ ∗ ) , for γ > γ ∗ ,
                            ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) 6 ϕSP,ǫ
                                                  γ
                                                       (γ − γ ∗ ) , for γ 6 γ ∗ ,

                                           2
                                    −aµ+ a2γ
where ϕSP,ε
       γ
            = (1 − ε) kF ′ k 3γa2 e            Γn +Γγ −1. Under condition (43) and for ǫ sufficiently small,
we have ϕSP,ǫ
         γ
              > 0. We have thus shown that function γ 7→ ϕ (n (µ∗ , γ) , γ) crosses the x-axis at γ ∗
from below. Step 2 of Proposition 2 applies identically. Hence, we may conclude that there exists
a non-empty interval (µl , µh ) such that for all µ ∈ (µl , µh ), there exists γl (µ) < γh (µ) such that
ϕ (n (µ, γl (µ)) , γl (µ)) = ϕ (n (µ, γh (µ)) , γh (µ)) = 0. Therefore, the social planner’s allocation is
also subject to uncertainty traps.


G      Auxiliary Lemmas (ONLINE APPENDIX)
    This online appendix contains the proofs of the technical lemmas used in the previous proofs.

G.1     Lemma for Belief Dynamics
Lemma 3. Functions s (n, γ) and Γ (n, γ) satisfy:
    1. The first derivatives of s are such that
                                                                                   1
                                                       ρθ γx                      γ2
                           sn (n, γ) =                              1                       3   > 0,
                                               2 (γz + nγx ) 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2
                                                                        1
                                         ρθ (γz + nγx ) 2 2γ + γz + nγx
                           sγ (n, γ) = −                   3                 3 6 0.
                                                2        γ 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2

       In addition, snn 6 0, sγγ > 0, while the sign of snγ varies with n and γ.

    2. The first derivatives of Γ are such that

                                                                ρ2θ γx
                                 Γn (n, γ) =                                       Γ (n, γ)2 > 0,
                                                        (γ + γz + nγx )2
                                                               ρ2θ
                                 Γγ (n, γ) =                                       Γ (n, γ)2 > 0.
                                                        (γ + γz + nγx )2

       In addition, Γnn 6 0, Γγγ 6 0 and Γnγ 6 0.
Proof. 1. Compute the first derivatives:
                                                                                                      − 1
                                      ρθ γx      1                              1       1                 2
                     sn (n, γ) =                                                  −
                                        2 (γ + γz + nγz )2                      γ γ + γz + nγx
                                                                            1
                                               ρθ γx                    γ2
                                =                        1                             3   >0
                                      2 (γz + nγx ) 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2

                                                               73
                                                                      − 1
                             ρθ 1             1           1           1     2
               sγ (n, γ) = −      −                  2       −
                             2 γ 2 (γ + γz + nγx )        γ γ + γz + nγx
                             ρθ          1    2γ + γz + nγx
                         = − (γz + nγx ) 2 3                   3 6 0.
                             2             γ 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2

Turning to the second derivatives,
                                                                1
                                       ρθ γx2  γ 2 (γ + 4γz + 4nγx )
                        snn (n, γ) = −                                       60
                                         4 (γz + nγx ) 32 (γ + γz + nγx ) 52

                                                1
                           ρθ (γz + nγx ) 2         3
                                                    2   (2γ + γz + nγx )2 − 2γ (γ + γz + nγx )
              sγγ (n, γ) =                                            5                       5            >0
                                  2                                  γ 2 (γ + γz + nγx ) 2
                                            1
The derivative sγn is positive for γ 6      2   (γz + nγx ), negative otherwise:

                                    ρθ γx                  1                          5    γz + nγx − 2γ
                 snγ (n, γ) =                           γ − 2 (γ + γz + nγx )− 2                           .
                                                                                          (γ + γz + nγx )3
                                                    1
                                4 (γz + nγx )       2


                                                                                                        γz
In particular, since snn 6 0, |sn | reaches its maximum at n = 0 and γ =                                2 .    Similarly, since
sγγ > 0, |sγ | reaches its maximum at γ = γ and n = γx−1 2γ − γz .
                                                                

   2. Compute the first derivatives:

                                                           ρ2θ γx
                                Γn (n, γ) =                                    Γ (n, γ)2 > 0,
                                                    (γ + γz + nγx )2

                                                               ρ2θ
                                Γγ (n, γ) =                                    Γ (n, γ)2 > 0.
                                                    (γ + γz + nγx )2
Similarly, the second order derivatives are given by

                                     ρ2θ γx2                                          ρ2θ
                                                                                                     
                                                                      2
             Γnn (n, γ) = −2                              Γ (n, γ)            1−              Γ (n, γ) 6 0,
                                (γ + γz + nγx )3                                 γ + γz + nγx

                                      ρ2θ                       ρ2θ
                                                                               
                                                                      2
             Γγγ (n, γ) = −2                  Γ (n, γ) 1 −              Γ (n, γ) 6 0,
                             (γ + γz + nγx )3              γ + γz + nγx

                                  ρ2θ γx                        ρ2θ
                                                                               
                                                      2
             Γnγ (n, γ) = −2                  Γ (n, γ) 1 −              Γ (n, γ) 6 0.
                             (γ + γz + nγx )3              γ + γz + nγx



G.2    Lemmas for Proposition 1
Lemma 4. Let a ∈ R. The following is true:

  1. For all (x, y) ∈ R2 , |max (y, a) − max (x, a)| 6 |y − x|.



                                                                74
   2. If g : x ∈ R → R is Lipschitz continuous of modulus g x , then x 7→ max (a, g (x)) is also
      Lipschitz continuous of modulus g x .
                                                                         
   3. If g : S → R is Lipschitz continuous in (µ, γ) of modulus g µ , g γ , then R (g) is also Lipschitz
                                     
      continuous of modulus g µ , g γ .

Proof. 1.   Let (x, y) ∈ R2 .         Assume WLOG that x 6 y.                          Then, either i) x 6 y 6 a,
|max (y, a) − max (x, a)| = 0 6 |y − x|, ii) x 6 a < y, |max (y, a) − max (x, a)| = |y − a| 6 |y − x|,
iii) a < x 6 y, then|max (y, a) − max (x, a)| = |y − x|.
     2.     Let (x, y) ∈ R2 , then by a trivial application of the previous bullet,
|max (a, g (y)) − max (a, g (x))| 6 |g (y) − g (x)| 6 g x |y − x|.
   3. Let a ∈ R and (µ, γ) ∈ S. From the second bullet, ∀x ∈ R, max (x, a) is Lipschitz of modulus
1 in x. Similarly, min (x, a) = −max (−x, −a) is Lipschitz of modulus 1 in x. A composition of
Lipschitz continuous functions is a Lipschitz continuous function whose modulus is the product
                                                                                          
of the individual moduli. Hence, [R (g)] (µ, γ) = g max min (µ, µ) , µ , max min (γ, γ) , γ is
                                        
Lipschitz in (µ, γ) of modulus g µ , g γ .

Lemma 5. Under the conditions of Proposition 1, the system of equations (31) admits a strictly
positive solution.
                           
                    c     c
Proof. The moduli f µ , f γ are defined as the solution to the system

                                                                         
                      c                    c                    c        c   c
                                      + βf µ + β kF ′ k ksn k f µ + Γn f γ f µ ,
                                      
                    f µ = Sµ µ, γ
                                                                                        
                      c                    c                                   c       c   c
                                µ, γ + βf γ + β ksγ k ∆s f + β kF ′ k ksn k f µ + Γn f γ f γ .
                                    
                    f γ = Sγ

                                  c                                 c
Multiplying the first row by f γ , the second one by f µ and subtracting both yields
                                                         
                                       c       Sγ µ, γ + β ksγ k ∆s f c
                                      fγ   =                        f µ.
                                                     Sµ µ, γ

Substituting the latter expression
                                   into the first row of our system provides us with a quadratic
              c           c
equation in f µ only,Ψ f µ = 0, where

                                                                                                              !
                                                                               Sγ µ, γ    + β ksγ k ∆s f
                                − (1 − β) f + β F ′                                                                f 2.
                            
         Ψ (f ) ≡ Sµ µ, γ                                         ksn k + Γn                    
                                                                                        Sµ µ, γ
                                                                       
                                                                         c
This quadratic equation admits two positive real solutions such that Ψ f µ = 0, if and only if

             (1 − β)2 − 4β F ′
                                                                                                    
                                       ksn k Sµ µ, γ + Γn               Sγ µ, γ       + β ksγ k ∆s f        > 0,

                                                                                                                     c    c
which corresponds to condition (33). In the case where there exists two distinct solutions f µ1 < f µ2 ,
                                                                                             c         c
we pick the largest one. The corresponding bounds on γ are such that f γ2 > f γ1 .


                                                             75
Lemma 6. Under the conditions of Proposition 1, the mapping T maps F0 onto itself.
                                                                                                                               c
Proof. Let f c ∈ F0 . To show that Tf c belongs
                                                to F0 , we must prove that T f c is bounded by f
                                       c   c
and Lipschitz continuous of moduli f µ , f γ .
                            c
  1. T f c is bounded by f . Let (µ, γ) ∈ S. Under assumptions (1) and 3, we have
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                              2 1−ρ2
                                            1 −aµ+ a22                                                   2
                                                                          
          c           1                                           1
                                                                    + γ1            a(1−ρ)µ− a2     θ +a
                                                                                                             (1−ρ2θ )σθ2
       |T f (µ, γ)| 6   (1 − β) + βµf + e                         γ    x       1 − βe             γ     2
                      a                     a
                          ˆ                
                                          c
                      +β      |f | dF + f
                           c
                      6 f ,

                                                                    c
     where the last line results from the definition of f .
                                          c
  2. T f c is Lipschitz in µ of modulus f µ . Let µ1 6 µ2 ∈ µ, µ , γ ∈ γ, γ . Denote ni =
                                                                        

     F (f c (µi , γ)) , i = 1, 2. We decompose the differential in µ as follows

                                    T f c (µ2 , γ) − T f c (µ1 , γ) = A + β (B + C) ,

     where

              A = S (µ2 , γ) − S (µ1 , γ)
                  ¨ 
                      max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ1 + s (n2 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) , 0
                                                                                   
              B =
                                                                                 
                             ′
                  −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ2 + s (n2 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) , 0 Φ (dε) F df ′
                                       c
                                                                                             

                  ¨
                      max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ1 + s (n1 , γ) ε, Γ (n1 , γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε) .
                                                                                       
              C =
                    ¨
                         max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ1 + s (n2 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε) .
                                                                                          
                  −

     From the Mean Value Theorem, there exists µ̃ ∈ [µ1 , µ2 ] such that A = Sµ (µ̃, γ) (µ2 − µ1 ).
     Hence,
                                                              
                                             |A| 6 Sµ µ, γ         |µ2 − µ1 | ,
                                                          2 1−ρ2
                                2
                                                                  2
                                                                                 
                         −aµ+ a2γ             a(1−ρθ )µ− a2 γ θ + a2 (1−ρ2θ )σθ2
     with Sµ (µ, γ) = e              1 − βρθ e                                     and where we have used the
     result that |Sµ | is decreasing in µ and γ. Turning to term B, the Lipschitz property of f c is
     preserved under the max operator (Lemma 4.2). Hence, max (f ′ − f c (µ, γ) , 0) is Lipschitz
                                         c
     continuous in µ of modulus f µ . Therefore,

                                                          c
                                                 |B| 6 f µ |µ2 − µ1 | .




                                                       76
  To control for term C, we use the result from Lemma 8, which tells us that

                                                                                                           c
              |C| 6 ∆n f γx |F (f c (µ2 , γ)) − F (f c (µ1 , γ))| 6 ∆n f F ′ f µ |µ2 − µ1 | ,

                         c               c                                                                        c
  where ∆n f = ksn k f µ + Γn f γ . Hence, T f c is Lipschitz in µ of modulus f µ if

                                                                                          c     c
                                                          + β 1 + ∆n f F ′
                                                                                    
                                     Sµ µ, γ                                             f µ 6 f µ.

   This condition is indeed satisfied as it corresponds to the first row of the system (31).
                                          c
3. T f c is Lipschitz in γ of modulus f γ . Let µ ∈ µ, µ , γ1 6 γ2 ∈ γ, γ . Denote ni =
                                                                               

  F (f c (µ, γi )) , i = 1, 2. We decompose the differential in γ as follows

                                 T f c (µ, γ2 ) − T f c (µ, γ1 ) = A + β (B + C + D)

  where

           A = S (µ, γ2 ) − S (µ, γ1 )
               ¨ 
                   max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0
                                                                                 
           B =
                                                                               
               −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ2 )) , 0 Φ (dε) F df ′
                          ′        c
                                                                                        

               ¨ 
                   max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0
                                                                                 
           C =
                                                                               
               −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0 Φ (dε) F df ′
                          ′        c
                                                                                        

               ¨ 
                   max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n1 , γ1 )) , 0
                                                                                 
           D =
                                                                               
               −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε) .
                          ′        c
                                                                                  


  From the Mean Value Theorem,
                                                                        
                                                  |A| 6 Sγ µ, γ              |γ2 − γ 1 | .

                                     2                                               2 1−ρ2
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                  
                                             1
                             a
                       a −aµ+ 2                + γ1                             a          θ +a
                                                                                                    (1−ρ2θ )σθ2
  with Sγ (µ, γ) =    2γ 2
                           e                 γ    x        1−   βρ2θ ea(1−ρθ )µ− 2       γ     2                      and we have used
  the fact that |Sγ | is decreasing in µ and γ. From Lemma 4.2, the Lipschitz property is
  preserved under the max operator. Hence, max (f ′ − f c (µ, γ) , 0) is Lipschitz continuous in
                  c
  µ of modulus f γ . Therefore,

                             c                                                c                        c
                 |B| 6 f γ |Γ (n2 , γ2 ) − Γ (n2 , γ1 )| 6 f γ Γγ |γ2 − γ1 | 6 f γ |γ2 − γ1 | ,
                                                                      γ
                                                                             2
  where we have used the fact that Γγ = ρ2θ                           γ+γz        < 1. To control for terms C and D, we

                                                                 77
        use Lemma 8, which tell us that

                            |C| 6 ∆s f |s (n2 , γ2 ) − s (n2 , γ1 )| 6 ∆s f ksγ k |γ2 − γ1 | ,

                                                                                                         c
                   |D| 6 ∆n f |F (f c (µ, γ2 )) − F (f c (µ, γ1 ))| 6 ∆n f F ′ f γ |γ2 − γ1 | ,
                                                                     c       c
                                        
                           1         1
        where ∆s f = f c s(0,γ) + s(0,γ)3 , and ∆n f = ksn k f µ + Γn f γ .      Thus, T f c is Lipschitz
                                              c
        continuous in γ of modulus f γ if

                                                                            c                        c       c
                                                  + β∆s f ksγ k + βf γ + β∆n f F ′ f γ 6 f γ ,
                                          
                               Sγ µ, γ

        which is satisfied as it corresponds to the second row of the system (31).



Lemma 7. Under the conditions of Proposition 1 and, in particular, conditions (34) and (35), the
mapping T maps F1 onto itself.50 In addition, the rates of increase of T f c are bounded from below
as follows:
                                                                                   
                                                                                  c
       ∀ µ2 > µ1 , T f c (µ2 , γ) − T f c (µ1 , γ) > Sµ (µ2 , γ) − β F ′ ∆n f f µ (µ2 − µ1 ) ,
                                                                                               c
                                                                                                
       ∀ γ2 > γ1 , T f c (µ, γ2 ) − T f c (µ, γ1 ) > Sγ (µ, γ2 ) − β ksγ k ∆s f − β F ′ ∆n f f µ (γ2 − γ1 ) .

                                                                                                                         
              fc                   fnc (µ, γ)             max (f ′       [R (f c )] (ρ          s (n, γ) ε, Γ (n, γ)) , 0) Φ (dε) F (df ′ ).
                                                      ˜
Proof. Let         ∈ F1 . Denote                  ≡                  −                   θµ +

We prove each property step by step.
                                                            2
   1. T f c is weakly increasing in µ. Let (µ1 , µ2 ) ∈ µ, µ with µ1 < µ2 and γ ∈ γ, γ . Denote
                                                                                    

        ni = F (f c (µi , γ)) , i = 1, 2. Using the same decomposition as in Lemma 6.2:

                                   [T f c ] (µ2 , γ) − [T f c ] (µ1 , γ) = A + β (B + C)

        where

                                                  A = S (µ2 , γ) − S (µ1 , γ)
                                                  B = fnc2 (µ1 , γ) − fnc2 (µ2 , γ)
                                                  C = fnc1 (µ1 , γ) − fnc2 (µ1 , γ) .

        Since Sµ > 0 and Sµµ 6 0, we have that

                                    A > Sµ (µ2 , γ) (µ2 − µ1 ) > Sµ (µ, γ) (µ2 − µ1 ) .


  50
     Conditions (34) and (35) are satisfied when γx is small enough that ∆n f is negligible and if the degree of risk
aversion a is large enough that Sγ > β∆s f ksγ k.


                                                                78
  Turning to term B, since f c ∈ F1 is increasing in µ, we have B > 0. Term C can be controlled
  in the same way as in Lemma 6.2:

                                                                     c
                                              |C| 6 ∆n f F ′ f µ (µ2 − µ1 ) .

  Hence, T f c increases at least at rate

                                                                                     c
                                                                                      
       ∀µ2 > µ1 ∈ µ, µ , T f c (µ2 , γ) − T f c (µ1 , γ) > Sµ (µ2 , γ) − β∆n f F ′ f µ (µ2 − µ1 ) ,
                     


  and T f c is weakly increasing in µ as long as

                                                                            c
                                                Sµ (µ, γ) > β∆n f F ′ f µ ,

  which is satisfied for γx low such that ∆n f is small enough.

2. T f c is weakly increasing in γ.
                                                                                       
                                                 Let µ ∈           µ, µ and γ1 6 γ2 ∈ γ, γ .   Denote ni =
  F   (f c (µ, γ   i )) , i   = 1, 2. Using the same decomposition as in Lemma 6.3:

                                     T f c (µ, γ2 ) − T f c (µ, γ1 ) = A + β (B + C + D)

  where

              A = S (µ, γ2 ) − S (µ, γ1 )
                  ¨ 
                      max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0
                                                                                    
              B =
                                                                                  
                  −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ2 )) , 0 Φ (dε) F df ′
                             ′        c
                                                                                           

                  ¨ 
                      max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0
                                                                                    
              C =
                                                                                  
                  −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) , 0 Φ (dε) F df ′
                             ′        c
                                                                                           

              D = fnc1 (µ1 , γ1 ) − fnc2 (µ, γ1 ) .

  Since Sγ > 0 and Sγγ 6 0, we have that

                                               A > Sγ (µ, γ) (µ2 − µ1 ) > 0.

  Turning to term B, we use the fact that f c ∈ F1 is weakly increasing in γ. Since Γ (n2 , γ1 ) 6
  Γ (n2 , γ2 ), we have that B > 0. We control terms C and D in the same way we did in Lemma
  6.3:

                                               |C| 6 ∆s f ksγ k |γ2 − γ1 |



                                                          79
                                                                              c
                                                   |D| 6 ∆n f F ′ f γ (γ2 − γ1 ) ,
                                                  
                                   1           1                         c         c             c increases in γ at
     where ∆s f = f c            s(0,γ)   + s(0,γ)3 , and ∆n f = ksn k f µ + Γn f γ . Hence, T f

     least at rate
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                 c
     ∀γ2 > γ1 ∈ γ, γ , T f c (µ, γ2 )−T f c (µ, γ1 ) > Sγ (µ, γ2 ) − β ksγ k ∆s f − β F ′ ∆n f f µ (γ2 − γ1 ) ,
                   


     and T f c is weakly increasing in γ as long as
                                                                                   
                                                                                  c
                                            Sγ (µ, γ) > β ∆s f ksγ k + ∆n f F ′ f γ ,

     which corresponds to condition 34 and is satisfied whenever risk aversion is large enough that
     Sγ (µ, γ) > β∆s f ksγ k and γx is small enough that ∆n f is negligible.



Lemma 8. For f c ∈ F0 , denote fnc (µ, γ) ≡                        max (f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε, Γ (n, γ)) , 0) F (df ′ ) Φ (dε).
                                                              ˜

The following inequalities hold.
                                                                                                 c        c
  1. F or n1 , n2 > 0, fnc2 − fnc1 6 ∆n f |n2 − n1 | where ∆n f = ksn k f µ + Γn f γ ;

  2. For s1 , s2 > 0,
                  ¨ 
                    max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s2 ε, Γ (n, γ)) , 0
                                                                    

                                                                 
                 −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s1 ε, Γ (n, γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε) 6 ∆s f |s2 − s1 | ,
                       ′        c
                                                                     


                     c
                                                    
                               1              1
     with ∆s f = f           s(0,γ)    +   s(0,γ)3
                                                      .
                             
Proof. Fix µ ∈ µ, µ and γ ∈ γ, γ .

  1. Since the Lipschitz property is preserved under the max and       R operators
                                                                                        (Lemma 4),
           ′       c     ′   ′                                           c     c
     max (f − [R (f )] (µ , γ ) , 0) is Lipschitz continuous of moduli f µ , f γ in µ and γ. Hence,

           f c (µ, γ) − fnc1 (µ, γ)
          ˆ n2
        6     |[R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ))| Φ (dε)
              ˆ
          + |[R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s (n1 , γ) ε, Γ (n1 , γ))| Φ (dε)
                                        ˆ
            c                                               c
        6 f µ |s (n2 , γ) − s (n1 , γ)| |ε| Φ (dε) + f γ |Γ (n2 , γ) − Γ (n1 , γ)| .
                               
              c             c
        6   f µ ksn k + f γ Γn |n2 − n1 | ,

                                                          q
                                                              2
                                   ´
     where we have used                |ε| Φ (dε) =           π   < 1.


                                                                     80
    2. Assume WLOG that s1 6 s2 . Using Lemma 4, the difference between the maximums is
         bounded by
                           ¨ 
                        max f ′ − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s2 ε, Γ (n, γ)) , 0
                                                                           
            A ≡
                                                                        
                    −max f − [R (f )] (ρθ µ + s1 ε, Γ (n, γ)) , 0 F df ′ Φ (dε)
                            ′           c
                                                                               

                    ¨
                       [[R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s2 ε, Γ (n, γ)) − [R (f c )] (ρθ µ + s1 ε, Γ (n, γ))] F df ′ Φ (dε) .
                                                                                                       
                  6


         We then proceed with the change of variable µ′ = ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε,
                                                                                                                                       (µ′ −ρθ µ)2
                                                                                                                        1
             ¨                                                                ¨
                                                                                                                                   −
                       c                                      ′                           c    ′                                         2s2
                                                                                                                                                     F df ′ dµ′ .
                                                                                                                                                          
                 [R (f )] (ρθ µ + si ε, Γ (n, γ)) F df             Φ (dε) =        [R (f )] µ , Γ (n, γ)                √      e            i
                                                                                                                 si 2π

         Hence,
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                  (µ′ −ρθ µ)2                           (µ′ −ρθ µ)2
                                                                        1                             1
                      ¨
                                                                              −                                   −
                                                                                     2s2                                     2s2
                               [R (f c )] µ′ , Γ (n, γ)                                                                                  F df ′ dµ′ .
                                                                                                                                                
              A6                                                        √   e          i        −     √         e              i
                                                                   s2 2π                            s1 2π

         From the fundamental theorem of calculus and summing over s,
                                                                                !
                           ˚     s2
                                                             1     (µ ′ − ρ µ)2    1 − (µ′ −ρ2θ µ)
                                                                                                   2
                                      c     ′
                                                                           θ                             ′
                                                                                                             ′
            A 6                  [R (f )] µ , Γ (n, γ) − 2 +                      √   e    2s        F df    dµ ds
                            s1                               s           s4        2π
                        ˚ s2
                                                                    1 ε2
                                                                            
                                 [R (f )] (ρθ µ + sε, Γ (n, γ)) − + 3 F df ′ Φ (dε) ds
                                      c
                                                                                   
                 6
                            s1                                      s s
                           ˚ s2             2
                         c            1 ε
                                    − + 3 F df ′ Φ (dε) ds
                                                      
                 6     f
                               s      s s
                            1                     
                         c        1           1
                 6     f              +              |s2 − s1 | .
                             s (0, γ) s (0, γ)3




G.3       Lemmas for Proposition 2
Lemma 9. Under the conditions of Lemma  7, the equilibrium
                                                           cutoff f c ∈ F1 is strictly increasing
in µ and γ and satisfies ∀µ1 6 µ2 ∈ µ, µ , γ1 6 γ2 ∈ γ, γ :
                                                                            −1                                              
     c                     c                              c         ′                                               ′
F (f (µ2 , γ1 )) − F (f (µ1 , γ1 ))       >       1+   βf µ    F        ksn k    Sµ (µ, γ)              min F                      (µ2 − µ1 ) ,
                                                                                                [f c (µ1 ,γ1 ),f c (µ2 ,γ1 )]
                                                                   −1                                                                                 
                                                         c
F (f c (µ1 , γ2 )) − F (f c (µ1 , γ1 ))           1 + βf µ F ′ ksn k                                                                         ′
                                                                                                  
                                          >                               Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k                                      min F                  (γ2 − γ1 ) .
                                                                                                                            [f c (µ1 ,γ1 ),f (µ1 ,γ2 )]
                                                                                                                                           c




                                                                            81
Proof. Let us define the following two auxiliary functions ψ and Ψ as

                                      max [f ′ − R (f c ) (ρθ µ + s (ñ, γ) ε, Γ (F (f c (µ, γ)) , γ)) , 0] F (df ′ ) Φ (dε) ,
                                  ˜
ψ (µ, γ, ñ)    = S (µ, γ) − β
Ψ (µ, γ, ñ)    = F (ψ (µ, γ, ñ)) − ñ.

By construction, since f c is the equilibrium cutoff, we have

                                    ∀ (µ, γ) ∈ S, Ψ (µ, γ, F (f c (µ, γ))) = 0,

and similarly, ψ (µ, γ, F (f c (µ, γ))) = f c (µ, γ) , ∀ (µ, γ) ∈ S. Note that, from the properties of
f c ∈ F 1 , Ψ is Lipschitz continuous in µ and γ. In addition, since Sµ > 0, Sγ > 0, sγ < 0, Γn > 0,
Γγ > 0 and f c ∈ F1 is monotonic, Ψ is strictly increasing in µ and γ such that
                             
      ∀µ1 6 µ2 ∈ µ, µ , γ ∈ γ, γ ,
                                                                                          
                                                                                ′
          Ψ (µ2 , γ, ñ) − Ψ (µ1 , γ, ñ) > Sµ (µ, γ)        minF               (µ2 − µ1 ) ,
                                                      [ψ(µ1 ,γ,ñ),ψ(µ2 ,γ,ñ)]
                                   
      ∀µ ∈ µ, µ , γ1 6 γ2 ∈ γ, γ ,
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                  minF ′
                                                                       
          Ψ (µ, γ2 , ñ) − Ψ (µ, γ1 , ñ) > Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k                                                     (γ2 − γ1 ) .
                                                                                        [ψ(µ,γ1 ,ñ),ψ(µ,γ2 ,ñ)]


Note that we have used the result that a lower bound on the rate of increase of Ψ as a function of
γ is Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k > 0 according to Lemma 7. On the other hand, using similar arguments
                                                                                    c
to Lemma (8), we have that ψ is Lipschitz in ñ of modulus βf µ ksn k. Hence, for ñ1 6 ñ2 , that
                                                                                     
         c                                                                   c
− 1 + βf µ F ′ ksn k (ñ2 − ñ1 ) 6 Ψ (µ, γ, ñ2 )−Ψ (µ, γ, ñ1 ) 6 − 1 − βf µ F ′ ksn k (ñ2 − ñ1 ) 6 0,

                                                   c
where we have used the fact β kF ′ k ksn k f µ 6 β kF ′ k ∆n f < 1 under condition (33), as argued in
Proposition 1. The implicit function theorem for Lipschitz functions (see Dontchev and Rockafellar
(2009)) tells us that the solution ñ (µ, γ) = F (f c (µ, γ)) to equation Ψ (µ, γ, ñ (µ, γ)) = 0 is such
that, ∀ (µi , γi ) ∈ S, i = 1, 2:
                                                −1                                
                                        c  ′                               ′
ñ (µ2 , γ1 ) − ñ (µ1 , γ1 ) >  1 + βf µ F ksn k               minF                   Sµ (µ, γ) (µ2 − µ1 ) ,
                                                       [f c (µ1 ,γ1 ),f c (µ2 ,γ1 )]
                                                −1                                
                                        c  ′                               ′
                                                                                                               
ñ (µ1 , γ2 ) − ñ (µ1 , γ1 ) >  1 + βf µ F ksn k               minF                     Sγ (µ, γ) − β∆s f ksγ k (γ2 − γ1 ) .
                                                                [f c (µ1 ,γ1 ),f c (µ1 ,γ2 )]




G.4     Lemmas for Proposition 3
Lemma 10. Under the conditions of Proposition 3, the mapping T W is a contraction on B (S).

Proof. Let W ∈ B (S). Note first that T W is a well-defined self-map on B (S). Indeed, the Theorem


                                                          82
of the Maximum tells us that T W W is continuous. It is also bounded, since for all (µ, γ) ∈ S,
                                                                    2
                                                       1
                                                                         ˆ
                                       W
                                                             −aµ+ a2γ
                                    T       W (µ, γ) 6     1+e          + |f | dF + β kW k .
                                                       a

We then conclude by noticing that mapping T W trivially satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions.
Indeed, T W satisfies

  1. Monotonicity: Let W1 6 W2 ∈ B (S), then T W W2 > T W W1 .

  2. Discounting: Let W ∈ B (S) and a ∈ R, then T W (W + a) = T W W + βa.

   Hence, T W is a contraction on B (S).


Lemma 11. Under the conditions of Proposition 3, the mapping T W is a well-defined self-map on
W ⊂ B (S).

Proof. Let W ∈ W. We must verify that T W W is Lipschitz continuous of moduli W µ , W γ . In
                                                                                       

what follows, it is useful to define the value of planning problem when evaluated at some arbitrary
cutoff in the current period. Define T̃ W such that
                                                    f2
                                                                
                                         1
                                                  ˆ
                                                −aµ+ a2γ
          T̃   W
                   (W ) (µ, γ, f ) ≡       1−e             − f F df˜
                                                              ˜
                                         a
                                       ˆ
                                     +β [R (W )] (ρθ µ + s (F (f ) , γ) ε, Γ (F (f ) , γ)) Φ (dε) .

                                           h        i
Then, by definition, T W (W ) (µ, γ) = max T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ, f ).
                            
                                                          f

  1. T W W is Lipschitz continuous in µ with modulus W µ . Let µ1 6 µ2 ∈ µ, µ and γ ∈ γ, γ .
                                                                                       

     Denote fiSP , i = 1, 2 the optimal cutoffs and entry associated to the maximization problem
     when evaluated at µi . Let ni = F fiSP . The difference T W W (µ2 , γ) − T W W (µ1 , γ) can
                                                                                 

     be bounded above by evaluating the value of the planning problem for µ1 at the suboptimal
     point f2SP . Hence,
                                                h     i             h      i
              T W W (µ2 , γ) − T W W (µ1 , γ) 6 T̃ W W µ2 , γ, f2SP − T˜ W W µ1 , γ, f2SP
                                                                                      

                                                              6 A + βB

     where
                   ˆ   f2 SP                              ˆ          f2 SP                                   
      A =                       E [u (θ) | µ2 , γ] − f˜ dF f˜ −                   E [u (θ + εz ) | µ1 , γ] − f˜ dF f˜
                   f                                                 f
                   ˆ                                                               ˆ
     B   =             [R (W )] (ρθ µ2 + s (n2 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) Φ (dε) −            [R (W )] (ρθ µ1 + s (n2 , γ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ)) Φ (dε) .




                                                                83
                                                   2
                                                        
                                  1         −aµ+ a2γ
  Since E [u (θ) | µ, γ] =        a       1−e               , we control term A as follows

                                                                         2
                                                              −aµ+ a2γ
                                                  |A| 6 e                    |µ2 − µ1 | .

  Using Lemma 4.3 and the Lipschitz property of R (W ), we bound B by

                                                   |B| 6 ρθ W µ |µ2 − µ1 | .

  Repeating the same argument for T W W (µ1 , γ)− T W W (µ2 , γ) to obtain the same bounds,
                                                    

  we conclude from the definition
                                                                                             2
                                                                                     −aµ+ a2γ
                                                 W µ = (1 − βρθ )−1 e

   that Lipschitz continuity of modulus W µ is preserved by the mapping T W .

2. T W W is Lipschitz continuous in γ with modulus W γ . Let µ ∈ µ, µ and γ1 6 γ2 ∈ γ, γ .
                                                                                     

  Denote fiSP , i = 1, 2 the optimal cutoffs and entry associated to the maximization problem
  when evaluated at γi . Let ni = F fiSP . The difference T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) can
                                                                               

  be bounded above by evaluating the value of the planning problem for γ1 at the suboptimal
  point f2SP . Hence,
                                             h     i             h      i
           T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) 6 T̃ W W µ, γ2 , f2SP − T˜ W W µ, γ1 , f2SP
                                                                                   

                                                            6 A + β (B + C)

  where
             ˆ    f2 SP                             ˆ               f2 SP                                      
  A =                      E [u (θ) | µ, γ2 ] − f dF f˜ −
                                                ˜                                   E [u (θ + εz ) | µ, γ1 ] − f˜ dF f˜
              f                                                     f
             ˆ                                                                       ˆ
  B   =           [R (W )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ2 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ2 )) Φ (dε) −                [R (W )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ2 )) Φ (dε)
             ˆ                                                                       ˆ
  C   =           [R (W )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ2 )) Φ (dε) −                [R (W )] (ρθ µ + s (n2 , γ1 ) ε, Γ (n2 , γ1 )) Φ (dε) .


  Using the same arguments as in the previous step, we have

                                                              a −aµ+ a2γ2
                                                |A| 6             e       |γ2 − γ1 | .
                                                             2γ 2

  Using Lemma 4.3, the Lipschitz property of R (W ) and the Mean Value Theorem on s and
  Γ, we can bound B and C by
                                                    ˆ
                             |B| 6 W µ ksγ k                |ε| dΦ |γ2 − γ1 | 6 W µ ksγ k |γ2 − γ1 |

                             |C| 6 W γ Γγ |γ2 − γ1 | 6 W γ ρ2θ |γ2 − γ1 | ,

                                                               84
                                                γ 2
      where we have used the fact that Γγ = ρ2θ γ+γz  6 ρ2θ . Repeating the same argument for
       W             W 
       T W (µ, γ1 ) − T W (µ, γ2 ) to obtain the same bounds, we conclude from the definition

                                                                             a −aµ+ a2γ2
                                                                                                               
                                                                 −1
                                       Wγ = 1 −             βρ2θ                 e       + β ksγ k W µ
                                                                            2γ 2

      that Lipschitz continuity of modulus W γ is preserved by the mapping T W .



Lemma 12. Under the conditions of Proposition 3, for all W ∈ W, T W W is differentiable.

Proof. Differentiability in µ is immediate after proceeding to the change of variable µ′ = ρθ µ +
s nSP , γ ε. Indeed, one can rewrite
         


                                                        f SP     
                                                                              a2
                                                                                      
                                                                 1
                                                    ˆ
             T W W (µ, γ) =                                         1 − e−aµ+ 2γ − f˜ F df˜
                 
                                           max
                                           f SP                  a
                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                    (µ′ −ρ
                                                                                                                    θ        µ)
                                                                                                     1       −
                                                ˆ
                                                                   ′                                                       2
                                                                                SP                             2s(nSP ,γ )
                                                                                                                             dµ′ .
                                                                                          
                                           +β       [R (W )] µ , Γ n                 ,γ        √            e
                                                                                                       SP
                                                                                                2πs (n , γ)

W being continuous and integrable, and using the Envelope Theorem, we can differentiate under
the integral sign. T W W is thus differentiable in µ and its derivative is
                                                                                                                                                2
                              2                                                                                      θ            (µ′ −ρ   µ)
                                                                                            ρθ               −
                                       ˆ
                       −aµ+ a2γ                             ′                                                            2
                                                                   SP
                                                                                                   µ′ − ρθ µ e 2s(nSP ,γ) dµ′ .
                                                                                
  Wµ (µ, γ) = e                   +β       [R (W )] µ , Γ n                ,γ        √
                                                                                          3    SP
                                                                                       2πs (n , γ)

Let us then
         h turn toi the differentiability along γ. The argument is inspired from Kim (1993). Let
us define T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ, f ) the planner’s current value evaluated at some arbitrary cutoff f as

                                                        f
                                                                    2
                                                                               
                                                        1
                                         ˆ
                                                               −aµ+ a2γ
          h                i
              T̃   W
                       (W ) (µ, γ, f ) ≡                  1−e             − f F df˜
                                                                            ˜
                                                        a
                                                                                             (µ′ −ρθ µ)2
                                                                                  1
                                                      ˆ
                                                                  ′                        −
                                                                                          e 2s(n,γ)2 dµ′ ,
                                                                            
                                                    +β [R (W )] µ , Γ (n, γ) √
                                                                               2πs (n, γ)
                                                          h        i
where n = F (f ). By definition, T W W (µ, γ) = max T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ, f ). Fix µ ∈ µ, µ . Pick
                                                                                               
                                                     hf       i
γ1 , γ2 ∈ γ, γ arbitrarily close, denote fi = argmax T̃ W (W ) (µ, γi , f ) and ni = F (fi ) for i = 1, 2.
             
                                                                       f
Then, for all f ∈ R, we have:
                                              h         i              h         i
             T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) > T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ2 , f ) − T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ1 , f1 ) .
                                

                                                     
In particular, we can choose f = f˜2 and ñ2 = F f˜2 to be such that Γ (n1 , γ1 ) = Γ (ñ2 , γ2 ), that
                                
is to say f˜2 = F −1 n1 − γ2γ−γ
                             x
                               1
                                  , which is well defined for γ1 and γ2 close enough. We then obtain

                                                                           85
the following lower bound:

                     T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) > Ψ (µ, γ1 , n1 , ∆) − Ψ (µ, γ1 , n1 , 0)
                                        

                                                                      +Ξ (µ, γ1 , n1 , ∆) − Ξ (µ, γ1 , n1 , 0) ,

where ∆ = γ2 − γ1 and
                                              
                                     F −1 n− γ∆                          2
                                                                                         
                                                    1
                                 ˆ
                                                                     a
                                              x               −aµ+ 2(γ+∆)
      Υ (µ, γ, n, ∆) ≡                                      1−e                    − f F (df )
                                                    a
                                                                                                               (µ′ −ρθ µ)2
                                                                                                      −
                                                                                   1
                                     ˆ                                                                                  2
      Ξ (µ, γ, n, ∆) ≡ β                 [R (W )] µ′ , Γ (n, γ) √
                                                                  
                                                                                                    e    (
                                                                                                          2s n− γ∆ ,γ+∆
                                                                                                                 x           ) dµ′ .
                                                                                       ∆
                                                                 2πs n −               γx , γ   +∆

Functions Υ and Ξ are continuously differentiable in ∆. Hence, by the Mean Value Theorem, there
       ˜ − ∈ [0, ∆] such that
exists ∆
                                               h                                      i
                                                                ˜ − + Ξ∆ µ, γ1 , n1 , ∆
              T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) > Υ∆ µ, γ1 , n1 , ∆                     ˜ − ∆.
                                 


Similarly, we can repeat this argument to obtain an upper bound. For all f ∈ R,
                                                h        i             h         i
              T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) 6 T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ, f2 ) − T̃ W (W ) (µ, γ1 , f ) .
                                 

                                                                      
Let us choose f = f˜1 to be such that Γ (n2 , γ2 ) = Γ F f˜1 , γ1 , that is to say f˜1 =
                                   
F −1 n2 + γ2γ−γ
             x
               1
                  . Define ñ 1 = F  f˜1 the corresponding measure of investors. Then,



                     T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) 6 Υ (µ, γ2 , n2 , 0) − Υ (µ, γ2 , n2 , −∆)
                                        

                                                                      +Ξ (µ, γ2 , n2 , 0) − Ξ (µ, γ2 , n2 , −∆)

                                ˜ + ∈ [0, ∆] such that
with ∆ = γ2 − γ1 . There exists ∆
                                           h                                        i
                                                             ˜ + + Υ∆ µ, γ2 , n2 , −∆
          T W W (µ, γ2 ) − T W W (µ, γ1 ) 6 Υ∆ µ, γ2 , n2 , −∆                      ˜ + ∆.
                             


The derivatives of functions Υ and Ξ being continuous in all their arguments and the optimal
nSP = F f SP being continuous by the Theorem
              
                                         h    of the
                                                  i Maximum,
                                                                we may now take the following
                                                          ˜
                          SP               W                   SP = F f SP , fix γ1 = γ and
                                                                           
limit: for some γ ∈ γ, γ , f    = argmax T̃ (W ) µ, γ, f , n
take the limit ∆ → 0 in γ2 = γ + ∆. Then,
                                                           W 
                                                           T W (µ, γ + ∆) − T W W (µ, γ)
                                                                                
                          SP                   SP
                                                  
          Υ∆ µ, γ, n           , 0 + Ξ∆ µ, γ, n , 0 6 lim
                                                      ∆→0              ∆




                                                              86
and
             T W W (µ, γ + ∆) − T W W (µ, γ)
                                        
                                                   6 Υ∆ µ, γ, nSP , 0 + Ξ∆ µ, γ, nSP , 0 .
                                                                                       
        lim
        ∆→0                   ∆
Function T W W is thus differentiable in γ and its derivative is Υ∆ µ, γ, nSP , 0 + Ξ∆ µ, γ, nSP , 0 ,
                                                                                                   

where
                                                                         
                     SP     1      1        1           −aµ+ a
                                                              2 
                                                                       SP        a −aµ+ a2γ2
                                                                                                F f SP
                                                                                                       
      Υ∆   µ, γ, n , 0 = −                     1 −    e      2γ   −  f        +      e
                           γx F ′ (f SP ) a                                     2γ 2
                                                                  µ′ −ρ µ 2
                                                          1 − 2s( (nSPθ ,γ))2
                           ˆ
                  SP
                                         ′
      Ξ∆   µ, γ, n , 0 = β [R (W )] (µ , Γ (n, γ)) √ e
                                                           2π
                                                                 !
                                                               2                                           
                                      1         (µ − ρθ µ)
                                                    ′
                                                                        1         SP
                                                                                                  SP
                                                                                                          
                         × −                2 +               4      −     s n  n    , γ   + s γ n    , γ    dµ′ .
                               s (nSP , γ)       s (nSP , γ)           γx




Lemma 13. The social value of information is positive. In particular, the value function that
corresponds to the planning problem satisfies

                                       d
                                         βE [W (ρθ µ + s (n, γ) ε, Γ (n, γ))] > 0.
                                      dn

Proof. Since E0 [u (θt )] is bounded, the Principle of Optimality (Theorem 9.2 of Stokey et al. (1989))
applies and the recursive social planner problem stated in (38) is equivalent to its sequential for-
mulation. For our purpose, it is useful to define the continuation value as
                                                                   (∞                                                      )
                                                                                         h                         i
                                                                               β F ftef f Et u (θt ) | {Xs , Ys }t−1
                                                                    X
             cont                                                                   t
         W          (µ, γ)     =            max               E0                                                 s=0               (44)
                                     ftef f ({Xs ,Ys }t−1
                                                      s=0 )              t=1
                              s.t.   ∀t > 0, θt+1 = ρθ θt + εθt
                                     Xt = θt + εX              Y
                                                t , Yt = θt + εt

                                     θ0 ∼ N µ, γ −1 ,
                                                     


which, by the Principle of Optimality, verifies W cont (µ, γ) = βE [W (µ′ , γ ′ ) | µ, γ]. We also define
the augmented problem, which corresponds to the sequential planning problem
                                                                            when the planner
                                                         v        v               −1
is initially endowed with an additional signal v = θ0 + ε0 where ε0 ∼ N 0, (∆nγx )    for some
∆n > 0, as
                                                                         (∞                                                        )
                                                                                                h                              i
                                                                                           ef f
                                                                                                 Et u (θt ) | {Xs , Ys }t−1
                                                                          X
   W̃ cont,∆n (µ, γ, v)        =              max              E0                   β t F ft                            s=0 , v0    (45)
                                     ftef f ({Xs ,Ys }t−1
                                                      s=0 ,v0 )               t=1
                              s.t.   ∀t, θt+1 = ρθ θt +            εθt
                                     Xt = θt + εX              Y
                                                t , Yt = θt + εt

                                     θ0 ∼ N µ, γ −1 , v = θ0 + εv0 .
                                                     


Note first that any feasible strategy f SP in the planning problem (44) is feasible in the augmented


                                                                         87
problem (45) by defining
                                                                    
                    ftef f,v {Xs , Ys }t−1        ef f
                                       s=0 , v ≡ ft      {Xs , Ys }t−1                    t−1
                                                                   s=0 , ∀t, v, {Xs , Ys }s=0 .


Hence, applying the law of iterated expectation, the value functions satisfy W̃ cont,∆n (µ, γ, v) >
W cont (µ, γ) and the marginal social value of a signal is positive. Note, in addition, that the signal
v only enters the problem (45) through the expectation operator Et [·]. In particular, using Bayes’
formula, ∀t,
                                                                                                                     
       h                                            i                       γµ + ∆nγx v
     Et u (θt ) | θ0 ∼ N µ, γ −1 , v, {Xs , Ys }t−1                                     , (γ + ∆nγx )−1 , {Xs , Ys }t−1
                                
                                                s=0 = Et u (θt ) | θ0 ∼ N                                           s=0 ,
                                                                             γ + ∆nγx

                                                                                    
                                                                 γµ+∆nγx v
which implies that W̃ cont,∆n (µ, γ, v) = W cont                  γ+∆nγx , γ   + ∆nγx , ∀µ, γ, v. To conclude, let
                                             d
us return to the value the value            dn βE [W    | µ, γ]. Note that since W is differentiable in µ and
γ from Lemma (12), this derivative exists and is well defined. We now note that, by definition,
 d
dn βE [W   | µ, γ] is the value of adding one marginal signal v about θ of precision “γx dn” at the end
of a period. By construction, we have
                                                                                                 
 d                                                 −1     γµ + ∆nγx v
   βE W µ′ , γ ′ | µ, γ =                                     cont
                     
                                   lim (∆n) E W                        , γ + ∆nγx − W (µ, γ) | µ, γ
dn                                 ∆n→0                    γ + ∆nγx
                                               h                                      i
                                 = lim (∆n)−1 E W̃ cont,∆n (µ, γ, v) − W (µ, γ) | µ, γ > 0.
                                     ∆n→0




Lemma 14. Let W ∈ W be the unique solution to the planner’s problem and f SP its optimal
cutoff. Let V τ (µ, γ, f ) be the value function of a firm facing investment subsidy τ (µ, γ) and tax
T (µ, γ) such that

           V τ (µ, γ, f ) = max E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f + τ (µ, γ) , βE V τ µ′ , γ ′ , f ′
                                                                                      
                                                                                           − T (µ, γ) .                     (46)

Then, the subsidy τ and tax T implicitly defined by

                                  d 
                                   E W ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ
                                                                     
               τ (µ, γ) = β
                                 dn¨
                                     V τ ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ , f ′ Φ (dε) F df ′ ,
                                                                                       
                                +β                                                                                          (47)


where nSP = F f SP             and T (µ, γ) = F f SP (µ, γ) τ (µ, γ), exist and implement the planner’s
                                                          

allocation.

Proof. Expression (47) is a functional equation in τ because the value function V τ depends im-
plicitly on τ . To show that this functional equation has a solution, we define the mapping T τ
corresponding to (46) on the set of continuous and bounded functions B (S × R) to itself such that




                                                             88
for all (µ, γ, f ) ∈ S × R and V ∈ B (S × R),

         [T τ V ] (µ, γ, f ) = max E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f + τ (µ, γ) , βE V µ′ , γ ′ , f ′
                                                                                       
                                                                                            − T (µ, γ)
                                            d
                               τ (µ, γ) = β E W µ′ , γ ′ + βE V µ′ , γ ′ , f ′
                                                                            
                       s.t.
                                           dn
                               T (µ, γ) = nSP (µ, γ) τ (µ, γ)
                               µ′ = ρθ µ + s nSP (µ, γ) , γ ε, ε ∈ N (0, 1) ,
                                                            

                               γ ′ = Γ nSP (µ, γ) , γ .
                                                     


Note that the mapping T τ satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions.

  1. Monotonicity: note that
                                            
                  [T V ] (µ, γ, f ) = max E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f + 1 − nSP ×
                    τ
                                                                          

                                                                              
                                               ′ ′   ′
                                                             d       ′ ′
                                                                            
                                        βE V µ , γ , f + β E W µ , γ             ,
                                                              dn
                                                                                           
                                                                            d 
                                       1 − nSP βE V µ′ , γ ′ , f ′ − nSP β E W µ′ , γ ′
                                                                                    
                                                                                            .
                                                                           dn

        Hence, for V1 6 V2 ∈ B (S × R), T τ V2 > T τ V1 .

  2. Discounting: for a ∈ R,
                                         
           [T (V + a)] (µ, γ, f ) = max E [u (θ) | µ, γ] − f + 1 − nSP ×
              τ
                                                                       

                                                                                
                                               ′ ′ ′
                                                                 d     ′ ′
                                                                              
                                      βE V µ , γ , f + a + β E W µ , γ             ,
                                                                  dn
                                                                                            
                                           SP
                                                        ′ ′ ′
                                                                      SP   d      ′ ′
                                                                                         
                                     1−n         βE V µ , γ , f + a − n β E W µ , γ
                                                                            dn
                                       τ
                                  6 [T V ] (µ, γ, f ) + βa.


The mapping T τ thus defines a contraction on B (S × R). Denote V τ its unique fixed point.
                          d
The subsidy τ (µ, γ) = β dn EnSP [W (µ′ , γ ′ )] + βEnSP [V τ (µ′ , γ ′ , f ′ )] and the tax T (µ, γ) =
nSP (µ, γ) τ (µ, γ) implement the efficient cutoff f SP . Indeed, the maximization yields the following
decision: invest if and only if

                                                                                     d 
          ≤ E [u (θ) | µ, γ] + τ (µ, γ) − βE V µ′ , γ ′ , f ′ = E [u (θ) | µ, γ] + β E W µ′ , γ ′ ,
                                                                                              
    f
                                                                                    dn

which coincides with the efficient cutoff f SP .




                                                      89
G.5       Lemmas for Proposition 4
Lemma 15. Under the conditions of Proposition 4, for γx small enough, the planner’s optimal
cutoff f SP is continuous and strictly increasing in µ and γ such that

                                                                                       1     a2
                 ∀ µ 6 µ1 6 µ2 6 µ,                    f SP (µ2 , γ) − f SP (µ1 , γ) > e−aµ+ 2γ (µ2 − µ1 ) ,
                                                                                       3
                                                                                       a −aµ+ a2γ2
                 ∀ γ 6 γ1 6 γ2 6 γ,                    f SP (µ, γ2 ) − f SP (µ, γ1 ) > 2 e         (γ2 − γ1 ) .
                                                                                      3γ

Proof. Expanding the derivative in equation (39) (Proposition 3), the planner’s optimal cutoff
solves the implicit equation
                                             2
                                                  
                         1
                                                            ˆ
     SP                               −aµ+ a2γ
                                        + β εsn nSP , γ Wµ ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ Φ (dε)
                                                                                      
 f        (µ, γ) =         1−e
                         a
                           ˆ
                         +β Γn nSP , γ Wγ ρθ µ + s nSP , γ ε, Γ nSP , γ Φ (dε)
                                                                     


where nSP = F f SP . To analyze the behavior of the optimal cutoff, define the function ϑ (µ, γ, f )
                  

as
                          2
                             
                     1
                                    ˆ
                    −aµ+ a2γ
ϑ (µ, γ, f ) ≡   1−e            + β εsn (F (f ) , γ) Wµ (ρθ µ + s (F (f ) , γ) ε, Γ (F (f ) , γ)) Φ (dε)
                     a
                 ˆ
               +β Γn (F (f ) , γ) Wγ (ρθ µ + s (F (f ) , γ) ε, Γ (F (f ) , γ)) Φ (dε) − f.


By definition, f SP (µ, γ) is a root of function ϑ, i.e., ϑ µ, γ, f SP (µ, γ) = 0. To lighten the notation,
                                                                             

define the functions A and B as

                                                                               − 12
                                     ρθ                   1         1
                  ˆ
A (µ, γ, f ) ≡           ε                        2         −                           Wµ (ρθ µ + s (F (f ) , γ) ε, Γ (F (f ) , γ)) Φ (dε)
                             2 (γ + γz + nγx )            γ   γ + γz + nγx
                                          2
                              ρ2θ Γ (n, γ)
                  ˆ
B (µ, γ, f ) ≡                                2 Wγ    (ρθ µ + s (F (f ) , γ) ε, Γ (F (f ) , γ)) Φ (dε) ,
                         (γ + γz + nγx )

where we have substituted for the expressions of sn and Γn , so that
                                                                2
                                                                     
                                    1                     −aµ+ a2γ
                     ϑ (µ, γ, f ) =               1−e                    − f + βγx [A (µ, γ, f ) + B (µ, γ, f )] .
                                    a

The derivatives of W , provided in Lemma 12, are algebraic combinations of continuously differ-
entiable functions with bounded derivatives on a compact and the Lipschitz function W . They
are therefore Lipschitz in µ and γ. Functions A and B are themselves compositions and multipli-
cations of continuously differentiable functions on a compact with Wµ and Wγ . Hence, they are
                                                                                                       
Lipschitz continuous in µ, γ and f . Denote their moduli of Lipschitz continuity by Aµ , Aγ , Af
and B µ , B γ , B f . By choosing γx sufficiently small that γx βAf 6 14 and γx βB f 6 14 , we thus have
                   




                                                                          90
for all f1 6 f2 ,
                          3                                              1
                         − (f2 − f1 ) 6 ϑ (µ, γ, f2 ) − ϑ (µ, γ, f1 ) 6 − (f2 − f1 ) .
                          2                                              2
                                                                          a 2                          a   2
                                                                   1 −aµ+ 2γ                  1 1 −aµ+ 2γ
Similarly, choosing γx small enough that γx βAµ 6                  4e        ,   γx βB µ 6    4 ae        ,      γx βAγ 6
              2                                 2
1 a    −aµ+ a2γ                   1 a    −aµ+ a2γ
4 2γ 2 e          and γx βB γ 6   4 2γ 2 e          , we have

                                                                                 1       a2
                  ∀ µ 6 µ1 6 µ2 6 µ,          ϑ (µ2 , γ, f ) − ϑ (µ1 , γ, f ) > e−aµ+ 2γ (µ2 − µ1 )
                                                                                 2
                                                                                1 a −aµ+ a2γ2
                  ∀ γ 6 γ1 6 γ2 6 γ,          ϑ (µ, γ2 , f ) − ϑ (µ, γ1 , f ) >        e      (γ2 − γ1 ) .
                                                                                2 2γ 2

Hence, by the Implicit Function Theorem applied to Lipschitz functions (Dontchev and Rockafellar,
2009), the planner’s optimal cutoff f SP (µ, γ) is Lipschitz continuous and such that for γx small
enough

                                                                                         a2
                                                                                 1 −aµ+ 2γ
                                                                                 2e
              ∀ µ 6 µ1 6 µ2 6 µ,             f SP (µ2 , γ) − f SP (µ1 , γ) > −                (µ2 − µ1 )
                                                                                    − 32
                                                                                             a2
                                                                                 1 a −aµ+ 2γ
                                                                                 2 2γ 2 e
              ∀ γ 6 γ1 6 γ2 6 γ,             f SP (µ, γ2 ) − f SP (µ, γ1 ) > −                    (γ2 − γ1 ) .
                                                                                        − 23




                                                           91
