NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUICIDE AND PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INDIA
Siwan Anderson
Garance Genicot
Working Paper 19978
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19978
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

Genicot is grateful to the Development Research Group of the World Bank for their warm hospitality
during the writing of a first draft of this paper. Javier Torres's research assistance was appreciated. We
thank Patrick Francois, Eliana La Ferrara and Debraj Ray for comments, as well as seminar participants
at Bocconi University, the IIES, the Maryland Population Research Center, the World Bank DECRG
and IFPRI. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Siwan Anderson and Garance Genicot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Suicide and Property Rights in India
Siwan Anderson and Garance Genicot
NBER Working Paper No. 19978
March 2014
JEL No. D1,K36,O1
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the impact of female property rights on male and female suicide rates in India. Using
state level variation in legal changes to women's property rights, we show that better property rights
for women are associated with a decrease in the difference between female and male suicide rates,
but an increase in both male and female suicides. We conjecture that increasing female property rights
increased conflict within household and this increased conflict resulted in more suicides among both
men and women in India. Using individual level data on domestic violence we find evidence that increased
property rights for women did increase the incidence of wife beating in India. A model of intra-household
bargaining with asymmetric information and costly conflict is consistent with these ˝findings.
Siwan Anderson
UBC
siwander@interchange.ubc.ca
Garance Genicot
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC 570
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
gg58@georgetown.edu

1

Introduction

Suicide rates in India have increased steadily over the last few decades.1 The WHO estimates that
there were 190,000 adult suicide deaths in India in 2010 alone. Suicide has become the second
leading cause of death among young Indians - it is the cause of twice as many deaths as HIV/AIDS
and almost the same number as maternal deaths in young women (Patel et. al. 2012).2 This paper
studies the impact of female property rights on male and female suicide rates in India.3 Using
state level variation in legal changes to women’s property rights, we show that better property
rights for women are associated with a decrease in the difference between female and male suicide
rates, but an increase in both male and female suicides.4 The large majority of suicide victims in
India are married and the broad class of ‘family problems’ is the main reported cause of suicide
for both men and women. Using a simple model of intra-household bargaining with asymmetry
of information, we show how strengthening women’s inheritance rights can raise intra-household
conflict an increase suicide rates.
In line with the recent literature on the economics of the family, our theoretical model assumes
that cooperation in a marriage can generate some gains and that spouses bargain over the allocation
of consumptions in the household under the threat of separation (divorce or ‘separate spheres model’
a la Lundberg and Pollak (1993)). To this basic framework, we add two elements: asymmetry of
information and costly conflict. Private information can generate delays and bargaining failure.
Hence, we follow Bloch and Rao (2002) and assume that husbands and wives derive some private
value of their union that is not known to their spouse.5 Moreover, we aim to capture the idea
that conflict is an integral part of the bargaining process. When an offer (regarding the division of
resources) is rejected, conflict ensues. Threatening separation does create an atmosphere of discord
within the household that comes at a cost, and separation cannot be achieved instantaneously. At
any point though, individuals may instead choose the ultimate exit and commit suicide. Hence,
separations and suicides are predicted by the model.6 We show that a pro-women redistribution of
1

The estimated rate of increase is more than 40 percent. More detailed verbal autopsy studies suggest that annual
suicide rates could be six to nine times these official rates (refer to Vijayakumar 2010).
2
India is second only to China in terms of total number of suicides. Relative female to male mortality rates from
this cause are high in both these countries compared to other regions. Refer to Anderson and Ray (2010) for an
analysis of excess female mortality at different ages by cause of death in China and India.
3
Refer to Doepke et. a. (2012) for an overview on the economics of female property rights.
4
These results are obtained while controlling for state and year fixed effects, socio-economic controls and robust
to using political variables as instruments for pro-women legislative changes.
5
See also Friedberg and Stern (2010) and Bobonis (2013).
6
In Ligon et al (2004)’s dynamic model of bargaining, where divorce and suicide can occur, a key assumption

1

resources often increases the likelihood of conflict between husband and wives, in which case male
suicide increases and the ratio of female to male suicide rates decreases.
Consistently, we provide suggestive evidence that marital discord may be the main channel
through which improving female property rights raised suicides. We show that the state changes
that strengthen female property rights for women are associated with an increase in the suicide rate
from family problems but have no significant impact on suicides from other causes. Moreover, using
alternative individual level data, which contains measures of domestic violence, we find evidence
that increased property rights for women did increase the incidence of wife beating in India. This
is consistent with our hypothesis that increasing female property rights increased conflict within
household and it is this increased conflict which resulted in more suicides among both men and
women in India.
There is a large sociological literature in sociology, following Durkheim’s (1897) ground breaking
work, studying empirically the relationship between marriage and suicides has been much, though
the topic has been mostly ignored in economics.7 This sociological literature has long recognized
the tendency for higher suicide rates, for both men and women, to be associated with increased
equality across the sexes. It emphasizes how increased opportunities for women can accentuate
tensions and marital discord within households, by challenging traditional roles, increasing the
importance of negotiation and raising the potential for conflict. There are numerous empirical
accounts investigating the possible consequences of female empowerment on suicides. For example,
in the United States, Stack (1987) found a positive relationship between the labor force participation
of wives and both the male and female suicide rates over the period 1948-1963, when antipathy
towards female labor participation prevailed; and a smaller, but still positive relationship, with male
suicide rates over the 1964-1980 period when female labor participation was more widely accepted.8
Similarly, cross-country studies find a concave effect of female labor participation on the female to
male suicide ratio and a positive correlation between the UNDP’s Gender Empowerment Measure
(a measure of women’s access to social, political, and economic power) and suicide rates for both
women and men (Pampel 1998).9 In China, the marriage law in 1950 that granted women the right
is that there is a strong advantage to being the one leaving the other that can create a prisoner dilemma type of
situation. When the marriage surplus is small (due to a shock), this preemptive advantage can make it impossible
for the couple to stay together. If now one of the party prefers committing suicide than staying alone, suicide would
result. However, it is not clear that such a preemptive advantage exists in the case of India.
7
Ligon et al. (2004) and Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) being two exceptions.
8
Similar relationships are found for Canada (Trovato and Vos 1992).
9
Mayer (2003) finds similar correlations in India using state-wide variation in gender-related development indexes.

2

to choose their own partners, demand a divorce, inherit property, and control of their children,
might have resulted in an estimated 70,000 to 80,000 suicides and murders of women between 1950
and 1953 (Das Gupta et al 2000).10
Economists and sociologists have studied and found conflicting information on the association
between violence and women’s empowerment, particularly in terms of economic opportunity, control
of assets and social group participation. In India for instance, some studies find that women with
greater economic resources, such as ownership of land or employment were less likely to report
violence (for example, Panda and Agarwal 2005), while in others, employed women have been
found to report violence more frequently than unemployed women, and this is despite the higher
income resulting from female employment (see for instance, Eswaran and Malhorta 2011). Likewise,
Luke and Munshi (2011) find that when women in the tea plantations in South India earn a higher
share of the household income, the probability of marital violence increases. In the context of
Progresa in Mexico, Bobonis et al. (2012) find that although women in recipient households were
significantly less likely to be victims of physical abuse than women in comparable non-beneficiary
households, they were more likely to be victims of emotional violence and more likely to separate.
To be sure, this paper is not suggesting that improving female property rights is undesirable.
Until recently, women have been excluded from land rights in many societies and their ability to
inherit property has largely been restricted. A growing body of empirical evidence shows that
improving women’s asset ownership, relative income, or ability to control land impacts the intrahousehold allocation of resources towards children (among others Lundberg et al. 1997, Duflo
and Udry 2004, Bobonis 2009). That improvements in women’s relative position in the household
can be desirable, not only on equity, but also on efficiency grounds is a frequent justification for
policies targeting women, such as microcredit and conditional cash transfers. Moreover, there
is evidence that making inheritance laws more egalitarian between sons and daughters has had
desirable consequences in India. For example, Roy (2010) and Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan
(2013) show that the legal changes to women’s property rights that we consider here increased
daughters’ likelihood to inherit land, women’s age at marriage and the educational attainment of
daughters.
Our model predicts that women’s expected welfare rises due to increased female property rights.
10
Suicides of married women and men as a response to family conflict are a common occurrence particularly in
developing countries. Canetto (2008) discusses the cultural ramifications of suicide - that relative to developed
countries, where suicidal behavior tends to be interpreted as a symptom of individual mental health, in poorer
countries, suicide is often considered a normal, albeit last resort response, to a serious family conflict.

3

When wives contribute a greater proportion of the total family wealth, they do no longer accept any
allocation offered by their husbands. Women expect, and are more likely to get, a more equitable
share of consumption. However, as a consequence of these higher expectations, conflict within the
household can rise and result in higher suicide rates for both men and women.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section presents a theoretical model linking female
property rights and suicides. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the changes in female property rights that
we study and then we describe our data. Section 5 contains our empirical analysis. Section 6
concludes.

2

A Model of Household Conflict

This section presents a model of intra-household bargaining with asymmetry of information that
captures the idea that, within a household, arguing is akin to starting a conflict. While bargaining
and conflict are most often studied separately or as alternatives, there is a burgeoning literature
that recognize that conflict is often an intrinsic part of bargaining (see Sanchez-Pages 2009 and the
signaling models of domestic violence of Bloch and Rao (2002) and Bobonis (2013)).
In our model, husbands and wives can use their resources to generate a surplus, and they bargain
over its allocation. As is common in the literature on intra-household bargaining, who owns the
resources in the household matters by affecting the outside options of the spouses.11 In order for
bargaining to fail some of the time, we assume that spouses derive some private satisfaction with
the marriage, whose magnitude is unknown to their partner. But what is distinct in this model
is that we assume that when an offer is rejected, marital discord or conflict ensues. This comes
at a cost to each spouse, and a cost whose magnitude is realized only at the time of the conflict.
Separation cannot be achieved without going through a period of marital conflict. In contrast,
suicide, the ultimate exit, can be achieved instantaneously.
This choice of modeling aims at capturing, or at least accommodating, the main views on
suicide. Leenars (1996) provides a useful overview of the psychological perspective on suicide and of
Schneidman’s work.12 Both authors point to a lack of coping responses among people who attempt
11

In the ‘unitary’ model of the household, who owns the resources does not affect any of the household choices.
This model has been empirically rejected in most contexts.
12
Schneidman is considered to be the “father” of suicidology who pioneered the use of hotlines as a means of suicide
prevention.

4

or commit suicide. A recent traumatic event can be identified in many suicides. In particular,
suicide is linked to events involving loss or conflict in existing interpersonal relationships. However,
it is not simply the stress or even the pain, but the person’s inability to cope with the event or
pain. The common stimulus in suicide is unendurable psychological pain. The person may feel
any number of emotions but it is the feeling of being hopeless-helpless that is particularly painful
for many suicidal people. The situation is unbearable and the person desperately wants a way out
of it, an exit. The suicide is functional because it abolishes painful tension for the individual. It
provides relief from suffering. Schneidman identified cognitive constriction (i.e., rigidity in thinking,
narrowing of focus, tunnel vision, etc.) as a common cognitive state among those who die by suicide,
preventing individuals in pain from perceiving ways to end the pain other than death.
Hence, we think of the cost of conflict in our model as the psychological and or physical pain
that the spouses do endure during an episode of marital discord. It’s magnitude is uncertain exante since it depends on many factors, including their ability to cope and put weight on the future.
When the pain is too acute, individuals may choose to commit suicide to end it.

2.1

Preferences

The preferences of husbands and wives depend on the status of their marriage.
If the marriage is intact, both spouses enjoy the household resources, and some surplus is
generated. Moreover we follow Bloch and Rao (2002), Friedberg and Stern (2010) and Bobonis
(2013) in assuming that each has a personal level of satisfaction with the marriage that is private
information. Specifically, we assume that preferences can be represented by the utility functions
V h (Ih + Iw , x, θh ) & V w (Ih + Iw , x, θw ),

(1)

where Ij for j ∈ {h, w} represent the resources of the husband and wife, x indicates how pro-wife
the division of non public goods are within the household, and θj for j ∈ {h, w} are the husband
and wife’s private level of satisfaction with the marriage. These satisfaction levels are independent
and each follows a distribution Gj (θ).13 V w and V h are strictly increasing in income and personal
satisfaction, and weakly concave in income. Moreover, Vw is strictly increasing and concave in x
while Vh is strictly decreasing and convex in x, ∂ 2 V w (I, x, θw )/∂I∂x ≤ 0 and ∂ 2 V h (I, x, θh )/∂I∂x ≥
13

Adding a joint component to the satisfaction in the marriage that is known to both parties would not affect the
analysis.

5

0, where I = Ih + Iw .
If the husband and wife separate or revert to “separate spheres” (Lundberg and Pollak (2003)),
their preferences change and are given by the following utilities
U h (Ih ) & U w (Iw ),

(2)

where U h and U w are strictly increasing and concave. Given that divorce is quasi-inexistent in this
context, the separate spheres refer to a noncooperative equilibrium within the marriage.14

2.2

Timing

Once a husband and wife are married, they each learn their personal levels of satisfaction with the
marriage. The husband then makes an offer x to his wife. If the wife accepts, all is well and they
enjoy utilities V h and V w in (1). If she refuses, it triggers marital discord or conflict within the
household. This means that both husband and wife incur costs (of conflict) κh and κw drawn from
a distribution F (where Fj indicates the marginal distribution for j ∈ {h, w}) before separating or
reverting to their separate spheres and enjoying utilities U h and U w in (2). At any point in this
process, individuals may instead choose to exit: end the pain and commit suicide.
To be sure, this is an extremely simplified model of conflict and bargaining. It allows us to
illustrate our point while avoiding the multiplicity of equilibria that would arise due to signaling
in multiple rounds of bargaining.

2.3

Decisions

Working backwards, consider a situation where a wife has rejected her husband’s offer. This refusal
initiates conflict within the household, and husband and wives observe their costs of conflict κh and
κw . Her utility will be U w (Iw ) − κw unless she kills herself, in which case she gets 0. Hence, she
stays alive if κw ≤ U w (Iw ). Similarly, the husband ends his days if κh > U h (Ih ), and otherwise gets
utility U h (Ih ) − κh . Note that these expressions assume that κ captures the cost of conflict with a
spouse or the cost of dealing with the spouse’s suicide. This assumption simplifies the analysis by
14

Official figures on the divorce rate are unavailable but experts say that, despite being rapidly increasing in urban areas, in 2010 only roughly 11 Indian marriages in every 1,000 end in divorce (http :
//www.bbc.co.uk/news/10284416).

6

removing any strategic (and probably unrealistic) element to the decision of suicide.
It follows that, if the wife rejects an offer, her expected utility is given by
w

w

w

U w (Iw )

Z

E (Iw ) ≡ Fw [U (Iw )]U (Iw ) −

κdFw (κ),

(3)

0

while her husband’s expected utility is
E h (Ih ) ≡ Fh [U h (Ih )]U h (Ih ) −

Z

U h (Ih )

κdFh (κ).

(4)

0

Hence, a wife accepts an offer x if:
V w (I, x, θw ) ≥ E w (Iw ),

(5)

where I = Iw + Ih .
e be the value of θw so that inequality (5) holds with equality. Gw [θ(x)]
e
Let θ(x)
is the probability
that an offer x is rejected.
The husband chooses an offer x that maximizes his expected utility



h
e
e
1 − Gw [θ(x)]
V h (I, x, θh ) + Gw [θ(x)]E
(Ih ).

(6)

Let x∗ (θh ) denote the solution to this problem. If the solution is interior, it is characterized by


2.4

 ∂V h (I, x, θh ) ∂G [θ(x)]


e
w
e
1 − Gw [θ(x)]
−
V h (I, x, θh ) − E h (Ih ) = 0.
∂x
∂x

(7)

Pro-Women Redistribution

We are interested in the effect of changes in property rights that increase women’s resources and
decrease men’s resources. To be sure, such changes would affect not only bargaining within households but the marriage market as well. However, in a society where there are many households of
different wealth levels, each having a boy and a girl, if assortative matching between the families
results, men would marry women of the same wealth as their sister. Hence, a pro-women change
in property rights would result in a one-to-one transfer of wealth between partners. Consequently,
7

when studying the effect of a pro-women redistribution of wealth, we consider an increase in Iw by
τ that is exactly compensated by an equivalent decrease in Ih .
Proposition 1 When suicide rates are positive, a pro-women redistribution of resources decreases
the ratio of female to male suicide rates.
Proof. Suicides rates consist of the probability of conflict times the probability of committing
suicide in the case of conflict. Accordingly, the female suicide rate Sf is given by
Z
Sf =

e ∗ (θh ))] (1 − Fw [U w (Iw )]) dGh (θh ),
Gw [θ(x

(8)

and the male suicide rate is given by
Z
Sm =



e ∗ (θh ))] 1 − Fh [U h (Ih )] dGh (θh ).
Gw [θ(x

(9)

The female to male ratio, Sf /Sm , decreases if ln Sf − ln Sm decreases, that is

dSf /dτ
Sf

<

dSm /dτ
Sm .

This is clearly the case as

e ∗ (θh ))]dGh (θh ) /dτ
Gw [θ(x
fw [Uw (Iw )]
0
−
U w (Iw )
R
e ∗ (θh ))]dGh (θh )
1 − Fw [Uw (Iw )]
Gw [θ(x
R

e ∗ (θh ))]dGh (θh ) /dτ
d
Gw [θ(x
fh [Uh (Ih )]
0
+
U h (Ih ).
R
e ∗ (θh ))]dGh (θh )
1 − Fh [Uh (Ih )]
Gw [θ(x
d

dSf /dτ
Sf

=

dSm /dτ
Sm

=

R

To be sure, the effect of a pro-women redistribution of wealth on the suicide rates for both
genders is ambiguous. Of crucial importance is the effect of a pro-women redistribution on the
likelihood of conflict. If conflict increases, the suicide rate of men increases while the suicide rates
of women can move in either direction.
Why is a pro-women redistribution likely to increase conflict? Assume that

1−Gw (θ)
gw (θ)

is decreasing

in θ. And let’s call surplus the difference between the utility in a peaceful marriage and the utility
once separated, that is
∆i ≡ V i (I, x, θi ) − E i (Ii ), f or i ∈ {h, w}.
8

A decrease in conflict requires that the increase in x∗ following a pro-women distribution is sufficiently high to increase the wife’s surplus (it more than compensates the increase in her outside
option); but for such an increase to satisfy the first order condition (7), the husband’s surplus
needs also to increase. Whether it is even possible for both surpluses to increase and conflict to
decrease depends on the utility function and the distributions. The following subsection show us
when conflict increases with linear utilities.

2.5

Linear Utilities

In what follows, we suppose that utilities are linear:
V w (I, x, θw ) = xbI + θw & V h (I, x, θh ) = (1 − x)bI + θh
and that θw and θh are uniformly distributed between 0 and θ.
When wives own nothing, they would accept anything. It follows that husbands offer x = 0 and
initially there is no conflict.
If the surplus generated by cooperation in the marriage is small compared with the range of
private satisfaction from the marriage (b − 1)I < θ, husbands with low valuations offer to keep all
the joint gain from the marriage as long as women’s share of wealth is low enough. As a result,
conflict necessarily rises over this interval. Women’s outside options have improved so they now
refuse some offers but their prospect are still bad enough that they might commit suicide if the
cost of conflict turns out to be too high.
As we keep on raising women’s share of wealth, the share offered to wives x keeps on rising and
conflict decreases as women and men are becoming more equal and then increases again as women
become richer. Naturally, men with a very high satisfaction from the marriage make offers that
their wives accept for sure.
This is illustrated in the example that follows. We set b = 1.2, θ = 50 and U j (I) = I for
j ∈ {h, w}. The private satisfaction from the marriage θw and the costs of conflict are assumed to
be independent and follow a Pareto distribution (κ = 0.5 and α = 1.1).
We set the total resources at I = 100 and progressively raise the level of resources owned by
the wife I w from 1 to 99. Figure 1 shows the consequence of a pro-women redistribution on the

9

−3

2.5

0.07

0.06

x 10

Female Suicide Rate
Male Suicide Rate

Probability of Conflict
2

0.05
1.5

0.04

0.03

1

0.02
0.5

0.01

0

0

0

10

20

30

40
50
Wife Wealth

60

70

80

90

0

(a) likelihood of conflict

10

20

30

40
50
Wife Wealth

60

70

80

90

(b) suicide rates

Figure 1: Effect of Pro-Women Redistribution
likelihood of conflict and on the suicide rates of men and women. These are averaged over the
different realizations of the levels of private satisfaction. We see that the likelihood of conflict
rises over a large range of the division of assets. This increase in conflict is always associated with
an increase in male suicides, and sometimes with an increase in female suicides. When conflict
decreases, female suicides decline. The female to male suicide ratio declines throughout.
We now turn to an empirical analysis of the link between some specific instances of pro-women
redistributions of resources in India and the suicide rates of men and women. We first describe
the measures of pro-women redistribution of resources, female inheritance and land rights, that are
used in the estimations.

3

Female Property Rights in India

Under traditional Hindu law, women had almost no rights to property ownership. Since 1956, the
property rights for all Hindus have been governed by the Hindu Succession Act. Hindus in the Act
include Sikhs, Jains, and Buddhists, and the Act applies to all states except Jammu and Kashmir -

10

covering 86% of the Indian population.15 The Hindu Succession Act of 1956 was aimed at unifying
the existing legal doctrines guiding succession and establishing a law of succession whereby sons
and daughters would enjoy similar property rights. While the Act significantly enhanced women’s
inheritance rights (Agarwal 1994), two major sources of inequalities remained: the Act exempted
joint family property and tenancy rights.
Traditional Hindu Law (dating from the 12th century) distinguished between two types of
property: joint family property versus separate property. The former is inherited ancestral property,
the latter is purchased or inherited from persons other than father (grandfather, great grandfather,
...). If a man has no sons, his share of ancestral property became his separate property. Under
the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, only the separate property of males devolves equally upon sons
and daughters.16 Since 1956, some states amended the Act so that both sons and daughters also
have right to joint family property (Kerala in 1976; Andhra Pradesh in 1986; Tamil Nadu in 1989;
Maharashtra and Karnataka in 1994). In other states, men remained the sole coparceners in joint
family property until 2005. Under the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act of 2005, all daughters,
including married daughters, are coparceners in joint family property. In the empirical estimations
that follow, we will be exploiting, these differences across states prior to 2005. We will interpret
Amendments to the 1956 Act, which occurred prior to 2005, as a measure of increased inheritance
rights for women in those states, for the years that the Amendment was in place (prior to 2005).
The Hindu Succession Act of 1956 was a part of the codification and reform of Hindu personal
law which followed Indian Independence. It was an attempt to unify different traditional schools
of law which not only varied from region to region but sometimes by caste within regions. Prior to
the Act of 1956, inheritance laws were governed by two main schools of Hindu law, Mitakshara and
Daydbhaga. The Mitakshara school prevailed in most of India, whereas the Daydbhaga school held
in Bengal and Assam. Within the Mitakshara school, there were also four different sub-schools:
Dravida (Madras) School in South India, Maharashtra (Bombay) School, Banares School in Orissa
and Bihar, and Mithila School in Uttar Pradesh. These diffferent sub-schools differed with regards
to their succession laws; the Madras and Bombay sub-schools in particular were somewhat more
liberal with regards to recognizing the rights of women (Halder and Jaishankar 2008).17 This being
said, none of these traditional schools gave equal inheritance rights to men and women and the
15

Tribal communities of the north-eastern states are governed by customary law instead (mainly uncodified).
Also widows and mothers.
17
These differences primarily pertain to the definition of stridhan (the part of the dowry that is the property of
brides) and not inheritance laws.
16

11

1956 Act was an improvement over all of them. Nevertheless, due to these inherent differences
across the traditional schools of law, passing the Act in 1956 turned out to be a huge challenge
and subject to much debate at the time (Kishwar 1994). It was by far the most controversial
part of the reform to Hindu personal law. The original provisions on succession, framed by the
B.N. Rau committee and piloted by Ambedkar in 1947, incorporated the concept of daughters as
coparceners in joint family property. These proposals met with a storm of opposition who were
not in favor of daughters inheriting property from their natal families at the cost of their brothers.
Consistent with the regional differences in the traditional schools of law, it was the northern states
who dismissed the more liberal ideas of the southern states, and by a majority vote, the proposed
clauses, allowing equal inheritance rights to women, were removed from the Act and the traditional
laws were maintained in this regard.
Given this background, it comes as no surprise that the five states which later introduced
amendments to the Hindu Succession Act of 1956 were those whose traditional schools of law (the
Madras and Bombay sub-schools) were more liberal and also those who agreed to the inclusion
of female inheritance rights at the time of passage of the original act but who were shot down
in parliament at the time. These later state level amendments included precisely the original
provisions framed by the committee in 1947 but were removed from the Act of 1956. This being
said, there does not appear to be any systematic reason for the specific years in which these
different states enacted their amendments (Kerala in 1976; Andhra Pradesh in 1986; Tamil Nadu
in 1989; Maharashtra and Karnataka in 1994). In our empirical analysis, we will be including
year and state fixed effects in our estimations. Therefore, the variation we are exploiting is the
specific timing of these amendments within each state. We will demonstrate that the timing of
these amendments are not correlated with other laws which pertain directly to women. That is,
we will demonstrate that our results do not seem to be driven by other confounding changes such
as the Dowry Prohibition Act, the Protection from Domestic Violence Act, the State Commission
for Women Act, and political reservations for women.
As a further robustness test that it is the change in female property rights which are affecting
suicide rates, the regional differences in traditional laws allow for an alternative source of variation
in female property rights which we can explore. An additional shortfall of the Hindu Succession
Act of 1956 is that it does not cover land ownership stemming from tenancy rights.18 The Hindu
Succession (Amendment) Act of 2005 brought all agricultural land on par with other property.
18

In some states, the definition of tenant was so broad as to encompass most agricultural land.

12

But prior to 2005, state tenurial laws governed tenancy rights and several states specified an order
of devolution that strongly favors men. Additional laws which governed land ownership in India
pertain to landholding restrictions. These landholding limits were defined per family unit, and the
states vary in their definition of the family, where in some states daughters receive no recognition at
all. Agarwal (1995) discusses the gender inequalities implicit in these state-level land and tenancy
reform acts prior to 2005. Using this state level variation in the legal treatment of women with
regards to land and tenancy reforms, we will construct alternative measures of pro-female property
reforms to use in our empirical analysis.

4

Data

The data for the annual suicides for men and women in each state come from the National Crime
Records Bureau of India. The data are available starting in the year 1967 through to the present.
Police are expected to investigate all suspected suicides and the final verdict to determine cause of
death is then passed to and reviewed by local government officials.19 The most common means of
suicide adopted in India – the ingestion of poison (35%), usually agricultural pesticides, and hanging
(32%) account for nearly 70% of suicides (Mayer and Ziaian 2002) – ensure that a substantial
amount of cases will come to the attention of the police. Nevertheless, suicides are likely underreported - for one, suicide is illegal in India. Substantial under-reporting is confirmed by detailed
epidemiological studies that find, in some areas, suicide rates are as much as four to six times
higher than the official rates (Gajalakshmi and Peto 2007, Joseph et al 2003, Soman et. al. 2009).
However, the general patterns of suicide rates in the official data that we will be focusing on in
our analysis match those found in these more detailed micro-level analyses. Of particular relevance
to our work, roughly the same female to male suicide ratio is found. Moreover, our empirical
strategy will be to examine variation in suicide rates across time and state. In particular, we will
be exploiting the impact of a legal change in female property rights which varies by state and year
in India on annual suicide rates of men and women. In our estimations, we will be controlling for
year and state fixed effects, therefore the under-reporting of suicide rates could only be biasing our
results if this under-reporting is systematically correlated with one particular legal change across
the states.
As discussed, the legal changes we focus on are Amendments to the Hindu Succession Act
19

Official suicide rates are then estimated off a sample of the population.

13

of 1956, which vary by year and state until 2005, when the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act
of 2005 was implemented throughout the country. Our period of analysis is therefore, 1967 (the
first year that the suicide data are available) to 2004. Suicide rates over this period are shown in
Table A1 in the Appendix. Average suicide rates are 11 and 7.3 (per 100,000) for men and women
respectively. The male to female suicide rate ratio for the entire period is 1.5. This ratio is much
lower than for most Western countries (where it is usually three time as large), and it is close to 1
for the age group 15-29.
For all of our control variables, we use panel data for fifteen major Indian states over the
period 1967-2004. Table A1 in the Appendix provides means and standard deviations for the main
variables used in the paper. These variables are averaged over the entire period. The data sources
are described in more detail in the Appendix.

5

Empirical Analysis

5.1

Basic Results

Our first set of estimations examine the effect of Amendments to the Hindu Succession Act of
1956, which vary by state and year, on male and female suicide rates. As discussed in Section
3, since 1956 some states amended the Act so that both sons and daughters have right to joint
family property (Kerala in 1976; Andhra Pradesh in 1986; Tamil Nadu in 1989; Maharashtra and
Karnataka in 1994). In other states, men remained the sole coparceners in joint family property
until 2005. We use this variation in the Amendments, by state and year, to determine the effect
on male and female suicide rates over the period 1967-2004.
The first set of estimating equations is represented by the following:
i
Sst
= β0 + β1 Xst + β2 Ast + λs + γt + εst

(10)

i refers to either the suicide rate of females (i = F ) or males (i = M ), per 1000
Where Sst

individuals (of group i), in state s and year t. Xst includes a set of state and time varying controls.
These include population shares of Muslims, Hindus, Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes; and
economic factors such as literacy, relative female to male literacy, food prices, state income per
capita, rural food production, yields, the incidence of floods or droughts, average rainfall, banks
14

per capita, urbanization, and share of state expenditure on heath, development and education. Ast
is our key variable of interest. It is equal to 1 if state s, in year t, has already passed an Amendment
Act which increased inheritance rights to women and 0 otherwise (refer to the Appendix for details
on the construction of this variable). λs and γt are state and year fixed effects respectively, and εst
is a regression disturbance term clustered at the state level.
Fixed effects at the state level control for the usual array of cross state differences in history,
family and economic structure that have been constant over our sample period, while the year effects
cover macro-shocks, trends in female empowerment and policies enacted by the central government
that affect suicide rates.
Table 1 present the regression estimates of (10). Columns 1 and 5 show that, controlling for state
and year fixed effects (as well as economic and cultural controls), the Amendments are associated
with an increase of 1 suicides (per 100,000) for female and 4 (per 100,000) for males (recall the
average suicide rate is 7.3 and 11 (per 100,000) for women and men respectively).
***Insert Table 1***
We also estimate (10) for relative female to male suicide rates. We use two measures: the simple
F − S M ) and also the ratio (S F /S M ), which implicitly takes into account state and
difference (Sst
st
st
st

annual variation in the overall suicide rate. Columns 1 and 5 in Table 2 report the results from these
estimations. We see, that the Amendments significantly reduce both of these relative measures.
That is, although both male and female suicide rates increase with the Amendments (as seen in
columns 1 and 5 in Table 1), male suicide rates increase by more. Controlling for state and year
fixed effects as well as economic and cultural variables, we see (from Column 5 of Table 2) that the
Amendment decreases the female to male suicide ratio by 0.10 (where the average of this ratio is
0.74).
***Insert Table 2***
We might expect that the longer a given law has been in place, the higher the awareness is
and the more frequently it is enforced. To examine these effects, we use the following estimating
equations:
i
Sst
= β0 + β1 Xst +

30
X

γy d(exposure = y)st + λs + γt + εst

y=−20

15

(11)

.3
Effect on female suicide
.1

.2

.3
.2

-.1

0

Effect on male suicide
.1
0
-.1
-20

-10
0
10
20
Years of exposure to amendment

30

-20

-10
0
10
20
Years of exposure to amendment

30

Figure 2: Effect of Years of Exposure.
where d(exposure = y)st is a dummy variable that takes value 1 when there has been y years of
exposure to the amendment in state s and year t.
Figure 2 plots the coefficients γy from estimating (11) with economic and cultural controls as
well as year and state fixed effects. We see that both male and female suicide rates are increasing in
the number of years since the Amendment has been passed and that relative female to male suicides
are decreasing in this variable. We do not find evidence of these effects abating with time. That
is, there is no evidence of a concave relationship between suicides and years since the Amendment
has been passed. In addition, we see no evidence that suicide rates started increasing prior to the
passage of the Amendments.

16

As suggested by Figure 2, another set of estimations, reported in Table A3 in the Appendix, uses
the years since the Amendment was in place. Though not reported here, the squared term of this
variable enters in to all of the estimations insignificantly and alternatively defined dummy variables
for different groupings of years since the Amendment has been passed all enter in significantly with
a similar sign and the coefficients are increasing in magnitude as the number of years increases.

5.2

Robustness Checks

Tables 1 and 2 also report results from a series of robustness checks on the effect of the Amendments
on suicide rates. Columns 3 and 7 (in Table 1) demonstrate that the results are robust to the
inclusion of state specific linear time trends for both female and male suicide rates respectively.
Though not reported here, the results are also robust to simply including a linear time trend.
Columns 3 and 7 of Table 2, demonstrate that the effect of Amendments on relative female to male
suicide rates are also robust to the inclusion of state specific linear time trends.
A key concern with our empirical strategy is that the state specific Amendments to the Hindu
Succession Act are correlated with other law changes which could impact relative female to male
suicide rates or family conflict. Other key laws in India which pertain directly to women are: the
Dowry Prohibition Act, the Child Marriage Act, The Prevention of Sati, The Hindu Marriage
Act, the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, and the State Commission for Women
Act. Of all of these acts, it is only the last which varies at the state level over our time period
of consideration. All of the other Acts, were primarily implemented at the national level, and
prior to our period of study (i.e., before 1967), or in the case of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, which was enacted in 2005, after our period of study.20 The National
Commission for Women was set up as a statutory body in 1992 under the National Commission for
Women Act of 1990 to review the constitutional and legal safeguards for women. In accord with
the national mandate, each state subsequently set up their own Commission for Women. The year
in which these committees were formed at the state level varied by year: the first was Maharashtra
in 1993 and later ones included Tamil Nadu in 2008 and lastly Haryana in 2012. The estimations
in Columns 2 and 6 of Tables 1 and 2, demonstrate that our key results are robust to the inclusion
20

There were some state level amendments to the Dowry Prohibition Act of 1961 in the the northern states
(Haryana, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, West Bengal, and Orissa) in 1975 and 1976. These amendments did
not alter the act substantially, rather pointed out clarifications regarding the definition of dowry and the exact amount
of fines imposed. Though not reported here, our results are robust to the inclusion of these state level amendments
to the Dowry Prohibition Act.

17

of a variable which is equal to one if this Commission is in place in a given state and year and
equal to zero otherwise. In general, we find no significant effects of this variable on female and male
suicide rates or the relative rate. This also held true if we only included the Commission variable
and not the Amendment variable into the regressions. These state level commissions primarily
provide recommendations for legal reform. Unless a change in the legal status of women is actually
legislated, we should not expect that the simple existence of these commissions should directly
impact family conflict and hence suicide rates of men and women, as is confirmed in the data.
A final consideration are the political reforms which have been in force since the 73rd Amendment to the Indian constitution, which mandated female representation in local governments. Recent work by Iyer et. al. (2012) has demonstrated that this increase in female representation in
local governments has lead to a significant rise in documented crimes (primarily kidnappings and
rapes) against women. As a check on their results, they looked to crimes where they thought
reporting bias is likely to be least like murders and suicides. Their hypothesis is that if reporting
bias is not strong, then the reporting of these types of crimes should not be affected by increased
female political presence. Indeed, they find no effects - that is, there is no significant relationship
between female political representation and female and male suicide rates.
In general there does not seem to be evidence that that other laws, which are aimed at the rights
of women, are confounding our key results. A further concern are alternative laws which might be
correlated with the Amendments, and which might impact suicide rates more generally, such as
those which affect poverty. As stated earlier in Section 3, given the differences in traditional schools
of Hindu law, it makes sense that these more liberal states which underwent the Amendments did
so before the others. However, there is no systematic explanation for the exact year that each state
chose to implement the Amendment. For a given state in India, there are often more than forty
enactments passed every year. If we restrict ourselves to only those which are applicable to the
whole state, at least five are typically passed in any given year. For our five key states of interest
(who imposed early Amendments to the Hindu Succession Act), there are no other enactments
that occurred simultaneously in each of these states. That is, Kerala passed the Amendment to the
Hindu Succession Act in 1976. That same year in Kerala, a tax on luxuries in hotels and lodging
was imposed, as well as enactments regarding pension payments to members of the legislature,
restrictions on the supply of paddy and rice to Travancore Palace, and the dissolution of municipal
co-op pharmacies. None of these enactments that occurred alongside the Amendment to the Hindu
Succession Act in Kerala in 1976 also occurred alongside the corresponding Amendments in the
other states in their respective years. That is to say, there is no specific law change (other than the
18

Amendment) that happened specifically in 1976 in Kerala, 1986 in Andhra Pradesh, 1989 in Tamil
Nadu, and in 1994 in Maharashtra and Karnataka. This was also the case for enactments imposed
a couple of years prior to these dates in all of the states. Hence, there is no evidence of a particular
enactment that was passed at the same time as the Hindu Succession Act in our different states of
interest.
To confirm this, we ran a series of placebo tests. Columns 4 and 7 of Tables 1 and 2 report the
estimation results from these tests. In these estimations we include additional dummy variables,
denoted Ast−2 , Ast−3 , Ast−5 , and Ast−7 which are equal to 1 for all years greater or equal to
t − 2, t − 3 , t − 5, and t − 7 respectively if state s passed the Amendment Act in year t and zero
otherwise. If it is indeed the effects of the Amendment that we are picking up in our estimation
of (10), then we should expect that the estimated coefficient on these additional dummy variables
to be insignificant in the estimations. We see from the results that this is the case: the effects of
the Amendment are only significant for the years when the Amendment was actually passed, and
not significant if we pretend the Amendment was passed instead 2, 3, 5, or 7 years prior. This held
true for a number of other empirical specifications, where the placebo years are differently defined,
or if we enter the different dummy variables, Ast−2 , Ast−3 , Ast−5 , and Ast−7 , into the estimations
independently instead of all together.
An additional set of estimations, reported in Table A4 in the Appendix, excludes the state
of Kerala. This state is distinct for many reasons, not only because it was the first to pass the
Amendment Act but also it has the highest overall suicide rates in the country. Moreover it is an
anomaly in India with regards to the status of women, along many positive dimensions. The second
set of estimations in Table A4 exclude the three states (Bihar, Punjab, and Uttar Pradesh), where
the average suicide rates for both men and women have been decreasing through time. In addition,
these three states have the lowest overall suicide rates in the country.

5.3

Instrumental Variables Estimations

In the regression estimates presented so far, there is possibly still a concern that unobservables determine both suicides and property legislation. Given the evidence presented in the prior section,
there does not appear to be any alternative policy changes that could be confounding our results.
However, there is still possibly the concern that the Amendments are correlated with some unobservable factor which also determines suicide rates or household conflict, like a poverty shock. This

19

does seem unlikely given the variation we are exploiting here. Again, there would have to be some
unobservable factor which is specifically relevant in 1976 for Kerala, 1986 for Andhra Pradesh, 1989
for Tamil Nadu, and in 1994 for both Maharashtra and Karnataka. This being said, to address this
issue we attempt to instrument for these legislations. We follow the strategy of Besley and Burgess
(2000) who conjecture that different groupings in the state legislature enact different Amendments
and Acts. Specifically, we use the seat shares of different political groups, lagged by one period, as
instruments. The results are robust if we instead use later lags. This likely follows because these
seat shares remain constant though a given election cycle. The assumption here is that lagged
political variables determine current legislation but not current unobservable factors which determine suicide rates. In other words, we are assuming that contemporaneous shocks which determine
suicide rates are uncorrelated with shocks that lead to particular groups being elected previously.
To correspond to the set of estimations represented by (10), this empirical strategy implies a
first-stage estimation:
Ast = γ0 + γ1 Xst + γ2 Zst−1 + ϕs + ψt + ηst

(12)

where Zst−1 are the political variables reflecting the seat shares of different political groups, each
lagged by one period. These are constructed from data from the Election Commission of India who
record the number of seats won by different parties in each state election (see the Appendix for
details).
The first stage estimation results are presented in the first column of Table 3 below. It shows
that state parties and the Congress party were more likely than Hindu parties to pass Amendments
to the Inheritance Law while the soft left parties were less likely to pass them (the F-test on
the instruments is about 10). Columns 2 to 5 show that, controlling for cultural and economic
factors, the results of Tables 1 and 2 remain robust to this instrumenting strategy. That is, the
Amendments increased both female and male suicide rates, but increased that of males by more,
where the magnitude of the coefficients in these IV estimations are larger than those in the OLS
estimations.
***Insert Table 3***

20

5.4

Alternative Property Rights Measures

In this section we consider an alternative measure of property rights for women. The previous
estimations pertain to variation across states and time with regards to legislating Amendments to
the Hindu Succession Act which granted sons and daughters similar rights to joint family property.
However, there are additional laws which govern land ownership in India which pertain to tenancy
rights and landholding restrictions.21 Agarwal (1995) discusses the gender inequalities implicit in
these state-level land and tenancy reform acts. The succession rules relating to land held under
tenancy are different than the personal laws. In a subset of states, devolution of tenancy land is
only to male heirs. In other states, daughters and sisters are recognized but come very low in the
order of heirs. In the remaining states, personal law applies to tenancy land and women have some
rights over the land. Landholding laws are defined by the maximum landholding per family unit
and the states vary in their definition of family. In some states, the family constitutes the cultivator
and his/her spouse, sons, and unmarried daughters. In other states, the family unit includes all
children (married or not). In many states, adult sons receive special consideration and the parental
household can hold additional land on account of each adult son. In other states, adult sons, count
as a separate unit and are entitled to hold land in their own right. In many of these enactments,
unmarried adult daughters receive no recognition at all, they do not count either as part of the
family unit or as a separate unit and in other states, married daughters do not receive recognition.
Using this state level variation in the legal treatment of women, we construct alternative measures of pro-women property reforms. In particular, we use the cumulative indexes of state-level
landholding and tenancy reforms used by Besley and Burgess (2000). We then interact these measures with an index which captures the degree to which these reforms favoured women in accord
with Agarwal (1995).
Our key variables of interest are represented by Lst , Tst , F Ls ∗ Lst and F Ts ∗ Tst . Lst is
a cumulative index of state-level landholding reforms, and Tst is a cumulative index of tenancy
reforms. Both of these are constructed from the data used by Besley and Burgess (2000), see the
Appendix for details. F Ls is an index of the degree to which these landholding reforms favored
women in accord with Agarwal (1995). F Ls = 1 if married and unmarried daughters receive no
recognition; F Ls = 2 if married but not unmarried daughters receive recognition; and F Ls = 3
if unmarried and married daughters receive recognition. F Ts is an index of the degree to which
21
The Hindu Succession Act covers only owned agricultural land and does not cover land stemming from tenancy
rights.

21

.2
female suicides
.1
.15

.3

0

.05

male suicides
.1
.2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

land reforms
pro men
pro women

3

4

5

land reforms
Fitted values
Fitted values

pro men
pro women

(a) Male

Fitted values
Fitted values

(b) Female

Figure 3: Effect of Land Reform
these tenancy reforms favored women in accord with Agarwal (1995). F Ts = 1 if the devolution of
tenancy land is only to male heirs; F Ts = 2 if daughters and sisters are recognized but come very
low in the order of heirs; F Ts = 3 if personal law applies to tenancy land and women have some
rights over the land. δs and θt are state and year fixed effects respectively, and st is a regression
disturbance term clustered at the state level.
We first illustrate the effect of land reform with a simple plot. Figure 3 plots the suicide rates
(male in panel (a) and female in panel (b)) on the cumulative land and tenancy reforms (Lst + Tst )
depending on whether these reforms also benefit women (defined as F Ls + F Ts >= 3) or not.
We see clearly a positive correlation between suicide rates and cumulative land reform when these
reforms also benefits women but not when these reforms predominantly benefit men.
We then look at these effects controlling for state and year fixed effects as well as our set of
state and time varying controls Xst . Specifically, we estimate:

i
Sst
= α0 + α1 Xst + α2 Lst + α3 F Ls ∗ Lst + α4 Tst + α5 F Ts ∗ Tst + δs + θt + st .

(13)

The estimation results of (13) are reported in Table 4. We see that a similar picture emerges
when considering these alternative measures of pro-women reforms. While the overall cumulative
landholding and tenancy reforms reduce both male and female suicide rates, the effect varies widely
22

depending on whether these reforms favor men or women. Landholding reforms that benefits mainly
(rate 1 on the pro-women scale) reduce female suicides by 4 (per 100,000) and male suicides by 8
(per 100,000), whereas landholding reforms that rate 2 on our pro-women scale only reduces male
and female suicide by 1 (per 100,000). Similarly, the most pro-male tenancy reforms (which rate 1
on our pro-women scale) prevent 1 female and 2 male suicides (per 100,000), while tenancy reforms
that rate 2 on our pro-women scale have no effect on the suicides rates. In both cases, the effects
of the interaction terms (α3 and α5 ) are positive and significant in all estimations and larger for
male suicide rates. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 4 present the estimates of the effects that these
pro-female land reform measures have on the relative suicide rate of women to men, measured as
F − S M ) and also the ratio (S F /S M ). Consistent with our earlier estimations,
the difference (Sst
st
st
st

we see that landholding and tenancy reforms which favor men (women) increase (decrease) relative
female to male suicide rates.
***Insert Table 4*****

5.4.1

Instrumental Variables Estimations

Finally, we also estimate an IV specification of (13). In a two-stage estimation, where the secondstage estimates are represented by (13), we need to instrument for both, the cumulative indexes
of reforms, Lst , and Tst , as done in Besley and Burgess (2000), and also their interaction with the
female oriented policy indices, F Ls ∗ Lst and F Ts ∗ Tst . To this end, as recommended by Angrist
and Pischke (2009, p. 191), we first estimate the following:
Lst = δ0 + δ1 Xst + δ2 Zst−1 + πs + σt + µst

(14)

Tst = θ0 + θ1 Xst + θ2 Zst−1 + φs + αt + υst

(15)

Where Xst and Zst−1 are the same variables defined in (12). We then use the predicted values,
b st and Tbst , from (14) and (15) respectively, and their interactions with the female policy index,
L
b st and F Ts ∗ Tbst , as instruments in the four first-stage estimations of Lst , Tst , F Ls ∗ Lst and
F Ls ∗ L
F Ts ∗ Tst in a conventional 2SLS procedure:
b st + λ3 F Ls ∗ L
b st + τs + χt + ιst
Lst = λ0 + λ1 Xst + λ2 L
23

(16)

b st + ρ3 F Ls ∗ L
b st + ωs + δt + ζst
F Ls ∗ Lst = ρ0 + ρ1 Xst + ρ2 L

(17)

Tst = π0 + π1 Xst + π2 Tbst + π3 F Ts ∗ Tbst + γs + φt + ξst

(18)

F Ts ∗ Tst = σ0 + σ1 Xst + σ2 Tbst + σ3 F Ts ∗ Tbst + κs + πt + %st

(19)

The first columns in Table 5 and 6 show that political variables are strongly significant determinants of landholding and tenancy reforms (F-tests of about 30 and 20 respectively). In particular,
hard left parties increase the likelihood of these reforms.
Columns 4 and 5 in Table 5 show that landholding reforms have large effects on suicides. Promale landholding reforms significantly decreased male and female suicide rates, while pro-female
landholding reforms (by one unit) have on average half the reducing effects. The remaining two
columns show similar results for the relative female to male suicide rates, where again, pro-female
landholding reforms increase this relative measure by roughly half.
***Insert Table 5****
Table 6 reports the analogous results for the tenancy reforms. We see very similar relationships
between pro-female tenancy reforms and suicide rates. Taken together these results demonstrate a
very consistent picture. Improving female property rights raise both female and male suicides, but
more the latter so that the relative female to male suicide rates decrease.
***Insert Table 6****

5.5

Family Conflict as a Channel

Our theoretical model in Section 2 suggested that pro-women changes in property rights can raise
suicide rates by raising family conflicts. In this Section, we investigate evidence for this channel.
According to the National Crime Records Bureau Reports on suicides, based on police investigations of the deaths, roughly 70 percent of the individuals who commit suicide are married and
24

fall into the age group of 15-44. Suicide victims are more likely to be educated (only about 20
percent have no education). For women, about 55 percent are housewives. These similar patters
are borne out in the more careful micro-level studies (Gouda and Rao 2008, Mohanty et. al. 2006,
Patel et. al. 2012).22
The broad class of “family problems” accounts for the single largest cause of suicides irrespective
of gender in the national level data. More specifically, this category refers to quarrels with spouse,
parents, or in-laws and accounts for the majority of suicides among the 15 to 44 age group for
both males and females. Illness is the second most important cause associated with suicides (this
does not typically refer to mental illness but more commonly to a serious (likely terminal) illness)
and accounts for the majority of suicides for individuals aged 60 and over. Other causes like
poverty, bankruptcy, and dowry disputes are cited as the causes of only 2 to 3 percent of suicides
respectively. Again, these relationships are also found in the micro-level studies which point to
marital disharmony as a main cause of suicide (Mohanty et al. 2006, Gouda and Rao 2008).
Given that the majority of suicides seem to be due to family conflict, we now test to see
if the effects of the Amendments on suicide rates, found in the earlier section, are determining
this particular cause of suicides. To this end, Table 7 (column 1) reports results from analogous
estimations to (10), where the dependent variable is instead the suicide rate from family problems for
females and males. We see that, as before, the Amendment Acts (which increased inheritance rights
for women) significantly increase both these male and female suicide rates, where the estimated
coefficient is larger for males. Column 2 of Table 7 reports results from analogous estimations where
the dependent variable is instead the suicide rate from other causes (i.e., not family conflict). We
see that in this case the Amendment Acts have no significant impact on these suicide rates. Table
7 also reports results where the dependent variable is instead the proportion of total suicides which
are due to family problems, for both males and females. Columns 3 reports this proportion, relative
to all suicides, by gender. We see that, consistent with the previous findings, the Amendment Acts
significantly increase the proportion of suicides due to family problems for both males and females.
Columns 4 report this proportion relative to total suicides only where the cause is known. We see
that the main results persist and that the estimated effects are large, where the increase in the
proportion of suicides attributed to family problems is more than 25 percent for both males and
22

These studies are typically conducted by health care workes and rely on verbal autopsy data. Soman et. al.
(2009), for example, performed a cohort study where villages were visited repeatedly for five years. Each reported
death was investigated by local health care workers as well as a physician who conducted a validation study of each
death and a detailed inquiry of household and village members.

25

females.
***Insert Table 7****
The fact that it is male and female suicides caused by family problems and martial disharmony
that have increased with the Amendment Acts, we conjecture that increasing female property rights
increased conflict within household and that this increased conflict resulted in more suicides among
both men and women. We now turn to an alternative data set to test this conjecture more directly.
We use individual level data from the recent National Family Health Survey of India (NFHS-3
collected in 2005), which comprises detailed information on violence against women collected from
married women aged 15 to 49.
Importantly the early Amendments to the Hindu Succession Act do not apply to women who
were married prior to the commencement of the Amendments. For these women, their inheritance
rights are dictated by the laws implace prior to the Amendment (refer to Agarwal (1995) for details).
We can exploit this application of the law to uncover the effects of the Amendment on individual
women within a give state. That is, we can compare outcomes of women who were married before
the Amendment to those who were married after the Amendment.
In particular, we estimate the following:
Yis = ψ0 + ψ1 Xis + ψ2 Ais + mis + αs + εis .

(20)

Where Yis is a domestic violence outcome variable for an individual female i residing in state
s. Yis takes on a value of 1 if a given female i (residing in state s) has been physically abused by
her husband, and zero otherwise. Roughly 28 percent of women in our sample have been beaten
by their husbands. Xis is a vector of individual and household control variables which include:
education, age, and occupation of wives and their husbands; caste and religion of wives; household
location (rural or urban); and household durable good ownership. Table A2 in the Appendix
presents summary statistics on these variables. mis is year of marriage and αs are state fixed
effects. Our key independent variable of interest Ais , is equal to 1 for those women who reside in
states where the Amendment has been passed and.they were married after the Amendment was
passed. It is equal to zero otherwise. That is, Ais is equal to zero for those women in these states
who were married before the Amendment was passed and for all women who reside in states where
no Amendment was passed prior to the year 2005.
26

Table 8 reports the estimation results of (20). Using the whole sample, Column 1 demonstrates
that, consistent with our conjecture, the effect of the Amendments (measured by Ais ) is positive
and significant on the probability that a wife is beaten by her husband. Recall that the Hindu
Succession Act only applies to the hindu population. Therefore, we should see no effects of the
Amendment for other religious groups. We test this in Columns 2 to 6 in Table 8. We see that the
significant positive effects of the Amendment on the incidence of domestic violence is only relevant
for Hindus - there are no significant positive effects for Muslims or Christians. We first show
this (Columns 2 to 4) by estimating (20) separately for the different groups: Hindus, Muslims,
and Christians respectively.

Column 5 instead estimates (20) over the entire sample and also

includes interaction effects between our key variable of interest, Ais , and dummy variables for the
different religious groups. Again, we find no significant positive interaction effects for Muslims and
Christians. The final column demonstrates that this result is robust if we just limit the sample to
those states which passed the Amendment. These results suggest that, increasing property rights
in favor of women, can lead to more violence against women.
***Insert Table 8***

6

Discussion

6.1

Other Possible Explanations

Our data do not allow us to directly test whether the above explanation is the actual channel
through which improvements in property rights increased suicide rates in India. Other explanations
are possible.
For instance, it might be that conflict between brothers and sisters, not husbands and wives,
increased as a result of the reforms. This would not change the way we think about this theoretically,
as we can use the above framework to model bargaining between a sister and a brother over assets
I.23 However, we think that it is less likely to be a main explanation as in micro-studies of suicides
mentioned in Section 4 marital disharmony was cited as a main trigger while dispute among siblings
was not.
23
Ij would be the assets that j is entitled by law, x the division of assets, and θj the value that j attaches to the
relationship with his or her sibling.

27

Another possibility is that, following the reform, some men pushed women to suicide to obtain
their resources. Note though that this would only explain the increased female suicide and therefore
needs to be combined with another explanation.24

6.2

Policy Implications

In terms of policy implications, we are certainly not recommending to keep inheritance rights
unequal between men and women. Though our paper highlights some of the negative implications
of women empowerment, it is important to stress that, as in the model presented in the previous
section, we do expect that women are made ex-ante better off by more equitable property rights.
What our model suggests is policies that decrease the cost of conflict by easing separations for
instance. In the US, Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) found that states that adopted more liberal laws
permitting “unilateral divorce” reported a 8 to 16 percent decline in female suicide, roughly a 30
percent decline in domestic violence for both men and women, and a 10 percent decline in females
murdered by their partners. In India, the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill in 2012 made divorce
proceedings for unhappy couples easier and women-friendly, but stigma as well as norms in terms
of child custody and alimony still make separation extremely hard in practice.

7

Conclusion

Our paper has demonstrated a positive relationship between better property rights for women and
female and male suicide rates in India. We conjecture that increased marital conflict could be
the main channel through which improving female property rights raise suicides. Our findings
are consistent with the sociological literature, which emphasizes how increased gender equality
can accentuate tensions and distress within households - leading to a greater incidence of male
and female suicides. The empirical accounts from industrialized countries suggest that this dire
consequence of increased opportunities for women may be mitigated once societal institutions adjust
and there is a greater acceptance of the new gender roles.
24

Moreover, following concerns over dowry violence, when a woman commits suicide within 7 years of her married
life, her husband quickly comes under suspicion. That is, if there is evidence that her husband or his relatives had
treated her with cruelty, it would be presumed by the Court that her husband or relatives had aided (abetted) her
suicide (Section 113 A of the Indian Evidence Act).

28

Of course, from a policy perspective, one would never want to advocate reducing gender equality
on a account of its link to suicide rates. Rather, the evidence provided here contributes more to the
sociological literature which focuses on the profound sociological significance of the unprecedented
rise in women’s empowerment and its effect, both negative and positive, on a variety of social
dimensions. By contrast, the economic literature on behavior in the household, has mainly focused
on the positive effects of increasing women’s outside options. By explicitly considering costly
conflict in the household, we demonstrate some more subtle features of increased bargaining power
of women.

29

References
[1] Agarwal, Bina (1994). A Field of One’s Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia. Cambridge University Press.
[2] Agarwal, Bina (1995) “Gender and Legal Rights in Agricultural Land in India”, Economic and
Political Weekly 30(12), A39-A56.
[3] Anderson, Siwan and Debraj Ray (2010) “Missing Women: Age and Disease” Review of Economic Studies, 77(4), 1262-1300.
[4] Angrist Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2009) Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press.
[5] Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess (2000) “Land Reform, Poverty Reduction, and Growth:
Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2), 389-430.
[6] Bobonis, Gustavo J. (2009) “Is the Allocation of Resources within the Household Efficient?
New Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Journal of Political Economy 117(3), 453-503.
[7] Bobonis, Gustavo J., Roberto Castro, and Melissa Gonzalez-Brenes (2012) “Public Transfers
and Domestic Violence: The Roles of Private Information and Spousal Control.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
[8] Bloch F and V. Rao (2002) “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case Study of Dowry
Violence in Rural India,” American Economic Review 92(4), 1029-1043.
[9] Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande (2005) “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the India
Social Banking Experiment” American Economic Review 95(3), 780-795.
[10] Canetto, Silvia Sara (2008) “Women and suicidal behavior: A cultural analysis.” American
Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 78(2), 259-266.
[11] Das Gupta, Monica, Sunhwa Lee , Uberoi, Patricia , Danning Wang , Lihong Wang and Xiaodan Zhang (2000). “State policies and women’s autonomy in China, India, and the Republic
of Korea, 1950-2000 : lessons from contrasting experiences,” Policy Research Working Paper
Series 2497, The World Bank.
[12] Deininger, Klaus, Aparajita Goyal, and Hari Nagarajan (2013) “Women’s Inheritance Rights
and Intergenerational Transmission of Resources in India”, Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
[13] Duflo Esther and Christopher Udry, (2004) “Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Cote
d’Ivoire: Social Norms, Separate Accounts and Consumption Choices,” NBER Working Papers
10498.
30

[14] Doepke, Matthias, Michele Tertilt, and Alessandra Voena (2012)“The Economics and Politics
of Women’s Rights.” Annual Reveiw of Economics, 4, 339-372.
[15] Durkheim, Emile (1897) [1951]. Suicide : A Study in Sociology. The Free Press, New York.
[16] Eswaran Mukesh and Nisha Malhotra (2011) “Domestic Violence and Women’s Autonomy:
Evidence from India”, Canadian Journal of Economics 44(4), 1222-1263..
[17] Friedberg Leora and Steven Stern (2010) “Marriage, Divorce, and Asymmetric Information”
mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Virginia.
[18] Gajalakshmi, Vendhan and Richard Peto (2007) “Suicide rates in rural Tamil Nadu, South
India: Verbal autopsy of 39000 deaths in 1997-98.” International Journal of Epidemiology,
36(1), 203-207.
[19] Gouda, MR Nagendra and Sambaji M Rao (2008) “Factors related to attempted suicide in
Davanagere.” Indian Journal of Community Medicine. 33(1), 15-18.
[20] Halder, Debarati and K. Jaishankar (2008) “Property rights of Hindu women: A feminist
review of succession laws of ancient, medieval, and modern India” Journal of Law and Religion,
24(2), 663-687.
[21] Iyer, Lakshmi, Anandi Mani, Prachi Mishra, and Petia Topalova (2012) “The power of political
voice: Women’s political representation and crime in India” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 4(4), 165-193.
[22] Joseph, A., S. Abraham, JP Muliyil, K. George, J. Prasad, S. Minz, VJ Abraham, KS Jacob
(2003) “Evaluation of suicide rates in rural India using verbal autopsies, 1994-99.” British
Medical Journal, 326, 1121-1122.
[23] Kishwar, Madhu (1994) “Codified Hindu Law: Myth and Reality” Economic and Political
Weekly, 29(33), 2145-2161.
[24] Leenaars, A. (1996) “Suicide: A Multidimensional Malaise” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 26(3), 221-236.
[25] Ligon, Ethan A., Hoddinott, John and Adam, Christopher (2004), “Dynamic Intrahousehold
Bargaining, Matrimonial Property Law and Suicide in Canada” mimeo, International Food
Policy Research Institute.
[26] Luke, Nancy and Kaivan Munshi (2011) “Women as Agenst of Change: Female Income and
Mobility in India” Journal of Development Economics, 94(1), 1-17.
[27] Lundberg, Shelly and Pollak, Robert A (1993) “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage
Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(6), 988-1010.
31

[28] Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak and Terence J. Wales (1997) “Do Husbands and Wives
Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Benefit,” Journal of Human
Resources, 32(3), 463-480.
[29] Mayer, Peter (2003) “Female equality and suicide in the Indian states” Psychological Reports,
92, 1022-1028.
[30] Mayer, Peter and Tahereh Ziaian (2002) “Suicide, gender, and age variations in India: Are
women in Indian society protected from suicide?” Crisis, 23(3), 98-103.
[31] Mohanty, Sachidananda, Geeta Sahu, Manoj Kumar Mohanty, and Manju Patnaik (2007)
“Suicide in India - A four year retrospective study,” Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine
14(4), 185-189.
[32] Pampel Fred C. (1998) “National Context, Social Change, and Sex Differences in Suicide
Rates,” American Sociological Review 63(5) , 744-758
[33] Panda P, and Agarwal B. (2005) “Marital violence, human development and women’s property
status in India.” World Development 33(5), 823-850.
[34] Patel, Vikram, Chinthanie Ramasundarahettige, Lakshmi Vijayakumar, J S Thakur, Vendhan
Gajalakshmi, Gopalkrishna Gururaj, Wilson Suraweera, and Prabhat Jha (2012)“ Suicide
Mortality in India: A Nationally Representative Survey” Lancet, 379, 2343-51.
[35] Rosenblum, Daniel (2010) “Fertility and Child Mortality: Unintended Consequences of Family
Formation in India,” mimeo, Dalhousie University..
[36] Roy, Sanchari (2010) “Empowering Women: Inheritance Rights and Female Education in
India,” mimeo, London School of Economics.
[37] Sanchez-Pages S. (2009) “Conflict as a Part of the Bargaining Process,” Economic Journal
119(539), 1189-1207.
[38] Shneidman Edwin (1985) Definition of Suicide , Ph.D., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York.
[39] Soman, CR, S. Safraj, V Raman Kutty, K. Vijayakumar, and K. Ajayan (2009) “Suicide
in South India: A community-based study in Kerela.” Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 51(4),
261-264.
[40] Stack, Steven (1987) “The effect of female participation in the labor force on suicide: A time
series analysis, 1948-1980.” Sociological Forum, 2(2), 257-277.
[41] Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers, 2006. “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
Laws and Family Distress,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1), 267-288.

32

[42] Trovato, Frank and Rita Vos (1992) “Married female labor force participation and suicide in
Canada, 1971 and 1981.” Sociological Forum, 7(4), 661-677.
[43] Vijayakumar, Lakshmi (2010) “Indian research on suicide.” Indian Journal of Psychiatry,
52(7), 291-296.

33

34

YES
YES
525

0.01 (0.005)***

YES
YES
525

0.01 (0.005)***
0.001 (0.004)

Women
Commission

YES
YES
525

0.01 (0.004)***

State specific
linear time
trends

YES
YES
525

0.007 (0.006)
0.005 (0.007)
-0.0006 (0.006)
0.01 (0.007)

0.01 (0.003)***

Placebo
Test

YES
YES
525

0.04 (0.01)***

Male

YES
YES
525

0.04 (0.01)***
0.01 (0.01)

Women
Commission

Table 1 - Suicide Rates and Female Inheritance - OLS Estimations

YES
YES
525

0.02 (0.007)***

State specific
linear time
trends

YES
YES
525

0.017 (0.010)
0.017 (0.017)
0.0007 (0.007)
0.009 (0.011)

0.05 (0.009)***

Placebo
Test

state expenditure on heath, development and education.

literacy rates, food prices, state income per capita, rural food production, yields, the incidence of floods or droughts, average rainfall, banks per capita, urbanization, and share of

for 1%. Cultural controls include population shares of Muslims, Hindus, Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes. Economic controls include literacy rates, relative female to male

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. A single asterix denotes significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple

Cultural Controls
Econ. Controls
Observations

Amendment
Commission
Amendment-2 years
Amendment -3 years
Amendment.-5 years
Amendment -7 years

Variable

Female

35

-2
-3
-5
-7

years
years
years
years

YES
YES
525

-0.03 (0.008)***

YES
YES
525

-0.03 (0.009)***
-0.01 (0.009)

Women
Commission

YES
YES
525

State specific
linear time
trends
-0.01 (0.004)**

YES
YES
525

YES
YES
525

YES
YES
525

YES
YES
525

YES
YES
525

0.01 (0.03)

-0.01 (0.04)

0.002 (0.006)

-0.09 (0.04)**

Placebo
Test

-0.001 (0.002)

-0.09 (0.04)***
-0.03 (0.05)

State specific
linear time
trends
-0.07 (0.02)***

-0.006 (0.03)
-0.007 (0.03)

-0.10 (0.04)***

Women
Commission

-0.01 (0.01)
-0.01 (0.01)

-0.03 (0.009)***

Placebo
Test

for 1%.

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. A single asterix denotes significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple

Cultural Controls
Economic Controls
Observations

Amendment
Commission
Amendment
Amendment
Amendment
Amendment

Variable

Female-Male

Table 2 - Relative Female and Male Suicide Rates and Female Inheritance
Female/Male

36
0.91

485

YES
YES

0.04 (0.01)***

Female Suicides

0.89

485

YES
YES

0.10 (0.03)***

Male Suicides

0.87

485

YES
YES

Suicides
-0.06 (0.02)***

0.62

485

YES
YES

Female Suicides
Male Suicides
-0.45 (0.13)***

10% level, double for 5%, and triple for 1%.

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterix denotes significance at the

0.68

486

Observations

R

10.30

F-stat on Instruments

2

YES
YES

-0.13 (0.17)
-0.67 (0.16)***
0.34 (0.12)***
0.15 (0.07)**

Amendment

Cultural Controls
Economic Controls

Hard Left
Soft Left
State Parties
Congress

Amendment

Variable

Table 3 - Suicides and Female Inheritance- IV-2SLS Estimations
Female-Male
First-Stage

37
0.91

0.94

407

YES
YES

Female
-0.07 (0.009)***
-0.02 (0.004)***
0.03 (0.004)***
0.01 (0.003)***

0.92

472

NO
NO

Male
-0.20 (0.03)***
-0.04 (0.007)***
0.09 (0.01)***
0.02 (0.004)***

0.94

407

YES
YES

Male
-0.15 (0.03)***
-0.04 (0.01)***
0.07 (0.02)***
0.02 (0.006)***

0.92

407

YES
YES

Female-Male
0.08 (0.03)***
0.02 (0.005)***
-0.04 (0.01)***
-0.01 (0.003)***

significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple for 1%. In all of the estimations the years covered are 1967-2000.

0.58

402

YES
YES

Female/Male
0.32 (0.10)***
0.20 (0.08)**
-0.12 (0.04)***
-0.09 (0.03)**

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses. A single asterix denotes

R

472

Observations

2

NO
NO

Female
-0.09 (0.008)***
-0.02 (0.006)***
0.04 (0.004)***
0.01 (0.003)***

Cultural Controls
Economic Controls

Variable
Landholding Acts
Tenancy Acts
Female*Landholding Acts
Female*Tenancy Acts

Table 4 - Suicides and Female Land Reforms- OLS Estimations

38
0.92

0.94

411
0.92

380

23.4

0.92

380

YES
YES

Suicides
-0.07 (0.04)*
0.04 (0.01)***

0.93

380

YES
YES

Suicides
-0.19 (0.07)***
0.10 (0.03)***

0.92

380

YES
YES

Female-Male
Suicides
0.12 (0.04)***
-0.06 (0.02)***

0.72

290

YES
YES

Fem. Suicides
Male Suicides
0.72 (0.45)†
-0.27 (0.18)†

† refers to significance at the 13% level. In this final estimation the sample is restricted to the years 1967-1992 (the orginal Besley-Burgess data set), for all of the other

estimations the sample is the years 1967-2000. .

for 1%.

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterix denotes significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple

R

441

Observations

2

30.5

F-stat on
Instruments

45.7

YES
YES

YES
YES

Cultural Controls
Economic Controls

YES
YES

0.95 (0.17)***

0.53 (0.07)***

Female*Landhold.

-0.86 (0.45)**

Landholding

-0.58 (0.18)***

3.20 (0.65)***
-3.03 (0.50)***
-0.87 (0.18)***
-0.17 (0.11)

Landholding

\
Landholding
\
Female*Landhold.

Hard Left
Soft Left
State Parties
Congress

Landholding Acts
Female*Landhold.

Variable

Table 5 - Suicides and Female Landholding Acts- IV-2SLS Estimations
Male
First-Stage
First-Stage
First-Stage
Female

39
0.92

0.93

407
0.93

407

20.3

0.94

406

YES
YES

-0.03 (0.006)***
0.02 (0.004)***

Female Suicides

0.93

406

YES
YES

-0.05 (0.01)***
0.03 (0.007)***

Male Suicides

0.91

406

YES
YES

Female-Male
Suicides
0.02 (0.008)***
-0.01 (0.005)**

0.78

406

YES
YES

Fem. Suicides
Male Suicides
0.20 (0.08)**
-0.09 (0.04)**

1%. In all of the estimations the years covered are 1967-2000.

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterix denotes significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple for

R

437

Observations

2

19.6

F-stat on
Instruments

26.1

YES
YES

YES
YES

Cultural Controls
Economic Controls

YES
YES

-0.36 (0.29)

-0.42 (0.13)***

Female*Tenancy

2.62 (0.62)***

Tenancy

1.74 (0.28)***

5.65 (0.92)***
0.67 (0.89)
-0.86 (0.20)

Tenancy

First-Stage

\
T enancy
\
Female*T enancy

Hard Left
Soft Left
State Parties

Tenancy Acts
Female*Tenancy

Variable

Table 6 - Suicides and Female Tenancy Acts- IV-2SLS Estimations
First-Stage
First-Stage

40
YES
YES
442

-0.005 (0.11)

-0.012 (0.009)

Suicide Rate
Other Causes

YES
YES
442

0.05 (0.02)**

0.07 (0.03)**

Proportion Suicides
Family Conflict
(All Suicides)

YES
YES
442

0.06 (0.02)**

0.19 (0.08)**

Proportion Suicides
Family Conflict
(Cause Known)

denotes significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple for 1%.

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses. A single asterix

YES
YES
442

0.01 (0.004)**

Male:
Amendment
Cultural Controls
Economic Controls
Observations

0.006 (0.003)**

Suicide Rate
Family Conflict

Female:
Amendment

Variable

Table 7 - Suicide Rates from Family Conflict and Female Inheritance- OLS Estimations

41

2

0.06

YES
YES
60687

Whole Sample
0.09 (0.02)***

0.06

YES
YES
51735

Hindus
0.09 (0.02)***

0.07

YES
YES
7610

Muslims
0.08 (0.07)

0.12

YES
YES
1221

Christians
0.06 (0.14)

0.06

YES
YES
60687

-0.14 (0.05)***
0.02 (0.08)

Whole Sample
0.10 (0.02)***

0.07

YES
YES
23053

-0.03 (0.10)

-0.09 (0.06)

Amended States
0.14 (0.03)***

5%, and triple for 1%.

Robust standard errors clusterd at the regional level are in parentheses. A single asterix denotes significance at the 10% level, double for

dummy variable equal to one if the woman was married after the Amendment had been passed in her state and equal to zero otherwise

caste and religion of wives; household location (rural or urban); and household durable good ownership. Exposed to Amendment is a

effects. Individual and household controls include: year of marriage, education, age, and occupation of both wives and their husbands;

Notes: The dependent variable equals to one if a wife has been beaten by her husband and zero otherwise. All regressions have state fixed

R

Individual Controls
Household Controls
Observations

Exposed to Amendment*Muslim
Exposed to Amendment*Christian

Variable
Exposed to Amendment

Table 8 - Domestic Violence and Female Inheritance (NFHS) - Probit Estimations

8
8.1

Appendix
Data Sources

Dependent Variables: Suicide numbers by gender and cause come from National Crime Records
Bureau of India.
Instrumental Variables: Political variables come from Election Commission of India.
Cultural Controls: Population, religion, and caste data come from decennial census published in
the Annual Statistical Abstract of India. Variables are interpolated between censuses.
Economic Controls:
State expenditure data, rainfall, drought and flood information comes from the EOPP Indian States
Data Base at STICERD, London School of Economics.
Bank availability come from the Burgess and Pande (2005) data set.

8.2

Variable Definitions

State Dummies: States included: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
and West Bengal.
Year Dummies: Years covered 1967-2004
Female Inheritance Amendments: Ast = 1 for t ≥ 1976 for Kerela; Ast = 1 for t ≥ 1986 for
Andhra Pradesh; Ast = 1 for t ≥ 1989 for Tamil Nadu; Ast = 1 for t ≥ 1994 for Maharashtra and
Karnataka; and Ast = 0 otherwise.
Land Reform Indexes: Lst is the cumulative number state-level legislations regarding landholdings.
These include legislations which implemented ceilings on landholdings (Type 3 in the Besley-Burgess
data); and acts that consolidated disparate landholdings (Type 4 in the Besley-Burgess data). Tst
is the cumulative number of state-level legislations regarding tenancy rights. These include acts

42

which regulate tenancy contracts, abolish tenancy, and transfer ownership to tenants (Type 1 in
the Besley-Burgess data); and acts which attempt to abolish intermediaries (Type 2 in the BesleyBurgess data). In accord with the Besley-Burgess data, amendments to the acts count as new
legislations.
F Ts is an index which increases in the rights women have regarding tenancy acts. Using the
information in from Table 2 in Agarwal (1995) , we code this: F Ts = 1 if the devolution of tenancy
land is only to male heirs {Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Haryana, Himachel
Pradesh}; F Ts = 2 if daughters and sisters are recognized but come very low in the order of heirs
{Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerela, Tamil
Nadu}; F Ts = 3 if personal law applies to tenancy land and women have some rights over the land
{Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh}.
F Ls is an index which increases in the rights women have regarding landholding acts. Using the
information in from Table 3 in Agarwal (1995) , we code this: F Ls = 1 if married and unmarried
daughters receive no recognition {Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana};
F Ls = 2 if married but not unmarried daughters receive recognition {Bihar, Assam, Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa}; F Ls = 3 if unmarried and married daughters receive
recognition {Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerela, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal}.
Political Variables: Zst−1 includes the proportion of seats in the state legislatures (Vidhan Sabha)
held by Hard Left (Communist Party of India; Communist Party of India Marxist Parties); Soft Left
(Indian National Congress Socialist Parties); Congress (Indian National Congress; Indian National
Congress Urs); and State Parties (Teluga Desam; Assam Gana Parishad; Shiv Sena; Uktal Congress;
Shiromani Alkali Dal; Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam).
Domestic Violence Variables: Yis reflects the dependent variable of whether a wife has been beaten
by husband, it takes on a value of 1 if a woman has ever been physically abused by her husband.
Female Inheritance Amendment (Individual level regressions): Let As denote the year that the
Amendment was passed in state s (i.e., As =1976 for Kerala; As =1986 for Andhra Pradesh; As =1989
for Tamil Nadu; As =1994 for Maharashtra and Karnataka). Then we define Ais as follows. Ais = 1
if year married ≥ As ; or Ais = 0 if year married < As . Ais = 0 for all of the states where no
Amendment was passed prior to the year 2005. .

43

8.3

Summary Statistics
Table A1 - Summary Statistics (across all years and states)
Variable
Female Suicide Rate
Male Suicide Rate
Female Suicide Rate - Male Suicide Rate
Female Suicide Rate/Male Suicide Rate
Hindus (share of population)
Muslims (share of population)
Schedule Tribes (share of population)
Schedule Castes (share of population)
Literacy rate
Female literacy/Male literacy
Real State Domestic Product per capita (log)
Rural food product per capita
Yields
Food Shock
Flood
Drought
Average monthly rainfall
Share of Health Expenditure in State income
Share of Development Expenditure in State income
Share of Education Expenditure in State income
Banks per capita
Urban Population Share
Prop of Seats won by State Parties
Prop of Seats won by Congress
Prop of Seats won by Hard Left
Prop of Seats won by Soft Left
Observations

Mean (s.d.)
0.073 (0.048)
0.11 (0.085)
-0.35 (0.05)
0.74 (0.23)
0.827 (0.154)
0.152 (0.173)
0.074 (0.074)
0.151 (0.058)
49.0 (16.2)
0.58 (0.15)
7.144 (0.456)
0.307 (0.273)
30.283 (17.982)
0.261 (0.439)
0.118 (0.323)
0.113 (0.317)
335.826 (256.696)
0.012 (0.005)
0.109 (0.041)
0.035 (0.012)
0.057 (0.027)
0.234 (0.083)
0.114 (0.232)
0.418 (0.259)
0.085 (0.15)
0.02 (0.049)
603

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Suicide rates are defined per 1000 individuals in a given state and
year. Yields are total agricultural output per area sown. Food shock is equal to one if a food shortage occurred in
a given state and year, and zero otherwise. Similar dummy variables are defined for the occurrence of a flood or
drought.

44

Table A2 - Summary Statistics - Individual Level Data (NFHS)
Variable
Beaten by husband
Wife - Age
Wife - No education
Wife - Housewife
Wife - Year of marriage
Wife - Exposed to Amendment
Husband - No education
Husband - Cultivator
Hindu
SC
ST
OBC
Rural
Number of Durables Owned
Observations

Mean (s.d.)
0.28 (0.45)
29.16 (9.49)
0.32 (0.47)
0.60 (0.49)
1990 (8.66)
0.17 (0.38)
0.22 (0.42)
0.25 (0.44)
0.72 (0.45)
0.17 (0.38)
0.14 (0.34)
0.33 (0.47)
0.54 (0.50)
2.71 (1.76)
61938

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. SC, ST, and OBC refere to the caste groupings (Scheduled Caste,
Scheduled Tribe, and Other Backward Castes). The excluded category are the higher ranked castes in the Indian
social hierarchy.

45

8.4

Other Estimations

Table A3 - Suicide Rates with Years of Amendment- OLS Estimations
Variable
Years Amendment

Female
0.002 (0.0004)***

Male
0.007 (0.001)***

Female-Male
-0.005 (0.0009)***

Female/Male
-0.009 (0.003)***

Cultural Controls
Economic Controls
Linear time trend
Observations

YES
YES
YES
531

YES
YES
YES
531

YES
YES
YES
531

YES
YES
YES
531

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. A single asterix
denotes significance at the 10% level, double for 5%, and triple for 1%.

Table A4 - Suicide Rates and Female Inheritance- Robustness Tests
Variable
Excluding Kerela:
Amendment
Observations
Excluding Bihar, Punjab, U.P.:
Amendment
Observations

Female

Male

Female-Male

Female/Male

0.01 (0.005)**

0.04 (0.01)***

-0.03 (0.01)***

-0.15 (0.04)***

490

490

490

490

0.009 (0.004)**

0.03 (0.01)***

-0.02 (0.009)***

-0.08 (0.04)**

422

422

422

422

Notes: All regressions have state and year controls as well as the economic and cultural controls of the previous
tables. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.. A single asterix denotes significance at the 10% level, double
for 5%, and triple for 1%.

46

