NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO BENEFITS WHEN THE GOVERNMENT PAYS MORE? PASS-THROUGH
IN THE MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PROGRAM
Mark Duggan
Amanda Starc
Boris Vabson
Working Paper 19989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19989

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We thank Josh Gottlieb, Jon Kostad, Kurt Lavetti, David Molitor, Neale Mahoney, Ashley Swanson,
Bob Town, and seminar participants at Stanford, UCSB, and the ASSA meetings for helpful comments.
The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the institutions or other individuals mentioned above, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. All errors are our own. Boris Vabson acknowledges funding from the NBER Pre-Doctoral
Research Fellowship in Disability Policy, through #1 DRC12000002-01-00.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Mark Duggan, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Benefits when the Government Pays More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage
Program
Mark Duggan, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson
NBER Working Paper No. 19989
March 2014
JEL No. H22,I13,L1
ABSTRACT
Governments contract with private firms to provide a wide range of services. While a large body of
previous work has estimated the effects of that contracting, surprisingly little has investigated how
those effects vary with the generosity of the contract. In this paper we examine this issue in the Medicare
Advantage (MA) program, through which the federal government contracts with private insurers to
coordinate and finance health care for more than 15 million Medicare recipients. To do this, we exploit
a substantial policy-induced increase in MA reimbursement in metropolitan areas with a population
of 250 thousand or more relative to MSAs just below this threshold. Our results demonstrate that the
additional reimbursement leads more private firms to enter this market and to an increase in the share
of Medicare recipients enrolled in MA plans. Our findings also reveal that only about one-fifth of the
additional reimbursement is passed through to consumers in the form of better coverage. A somewhat
larger share accrues to private insurers in the form of higher profits and we find suggestive evidence
of a large impact on advertising expenditures. Our results have implications for a key feature of the
Affordable Care Act that will reduce reimbursement to MA plans by $156 billion from 2013 to 2022.

Mark Duggan
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1452 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
mduggan@wharton.upenn.edu
Amanda Starc
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Room 303 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
astarc@wharton.upenn.edu

Boris Vabson
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1400 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
bvabson@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Governments often contract with private …rms to provide publicly …nanced goods and services.
While the details vary substantially, the scope of these contracting arrangements is large, representing 10% of U.S. GDP in 2008 (OECD 2011). The range of industries, goods and services is
also vast, ranging from defense contractors making military helicopters to landscaping companies
mowing the lawns of publicly-owned property. Private …rms are also increasingly involved in social
services such as charter schools (Neal 2002, Rouse 1998) and health care. Theoretically, "contracting out" could lead to improved e¢ ciency, given that private …rms have powerful incentives to
control costs. Additionally, if the government contracts with multiple …rms (or includes a government option), consumers may have access to more choice. This can improve consumer surplus in
two ways: additional competition can lead to quality improvements and private …rms may more
e¤ectively cater to heterogeneous consumer preferences.
An important example of "contracting out" can be seen in the Medicare program, which currently provides health insurance to nearly 52 million U.S. residents, with total expenditures estimated to have exceeded $600 billion in 2013 (CMS, 2013; CBO, 2013). For most Medicare
recipients, the federal government directly reimburses hospitals, physicians, and other health care
providers on a fee-for-service basis. However, for 15.4 million recipients, the federal government
instead contracts with private insurers and other organizations to coordinate and …nance medical
care as part of the Medicare Advantage (MA) program. This paper examines the MA market and
asks a central question: how does the quality of private provision change as the generosity of the
government contract increases? Armed with extensive data on private provision in the Medicare
program, we examine the incidence of exogenous increases in plan reimbursements, in terms of the
price and quality of insurance coverage, the utilization of medical care, and health outcomes.
A large body of previous research has investigated the e¤ect of Medicare Advantage on
Medicare expenditures, health care utilization, and health outcomes (Afendulis et al 2013, Landon
et al 2012, Lemieux et al 2012). A related strand of research has explored how MA enrollment
levels are a¤ected by the generosity of plan reimbursement (Cawley et al 2005, Pope et al 2006).
Yet, surprisingly little research has investigated how various aspects of Medicare Advantage coverage might vary with the generosity of plan reimbursement. Theoretically, one would expect plan

2

payment rates to in‡uence both the quality of coverage o¤ered by private insurers and potentially
the entry decisions of some insurers. This gap in the literature is unfortunate, given that a key
feature of the recently enacted A¤ordable Care Act gradually lowers reimbursement to MA plans
by an estimated $156 billion from 2013-22 (CBO 2012). While the Congressional Budget O¢ ce
and others have estimated that these lower payment rates will reduce MA enrollment, there is little
evidence on how the number of options and the quality of coverage will change for those who remain
in the program.
In this study, we aim to partially …ll this gap in the literature by exploiting policy-induced
variation in the generosity of MA plan reimbursement. We begin with an illustrative model–showing
the impact of plan reimbursement under perfect as well as imperfect competition. Under this model,
as an insurer makes its coverage more generous in response to an increase in reimbursement, more
Medicare recipients are likely to enroll in the MA plan. If these marginal enrollees are more costly,
then even with perfect competition, the inframarginal enrollees will not receive the full bene…t of
the additional reimbursement. More speci…cally, if an insurer receives $10 more per month from
the federal government, it cannot reduce its premium by that same amount, while keeping pro…ts
constant, if marginal enrollees are more costly. Altogether, our model formalizes how the degree
of selection a¤ects the incidence of MA reimbursement, under perfect competition. Theoretically,
imperfect competition could also reduce pass-through; this factor may be material to the Medicare
Advantage setting, given that the market for MA plans may be imperfectly competitive. Under
imperfect competition, even if there is no di¤erence between the marginal and the average MA
enrollee, there will be less than full pass-through of bene…ts. We use our model to consider the
factors, including plan entry, a¤ecting incidence under imperfect competition.
Our empirical results exploit geographic variation in MA reimbursement. MA reimbursement levels are set at a county-level and are also individually risk-adjusted; the amount that a
plan is paid for any given enrollee is thereby equivalent to the MA benchmark in their county of
residence, multiplied by that enrollee’s risk score (dependent on that individual’s health status).
The county benchmark, meanwhile, is largely a function of each county’s per-person FFS spending
levels; plans are paid more in areas with high fee-for-service spending, such as Miami, Florida,
than in areas with low FFS spending, such as Minneapolis, Minnesota. However, in counties with
relatively low FFS spending, benchmarks are set at a level higher than that county’s FFS spending,
3

otherwise known as a payment ‡oor. In 1998, the federal government introduced this minimum
benchmark to encourage plan entry in counties with low FFS spending. Initially, the payment ‡oor
was uniform across all counties. However, in 2001, the payment ‡oor was set to be approximately
10.5% higher in counties belonging to metro areas with more than 250 thousand residents. To better understand this payment structure, we can consider an example from two comparable Illinois
counties, Peoria and Sangamon, whose 2008 benchmarks were both set at the payment ‡oor. Peoria
County belongs to the Peoria, IL metropolitan area –with a population of 367K –while Sangamon
County belongs to the Spring…eld, IL MSA, with a population of just 204K. As a result, though
these counties have similar per-capita FFS expenditures ($601 for Peoria and $612 for Sangamon),
the county-level benchmark in Peoria County was $772 per month – corresponding to the urban
‡oor rate –versus just $699 per month in neighboring Sangamon county –the non-urban ‡oor rate
We investigate whether this policy-induced variation in the generosity of MA reimbursement
a¤ects the quality of insurance coverage, the utilization of medical care, as well as health outcomes.
The relationship between average fee-for-service expenditures and the county-level benchmark in
2004 is shown in Figure 1. As this …gure demonstrates, counties with relatively low fee-for-service
spending have benchmarks that correspond to the payment ‡oor. Furthermore, this …gure documents the two di¤erent payment ‡oors, applying to urban (metro area with population of 250K or
more) and non-urban (249k or less) counties, respectively.1 To estimate the impact of plan reimbursement levels, we compare counties in MSAs with a population of 250 thousand or more, which
have the higher payment ‡oors, with similar counties below this threshold.

Our speci…cations

control ‡exibly for both the county and the MSA population while also controlling for the level of
per-capita FFS expenditures in the county. We focus primarily on counties with low per-capita feefor-service spending, in which the payment ‡oors described above will typically be binding. We also
on counties located in MSAs with populations relatively close to the 250 thousand threshold (100
- 600 thousand), so that we obtain treatment and control counties that are otherwise comparable.
Our …rst set of empirical results investigates the e¤ect of the additional plan reimbursement on the number of insurers enrolling MA recipients and the HHI concentration index of MA
enrollment in the county. We …nd that in counties with 10.5 percent more reimbursement (due to
1

For reasons that we explain in more detail below, the relationship becomes somewhat hazier in the next few years,
as shown in Appendix Figure 1. It is also worth noting that for the 67% of counties that belong to single-county
metro areas, the county and metro populations are identical.

4

the higher payment ‡oor), there are on average 1.9 additional insurers and that the average HHI is
lower by 1047. These e¤ects are substantial, given that our control counties (belonging to 100-249k
metro areas) have an average of 5.4 insurers and an average HHI of 4250. Consistent with this, we
show that the number of plans increases and the HHI falls as the gap between the payment ‡oor and
a county’s average fee-for-service costs grows. This …rst set of results indicates that the additional
reimbursement induces more insurers to enter the MA market and that individuals enrolled in MA
then have more plans from which to choose.
We next estimate the e¤ect of the additional reimbursement on the fraction of Medicare
recipients enrolling in MA. All else equal, a higher level of reimbursement would lead more Medicare
recipients to be pro…table for health insurers, which theoretically would lead insurers to aim for
higher enrollment. Plans might achieve this by, for example, improving the quality of their coverage or by advertising more intensively. Consistent with this, we estimate that the 10.5 percent
increase in plan reimbursement leads to a 7.0 percentage point increase in enrollment in Medicare
Advantage HMO and PPO plans. The higher reimbursement also leads to a similar increase of 5.3
percentage points in enrollment in private fee-for-service MA plans, though these plans di¤er little
from traditional Medicare as they do not restrict recipients’choice of providers (although they do
bear …nancial risk).
Given evidence of higher levels of competition in markets with higher MA payments, we
turn to calculating the impact on plan price and quality. Here, we …nd much more modest e¤ects.
For example, we …nd that enrollees in counties located in MSAs that are just above the population
threshold do not pay signi…cantly lower monthly premiums. Estimates that incorporate additional
expected out-of-pocket costs to consumers suggest that less than one-…fth of the additional funding
is passed through, allowing us to rule out pass through of more than 45 percent at the 95 percent
level of con…dence. These …ndings suggest that much less than half of the additional reimbursement
is passed on to consumers …nancially, such as through lower premiums, deductibles, or co-payments.
Of course, plans may respond to reimbursement increases by improving the quality of
medical care, rather than decreasing their enrollees’ …nancial costs. For example, plans could
contract with better providers in response to the additional revenues or cover additional services.
To investigate this possibility, we use detailed individual-level data from the Consumer Assessment
of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS), which contains information on plan satisfaction
5

ratings, utilization, and health outcomes for approximately 160,000 enrollees per year. We …nd
no evidence of increased patient satisfaction or increased utilization of routine, primary care, or
specialist visits in urban ‡oor counties, relative to their non-urban counterparts. Similarly, we
…nd no impact on self-reported (overall or mental) health or satisfaction with care. Finally, while
selection and composition e¤ects could partially explain low pass-through, we …nd no evidence of
signi…cant composition di¤erences across our payment threshold.
Taken together, our results indicate that the increased reimbursements paid to ‡oor counties
just above the 250 thousand threshold substantially increase the number of enrollees in Medicare
Advantage, even though plan quality appears to be little changed. Not only is this inconsistent with
a model of perfect competition, but it presents a puzzle even under the presumption of imperfectly
competitive insurers. How could insurers increase enrollment in counties above the MSA population
threshold, without making changes to plan quality? We present suggestive evidence that …rms
may accomplish this by advertising more aggressively in counties with higher benchmarks, with
this increased advertising leading to higher enrollments. The increase in advertising spending,
meanwhile, suggests that not all of the rents associated with market power are captured by insurers.2
The recently enacted A¤ordable Care Act instituted many changes to the Medicare Advantage program that are currently being phased in. Chief among them is a reduction in the
generosity of MA reimbursement, with the magnitude of these reductions growing steadily over
time. According to the Congressional Budget O¢ ce, these cuts will save the federal government
$156 billion over the 2013-2022 period (CBO 2012). Our estimates indicate that the …nancial incidence of these cuts will fall to a signi…cant extent on the supply side of the market. While we
cannot measure the direct impact on …rm pro…tability, we can look to stock returns as a proxy.
In April 2013, following reversals of planned cuts to the MA program, the stock market valuation
of major health insurers rose substantially (see Figure 2).3 At the same time, the stock price of
the largest publicly traded hospital operator (HCA) was unchanged. Consistent with the evidence
that we present below, this suggests that consumer costs fall less from policy-induced increases in
MA plan reimbursement than a perfectly competitive model would predict. Further, given that
2
To the extent that the market for hospital or physician services is imperfectly competitive, some of the bene…ts
of additional reimbursement may be passed through to them as well.
3
Stock prices of major insurers reacted similarly-in February 2014- to reductions in the expected size of MA cuts.
See Al-Issis and Miller (2013) for an examination of the e¤ect of the A¤ordable Care Act on the stock prices of a
broader set of …rms in the health care sector.

6

insurers, rather than providers, appear to be the primary bene…ciaries of reimbursement increases,
it appears that insurance operators have the predominant market power.
The paper is organized as followers. Section 2 describes the Medicare Advantage program
and Section 3 describes our theoretical framework. Section 4 describes the data on Medicare
Advantage enrollment, cost, and quality along with insurer participation. Section 5 outlines our
identi…cation strategy and presents our results, and Section 6 concludes.

2

The Medicare Advantage Program
First introduced in 1982 as Medicare Part C, the forerunners to contemporary Medicare Ad-

vantage plans allowed consumers to opt out of traditional fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare and into
private managed care plans. The federal government hoped to achieve quality as well as cost
improvements by harnessing competition between private insurers (see McGuire, Newhouse, and
Sinaiko 2011, for a comprehensive history). In contrast to the FFS framework used by Medicare,
private Medicare Advantage plans provide care through a managed care model. Under traditional
FFS, patients have substantial freedom in selecting physicians as well as treatment options, with
relatively few restrictions placed on the scope of care. Under managed care, greater restrictions
exist on physician access, with consumers often limited to a plan’s provider network. Furthermore,
many managed care plans require special approval for specialist visits and certain procedures. They
may also make e¤orts to coordinate patient care, which could yield e¢ ciency improvements.

2.1

Plan Description
While all Medicare Advantage plans must cover the services that are included under traditional

Medicare Parts A and B, individual plans can di¤er in the supplemental bene…ts that they provide,
such as vision or prescription drug coverage. Plans can also di¤er in their …nancial characteristics,
including the premium charged and consumer co-payments (which a¤ect the level and variance
of predicted out of pocket costs). Private insurers can enter county-level markets by o¤ering a
variety of plans, and an insurer can selectively introduce a Medicare Advantage plan to certain
counties and not to others. An insurer can o¤er multiple plans within the same county and vary
the characteristics of these plans. However, Medicare Advantage plans are guaranteed-issue, and

7

the insurer is required to o¤er coverage to all interested Medicare recipients in the counties in which
a given plan is active.
Plans can also di¤er in the speci…c type of managed care framework that they utilize. All
Medicare Advantage plans were operated as health maintenance organizations (HMO’s) through
2003. However, following the passage of the Medicare Modernization Act, these plans could also
operate as POS (point of service), PPO (preferred provider organization), or PFFS (private feefor-service). HMO, POS, and PPO plans all rely on provider networks, while PFFS plans were not
required to construct networks prior to 2011. Medicare Advantage HMO plans do not allow enrollees
to see physicians or hospital outside of their provider network, barring a medical emergency. POS
enrollees, meanwhile, have the option of visiting physicians and hospitals outside of the network,
but require explicit approval to do so. Under PPO plans, out-of-network physician visits would not
require plan approval, but would entail greater cost sharing. Finally, as part of PFFS plans, enrollees
would have the option to visit any physician, so long as that physician accepts the payment terms
of the PFFS plan (cost sharing terms for the patient would remain the same across all physicians).
Di¤erences between these plan types could ultimately shape insurers’ market entry decisions, in
terms of the plan types o¤ered within a county. For instance, given that PFFS plans are not
required to form provider networks, the …xed costs of market entry for PFFS plans could be much
lower than for other types of plans.

2.2

Plan Reimbursement
Payments to Medicare Advantage plans are based on payment benchmarks, which correspond

to a given enrollee’s county of residence. The benchmark payment is risk-adjusted for that enrollee’s
demographic and health characteristics. Originally, county-level payment benchmarks for Medicare
Advantage plans were set at 95% of a county’s per enrollee, risk-adjusted Medicare fee-for-service
spending. CMS introduced a payment ‡oor in 1998, primarily to encourage plan entry to rural
counties. However, as a by-product, government spending on MA enrollees in many counties
(particularly rural ones) came to exceed spending on similar enrollees in Medicare FFS. In 2001,
CMS introduced a second payment ‡oor, which was set at an approximately 10.5 percent premium
to the existing one, and which applied only to urban counties. CMS de…ned a county as "urban"
if the metropolitan area in which it is included had a population of 250 thousand or more.
8

The relationship between a county’s average per-capita fee-for-service spending and its
benchmark, as of 2004, can be seen in Figure 1. As this …gure shows, counties with relatively low
FFS spending had benchmarks set at the payment ‡oor. More speci…cally, a non-urban county with
average per-capita FFS spending below $555 per month had a ‡oor of $555 while an urban county
with average per-capita FFS spending below $613 had a ‡oor of $613. Counties with per-capita
FFS spending above $613 were in this year essentially una¤ected by the payment ‡oor while only
urban counties between $555 and $613 are a¤ected. As the …gure shows, the magnitude of the
impact of the payment ‡oor is quite substantial for some counties. Consider an urban county with
per-capita FFS spending of $500. Its benchmark is 23 percent greater than it would be in the
absence of the payment ‡oor. The corresponding gap is considerably smaller for an urban county
with per-capita FFS spending of $600, where the ‡oor increases the benchmark by just 2 percent.
Our analysis focuses on the 2007-2011 period, throughout which payment ‡oors continue to
be functionally (albeit not formally) present; benchmarks after 2004 were set at the highest of the
previous year’s benchmark (adjusted for in‡ation) or a county’s average FFS level. As such, 2004
‡oor counties would have 2007-2011 benchmarks set at the in‡ation adjusted 2004 ‡oor rates, so
long as the in‡ation adjusted ‡oor, from 2004, exceeded that county’s contemporaneous FFS costs.
Ultimately, over 90% of the original, 2004 ‡oor counties remained ‡oors in the subsequent period.
The relationship between benchmarks & a county’s average per-capita fee-for-service spending, for
this period, can be seen in Appendix Figure I; as expected, this relationship is largely consistent
with what was observed in 2004, though it becomes somewhat less tight.4
In 2003, the Medicare Modernization Act introduced an additional component to the reimbursement mechanism, in the form of a bidding system. Beginning in 2006, if a …rm placed a
bid that was lower than the existing reimbursement benchmark, 25 percent of the di¤erence got
returned to the federal government. The remaining 75 percent got passed back to plans, and had
to fund services not covered by traditional Medicare or be passed on to consumers. In the …rst year
of these bids, CMS estimated that 65% of these rebates went towards part A and B cost-sharing
reductions, 14% towards providing non-traditional bene…ts (vision, etc), 4% towards reducing part
4

To the extent that a county’s FFS level rose above the ‡oor level in one or more years, its benchmark would
subsequently exceed the in‡ation-adjusted ‡oor. This explains why some counties in 2007 have a benchmark above
the linear relationships displayed in Figure 1. Similarly, counties with non-binding 2004 ‡oors would have subsequent
rates that always exceeded the corresponding, in‡ation adjusted ‡oor level, irrespective of their subsequent FFS costs.
After 2004, a county can go from being ‡oor to non-‡oor, but cannot go from being non-‡oor to ‡oor.

9

B premiums, and 16% towards part D bene…ts and premium reductions (CHS, 2006). Recent work
has explored the e¤ect of county benchmark changes on plan bids but does not consider the e¤ects
on measures of plan quality (Song et al, 2013).5
A number of papers highlight the bene…cial e¤ects of competition in Medicare Advantage,
on characteristics such as premium costs (Town and Liu 2003, Lustig 2010) and out-of-pocket
payment levels (Dunn 2011). Separately, a literature has examined …rm entry in this market
(Chernew et al 2005, Pizer and Frakt 2002, and Frakt, Pizer, and Feldman 2009), and a broad
literature has considered other aspects of the program, including consumer choice (Dafny and
Dranove 2008), mortality, and disparities in health care (Balsa, Cao, and McGuire 2007). Our
paper adds to this literature by examining the e¤ect of policy-induced changes in plan generosity
on market structure, MA plan enrollment, and on the quality of MA coverage.
Our paper also adds to an expanding literature on the role of insurance market competition
in shaping negotiations with providers (Ho and Lee 2013, Gowrisankaran, Nevo, and Town 2013),
and premiums (Dafny 2010, Dafny, Duggan, and Ramanaryan 2012). Furthermore, our paper is
similar in spirit to a number of papers that evaluate the impact of the Medicare program on private
insurers and consumers (see Cabral and Mahoney 2013 and Starc 2013 on Medigap, Abaluck and
Gruber 2011, Ketcham et al 2012, Kling et al 2012, or Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2013 on
demand in Medicare Part D, and Clemens and Gottleib 2013 on the relationship between public and
private reimbursement). Finally, Gaynor and Town 2012 provide a nice summary of competition
in health care markets more broadly.

3

Theory
This section describes the theoretical framework that informs the empirical speci…cations and

highlights the fact that incidence depends on the degree of competition in the market as well
as selection. Under perfect competition and constant marginal costs (perfectly elastic supply), we
5

Song et al (2013) explore the e¤ect of benchmark changes on plan bids. They instrument for the county benchmark
with the growth of FFS spending in other counties in the state and with the national changes in benchmarks (which
in dollar terms are larger for those counties with higher baseline FFS spending). However, this identifying variation
is unlikely to be exogenous, given the many factors with which initial benchmark levels & state-level FFS growth
rates may be associated. One of the many outcome variables that we consider below is the plan rebate, which is
three-fourths of the di¤erence between the bid and the benchmark.

10

expect full pass-through of reimbursements to consumers.6 However, competition may be imperfect
and there may be (adverse or advantageous) selection (conditional on any risk adjustment). Just as
manufacturers face upward sloping supply curves because the last plant location is not as e¢ cient
as the …rst plant location, insurance companies may face upward sloping average cost curves as
well. If there is advantageous selection7 , then the marginal Medicare Advantage consumer is sicker
and more costly to insure than the average. The average cost curve traces out costs from those who
value insurance the most to those who value insurance least. Under advantageous selection, the
low cost enrollees have the highest valuation for Medicare Advantage plans. In this case, we should
expect a pass-through rate of less than one. As the amount of the subsidy increases, Medicare
Advantage penetration rates increase, and sicker consumers begin to enroll in plans. As a result
a dollar increase in the subsidy must fund the health costs of the sicker enrollees in addition to
providing additional bene…ts to existing enrollees. Figure 4 illustrates that incomplete pass-through
under advantageous selection into Medicare Advantage policies.8 Let AC1 be average costs under
initial reimbursement generosity. If generosity increases by some amount m, there is a downward
shift in the insurer’s average cost curve to AC2 . If demand were completely inelastic, the price
would fall from p1 to p1

m. However, if demand is not completely inelastic, the price will fall

to some intermediate level p2 : the incidence of the increased generosity depends on the relative
elasticity of supply (determined by selection) and demand.9
Furthermore, various studies (Dafny 2010, Lustig 2010, Starc 2013) have argued that perfect
competition is a poor benchmark in insurance markets, and the incidence of the MA subsidy also
depends on market structure. Consider pass-through under monopoly. Figure 5 shows a downward
shift of the average cost curve and assumes no selection; the marginal consumer and average
6

Therefore, the reimbursement is optimal when the marginal consumer in Medicare Advantage places a value on
the additional coverage provided at an amount equal to the shadow price of public funds.
7
As suggested by Brown et al. (2013).
8
We collapse this average out-of-pocket cost to an e¤ective price p and assume no di¤erences in plan quality. We
will relax this assumption in the empirical section and explore the relationship between contract generosity and plan
quality.
9
The intuition is reversed if there is adverse selection. Pass-through is greater than one because the increased
subsidy serves to internalize part of the asymmetric information problem. If there is relatively little selection (and
thus a ‡at AC curve) and the market for MA plans is perfectly competitive, then virtually all of the additional
spending passes through to consumers in the form of a lower premium.
The intuition is reversed if there is adverse selection. Pass-through is greater than one because the increased subsidy
serves to internalize part of the asymmetric information problem. If there is relatively little selection (and thus a ‡at
AC curve) and the market for MA plans is perfectly competitive, then virtually all of the additional spending passes
through to consumers in the form of a lower premium.

11

consumer are the same. When the monopolist sets price equal to marginal revenue, the decrease
in price is smaller than under perfect competition because the marginal revenue curve is steeper
than the demand curve. In our example with constant marginal costs, linear demand would imply
a pass-through rate of one-half, as the marginal revenue curve is twice as steep as the demand
curve. Advantageous selection ampli…es this e¤ect. Therefore, both advantageous selection and
imperfect competition theoretically reduce pass-through rates. Weyl and Fabinger (2013) expand
this analysis to intermediate cases: the less competitive the conduct in a market is, the smaller the
pass-through rate.10
In addition, more …rms may enter as a result of increased plan generosity. If entry is costly,
then an increase in government bene…ts could induce additional …rms to enter.

This is socially

bene…cial if the bene…ts to consumers in the form of increased competition and product variety are
greater than the additional …xed costs incurred and the deadweight loss of taxation. However, if
increased generosity spurs excess entry, …xed and marketing expenditures are real economic costs.
A model describing the full strategic interaction of imperfectly competitive …rms is outside the
scope of this paper; however, we can describe the strategic decisions made by insurers.
First, the …rm must decide which markets to enter. Second, conditional on being active in a
market, they must design insurance products, and then set premiums for those insurance products.
Finally, the …rm may choose to make ongoing quality investments over the course of the year, and
earn variable pro…ts on each policy. If the discounted sum of future variable pro…ts is higher than
the …xed cost of entry, the …rm enters the market.11 Therefore, in order to predict …rm entry and
the associated increase in competitive pressure, we are interested in a comparative static that links
benchmarks to …rm variable pro…ts. This comparative static depends on four e¤ects.
The …rst is the direct e¤ ect, where increased benchmarks lead to higher reimbursements
for …rms. The second is a price e¤ ect: for the same vector of bids, an increased benchmark means
10

Similarly, Mahoney and Weyl (2013) speci…cally consider the case of selection markets.
A …rm f may have a number of products j in market m. The …rms variable pro…ts from that policy can be
written as:
P
(bm + pj cijm ) sijm
jm =
11

i

where bm is the benchmark (which in practice is adjusted by the individual’s risk score), pjm the plan’s premium (if
any), cijm the cost of individual i covered by plan j in market m, and sijm the probability that the same consumer
purchases the plan. In order to get …rm-level variable pro…ts in a given market, aggregate over all plans within a
market o¤ered by the …rm and subtract any …xed or sunk cost of entry.

12

a lower price for consumers, depending on the pass-through rate.12 Third, there is a cost e¤ ect,
where higher benchmarks could change the nature of selection within the market. For example,
increasing penetration rates may lead to …rms attracting sicker consumers, increasing costs, if there
is advantageous selection in the market. Finally, there is a market power e¤ ect, in which high
benchmarks may lead to more entry. As more …rms enter, consumers have access to more plans
that may prove to be closer substitutes, driving down markups. The overall e¤ect of more generous
plan reimbursement is ultimately an empirical question.

4

Data
We use a number of administrative datasets from CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid

Services) and from HCUP (Healthcare Cost & Utilization Project) that contain MA plan enrollment
levels, plans’ …nancial generosity, measures of plan quality and patient utilization, government
payment amounts to Medicare Advantage plans, and FFS spending levels per enrollee. We extract
information on plan characteristics from a variety of CMS datasets, covering such dimensions as
insurer identity, plan type, plan …nancial characteristics (including premium and out of pocket
costs), and plan quality measures. We construct measures of MA enrollee composition at a plan,
county, as well as year level, using CAHPS survey data, Medicare enrollment data (from the
denominator …les), as well as hospital discharge data. These data are nationwide in scope, covering
more than three thousand US counties.

We have annual county-level data on the number of

insurers, the HHI index, and MA enrollment (separately by HMO, PPO, and PFFS) from 2007
through 2011 along with data on plan characteristics (such as premiums, out-of-pocket costs, and
Part D coverage), and individual-level data on MA plan ratings for these same years.
We initially di¤erentiate between three types of counties - those with monthly per-capita
FFS spending below $662.32 in 2007, those between $662.32 and $732.04, and …nally those above
$732.04. For the …rst group, for any given level of FFS spending, the benchmark is typically 10.5
percent higher in urban counties than in non-urban counties and is set at the payment ‡oor. For
the third group, the benchmarks are essentially the same in each of the two types of counties for
12

A higher benchmark need not change the competitive environment or optimal prices; increased benchmarks may
simply a¤ect …rm pro…ts by increasing quantity, as decreased premiums may increase Medicare penetration rates,
and, therefore pro…ts.

13

any given level of FFS spending. And for the second group, the gap in benchmarks between the
two counties declines linearly from about 10.5 percent at per-capita FFS spending of $662.32 to 0
by $732.04. Urban counties in this group typically have their benchmarks set at the payment ‡oor
while non-urban counties do not.
Figure 1 shows the relationship between average fee-for-service expenditures and county
benchmarks for the three types of counties as of 2004, while Appendix Figure I presents the comparable relationship for 200713 . As these …gures show, the e¤ect of being designated an urban
county (in a metropolitan area with 250 thousand or more residents) is largest for those with average fee-for-service spending below $662 and this e¤ect declines steadily from that threshold to the
threshold of $732, at which point the ‡oor no longer binds for urban counties. Table 1 provides
summary statistics for all counties and then separately for each of these three types of counties.
As the table shows, both benchmarks and average per-capita FFS expenditures are substantially
higher for the third group than for the second or …rst groups. Additionally the average population both of the individual counties and of the metropolitan areas in which they are included - is highest
among those above the $732 threshold and lowest in those below the $662 threshold.
It is worth noting that a county’s ‡oor status can change from one year to the next. More
speci…cally, a ‡oor county in which per-capita FFS spending grows relatively rapidly may move out
of the ‡oor category. This is of course more likely for counties close to the kinks in the schedule
displayed in Figure 1. For example, among non-urban counties with FFS expenditures from 600
to 662 in 2007, around seven percent are no longer "‡oor counties" three years later in 2010. In
contrast, just three percent of non-urban counties with FFS expenditures below 600 in 2007 are
no longer ‡oors as of 2010. The patterns are similar for urban counties, with those closer to the
kink in 2007 more likely to shift to non-‡oor status thereafter. Rather than rede…ning the ‡oor
"treatment" each year, we use a county’s 2007 FFS expenditures and its status as an urban or nonurban county in that year as our primary source of variation in the generosity of plan reimbursement
below. Our analyses explore the e¤ect of this reimbursement generosity from 2007 through 2011.
In our …rst set of analyses, we include all 3028 counties with non-missing data. However,
because we use the urban / non-urban threshold as a key source of identi…cation, we primarily focus
13

As of 2007, a number of of counties-but fewer than 10%-no longer have benchmarks determined in the same
manner as in 2004. The reasons for this are described in Section 2.2.

14

on counties located in metropolitan areas that are relatively close to the 250 thousand population
threshold so as to have a more comparable set of counties. More speci…cally, in subsequent analyses,
we restrict to counties belonging to metropolitan areas with populations between 100 thousand
and 600 thousand. The population range is set larger above the threshold because the density of
metropolitan area populations is somewhat thicker in the range below the threshold than above.
These criteria yield a sample of 576 counties, with 304 below the population threshold and 272
above.

These counties are included in 280 metropolitan areas, with approximately half of the

metro areas having just 1 county, 20 percent having exactly two counties, and the remaining 30
percent having between 3 and 6 counties. As we explain in more detail below, in most speci…cations,
we further restrict attention to the 348 counties in this group of 576 with su¢ ciently low fee-forservice spending to be fully a¤ected by the payment ‡oors displayed in Figure 1.

4.1

Plan Enrollment Data
We obtain Landscape …les from CMS on Medicare Advantage enrollment levels for the combi-

nation of the following: county, month, insurer, and the insurance package o¤ered by that insurer
(which has the technical term contract). Our …nal dataset is at the county-year-insurance contract
level. For any given year, we exclude contracts with fewer than 10 enrollees. In addition, we obtain
information on county-year level Medicare enrollment levels, which allows us to calculate Medicare
Advantage’s share of each county’s Medicare population. For counties with fewer than 10 MA
enrollees, this number is not reported. Given the small number of counties in our analysis sample
missing this data (e.g. just 11 out of 576 in 2007), our results are not sensitive to whether we
exclude these counties from our sample or assume that MA enrollment there is equal to 0.
Across all counties nationwide with MA enrollment exceeding ten, the average number
of insurers o¤ering an MA plan is 4.8 and the average HHI concentration index is 4,961. For
our restricted sample, the corresponding averages are 6.2 and 3,937, respectively. These market
measures treat PFFS, HMO, and PPO types of Medicare Advantage similarly. We compile a list
of the most active insurers, based on the number of county-years in which they operate from 2007
through 2011, and also break out each …rm’s activity by county type as in Table I. We present these
statistics in Table 2 and show that Humana is the most active MA insurer, in terms of county-years
in which it is present (comprising nearly 80 percent of all possible markets) and in terms of the
15

number of enrollees it covers (across our restricted sample, it covers about a quarter of all those in
MA). Interestingly, it is the insurer with the greatest stock price response to MA reimbursement
increases, as displayed in Figure 2.

4.2

Plan Characteristics Data
To measure plan …nancial characteristics, we draw on plan-year level data from the CMS

landscape …les and metrics of premium levels, the availability of drug coverage, and mean drug
deductibles and copayments (for the plans that o¤er this coverage).14 We obtain data on consumer
out-of-pocket costs at a plan-year level as compiled by CMS. These …gures are featured as part of the
Medicare Compare database, and, therefore, are likely to be salient to consumers. The database
includes information on overall expected out-of-pocket costs and also separates these costs into
individual components (such as Part B premiums, inpatient hospital costs, and prescription drugs).
Further, these data break down expected out-of-pocket costs across di¤erent demographics-by age
as well as self-reported health status. For example, the database provides an expected out-of-pocket
cost for a 65-72 year old in excellent health, enrolled in a given insurance contract. Altogether, we
average these estimates-across demographic groups-to construct a single composite metric. There
is no geographic variation in this data–it does not account for cross-region di¤erences in practice
patterns or price levels-so it provides a valuable standardized measure of plan generosity.
If insurers bid below the benchmark, they must devote a part of the di¤erence to improving
consumer bene…ts in the form of a rebate of added bene…ts. As noted, the bid denotes the insurer’s
estimated cost of providing traditional Medicare coverage to an enrollee with an average risk score.
The rebate amount, meanwhile, equates to 75% of the di¤erence between the bid amount and the
benchmark, in those cases where the benchmark exceeds the bid (CHS, 2006). As such, we examine
the impact of benchmark di¤erences on rebate amounts, which we obtain from CMS data …les at
an insurer-plan type-county-year level.
In some cases, plans allocate rebates towards decreasing the Part B premium paid by
consumers. Plans could also allocate this rebate towards reduced cost-sharing or supplementary
14

We also obtain information from CMS on the parent companies operating each speci…c insurance plan, as well as
the type of coverage o¤ered (HMO/HMOPOS, PFFS, or PPO). Following the literature, we consider the plan with
the lowest plan ID to be most representative of the insurance contract as a whole (Hall 2007 and Nosal 2012). In
matching contract enrollments to individual plan characteristics, we match enrollments to the characteristics of the
lowest plan ID within the contract.

16

bene…ts like drug coverage. When the estimated cost of supplementary bene…ts exceeds the rebate
amount, plans can charge consumers an additional premium: there exist many plans that receive
rebates, yet simultaneously charge a premium. In Table I, we present the average …nancial characteristics of plans across di¤erent sets of counties, including urban ‡oor and non-urban ‡oor counties
in the population range of interest. The results indicate that plans’…nancial generosity in urban
‡oor counties is no greater, on average, than in the non-urban counterparts. These numbers suggest
that higher payments to plans within urban ‡oor counties are not getting passed on to consumers,
at least …nancially.

4.3

Plan Quality Data
As measures of plan quality, we rely on CAHPS survey data, which contains enrollees’ratings

of plans, self-assessments of health status, and other measures of plan experience, such as selfreported number of physician visits. The CAHPS survey is administered yearly, and covers every
Medicare Advantage plan that is at least a year old (including HMO, PPO, as well as PFFS plans).
As part of the survey, 600 individuals from each MA contract are selected for questioning (if a
contract has fewer than 600 enrollees, then all of its enrollees are selected). While 600 are selected
for questioning, fewer respond (non-response rate is around 25%).
We have obtained the CAHPS data at an individual respondent-level, covering around
160,000 MA enrollees annually, for the years 2007- 2011, The data identi…es the insurance contract in
which each survey respondent is enrolled, along with that respondent’s demographic characteristics
such as county of residence, age, race, and education. In addition, the data contains the respondent’s
answers to each of the survey questions. Even with our sample restrictions, we are left with 81,890
person-year observations across the CAHPS data. In Table 6, we present the average levels of
CAHPS indicators within di¤erent sets of counties, including urban ‡oor and non-urban ‡oor
counties. We …nd that measures of plan quality and utilization appear to be similar across these
counties.
As an alternative measure of the quality and composition of care within plans, we also
make use of hospital discharge data from HCUP’s National Inpatient Sample (NIS), for the years
2007-2010. The NIS contains discharge-level data for every single visit made to a hospital, from
20% of all hospitals from over 40 states. The data in the NIS is at an individual-discharge level,
17

and was separately submitted to the NIS by each participating state. As such, the heterogeneity in
what states track or turn-over also …nds its way into the NIS. Only a fraction of states in the NIS,
16 in total, o¤er the speci…c information required for our analyses-county identi…ers and identi…ers
di¤erentiating Medicare FFS from Medicare Advantage patients (incidentally, these states contain
59% of MA enrollees).

4.4

15

Identi…cation Strategy
We exploit variation in the Medicare Advantage benchmark formula that leads urban ‡oor

counties to have benchmarks that are approximately 10.5% higher than similar, non-urban ‡oor
counties. As shown in Appendix Figure 1, both urban and non-urban counties with per-capita FFS
expenditures of $662 or less in 2007 typically had benchmarks set at the urban or non-urban ‡oor.
In contrast, the payment ‡oor did not bind in counties above $732 in per-capita FFS spending.
Urban counties between these two thresholds usually had benchmarks at the urban ‡oor while the
non-urban ‡oor was not binding in comparable counties in metropolitan areas with a population
of less than 250 thousand.
Our key sources of variation are the urban population threshold and a county’s per-capita
level of fee-for-service expenditures. We begin by estimating the e¤ect of urban status on the level
of benchmarks and then proceed to estimate the e¤ect on market outcomes such as the number
of insurers and the HHI concentration index along with measures of plan quality such as plan
premiums and enrollee satisfaction with care. We control ‡exibly for a county’s per-capita level
of FFS expenditures and for both the county and metropolitan area population when estimating
speci…cations of the following type:

Yjt = b0 + b1 F F Sj;2007 + b2 U rbanj + f (CountyP opj;2007 ) + g(M etroP opj;2007 ) + gt

(1)

In this equation, our coe¢ cient of particular interest is b2 , which represents our estimate of the
average impact of urban status on outcome variable Yjt . One concern with this equation is that there
15

We should note that county identi…ers contained in the NIS all denote the location of the hospital, rather than
of the patient’s original county of residence. As MA reimbursement is based on patients’ county of residence, this
results in some measurement error. However, the extent of this error could be modest, as evidence suggests that the
vast majority patients use hospitals in their home counties (for example in California’s discharge data, hospital and
patient county correspond approximately 95% of the time).

18

may be other factors associated with urban status - being part of a relatively large metropolitan
area - that are not adequately captured by our controls for county and metropolitan area population
and fee-for-service expenditures. This concern is to some extent reduced by focusing on a smaller
and more comparable set of counties that are close to the 250 thousand threshold. To probe further
on this potential concern, we estimate this speci…cation with each of the three set of counties - those
"fully treated" by the urban status, those "partially treated" and those "untreated." If we were
to estimate a large e¤ect of urban status on the benchmark for counties with high per-capita FFS
expenditures, this would suggest that some other factor is driving the estimate.
We also estimate speci…cations in which we consider those counties with FFS costs in 2007
that put them above the non-urban ‡oor threshold but below the urban ‡oor.

Urban counties

in this per-capita FFS range are essentially partially treated. This is close to a full treatment for
counties close to $662 in per-capita FFS expenditures and declines linearly to 0 for those counties at
$732. We therefore de…ne a variable GAP that captures this partial treatment as the (absolute value
of the) di¤erence between the county’s 2007 FFS spending and $732 while dividing this di¤erence
by $70.

Yjt = b0 + b1 F F Sj;2007 + b2 U rbanj + b3 GAPj
+b4 U rbanj

GAPj + f (CountyP opj;2007 ) + g(M etroP opj;2007 ) + gt

(2)

We estimate the …rst speci…cation above for each of the three sets of counties and estimate the
second speci…cation for counties above the $662 threshold. Our analysis focuses on the period from
2007 through 2011.

5
5.1

Results
The Impact on County Benchmarks
Table 3 summarizes the results from several speci…cations that explore the impact of a county’s

urban status on its monthly Medicare Advantage benchmark. The speci…cation listed in the …rst
column includes observations for each year from 2007 through 2011 for all counties with monthly

19

fee-for-service spending below $662.32. The speci…cations also control (with a linear and quadratic
term) for both the county population and the metropolitan area population along with monthly
fee-for-service expenditures. Standard errors are clustered at the metropolitan area level given the
level of variation of the URBAN indicator. The statistically signi…cant estimate for the coe¢ cient
on the URBAN indicator implies that during this …ve-year time period, the average di¤erence in
monthly benchmarks between urban and non-urban counties in this group was about $72. This
estimate is virtually unchanged in the next column when we restrict attention to the subset of
counties in metro areas with populations between 100 and 600 thousand. In both speci…cations,
there is a small though statistically signi…cant estimate on the coe¢ cient for FFS expenditures.
This re‡ects the fact that, as described above, counties close to the threshold are more likely to
have fee-for-service spending above the payment ‡oors in one or more subsequent years (causing
some county benchmarks to eventually exceed the payment ‡oor).
The next two columns summarize a companion set of speci…cations for counties with feefor-service expenditures between $662 and $732. As shown in Figure 1, in this range, status
as an urban county results in a partial treatment as the gap between the urban and non-urban
benchmarks is only a fraction of that for those in the lower FFS range. And consistent with this,
the point estimates for the URBAN indicator are signi…cantly positive though much smaller than
for the previous samples, suggesting on average an increase of $23 in the monthly benchmark. In
these speci…cations, the coe¢ cient for the FFS expenditures variable is large and highly signi…cant,
which makes sense given that - at least for non-urban counties - higher FFS expenditures directly
translate into a higher benchmark.
In columns …ve and six, we summarize the results for counties with per-capita FFS expenditures above $732 per month. For this set of counties, the URBAN indicator should have little
impact on the benchmark, as shown in Figure 1. Consistent with this, column …ve shows an estimate of just $3, which is statistically insigni…cant. For the narrower sample, the URBAN indicator
coe¢ cient is actually negative and marginally statistically signi…cant. In these two speci…cations,
the coe¢ cient estimate for FFS spending is slightly above 1, re‡ecting the direct relationship between FFS expenditures and the benchmark shown in this expenditure range as shown in Figure
1.
In the …nal two speci…cations, we estimate speci…cations similar to (2) above in which we
20

include counties above the $662 threshold, thus combining the second and third groups. In both
speci…cations, the URBAN indicator is small in magnitude and statistically insigni…cant. However,
the interaction of the URBAN indicator with the GAP variable described above is close to $50
in both cases and highly statistically signi…cant. This provides further evidence that the baseline
level of per-capita FFS expenditures is a strong predictor of the benchmark even for those counties
above the non-urban ‡oor threshold.
Taken together, the results in Table 3 demonstrate that URBAN status is a powerful predictor of MA benchmarks for counties with FFS expenditures below both the urban and non-urban
‡oors. Additionally, the results are fairly similar when we consider the full sample or restrict attention to the subset of counties in metro areas with populations close to the 250 thousand threshold.
In the subsequent sections, we focus primarily on counties with per-capita FFS expenditures below
the non-urban threshold in 2007 and with metro populations between 100 and 600 thousand. We
do this so as to focus on the counties for which the URBAN status "matters most" and to consider
a more comparable set of counties.

5.2

Market Structure
We next explore the e¤ect of the policy-induced increase in MA plan reimbursement on two

measures of market structure - the number of insurers and the HHI concentration index. As our
model above suggests, increases in the generosity of reimbursement may cause additional …rms to
enter the MA market and incumbent …rms to increase the quality of their product in response. Here,
we consider counties in the …rst group described above, with FFS expenditures per enrollee below
$662 in 2007. For this group of counties, the average number of insurers o¤ering an MA plan during
the 2007 through 2011 period was 6.2 and the average HHI concentration index 3,937 (measured
on a 10,000 scale). We once again control for both county population and metropolitan area
population (with both a linear and quadratic term) and for average per-capita FFS expenditures
in 2007. In contrast to the previous set of analyses, one would expect the population measures to
be an important determinant of our outcome variables.
The …rst speci…cation summarized in Table 4 considers the e¤ect of URBAN status on the
number of insurers. The point estimate of 1.92 for the URBAN indicator variable equates to more
than 30 percent of a county’s mean number of insurers, for our analytic sample. This estimate
21

is highly signi…cant with a t-statistic of 3.6. This same column reveals that there is a strong
relationship with the county population (and the estimate for the URBAN indicator is robust to
including a cubic and a quartic in this county population measure). Interestingly, the population of
the metropolitan area has little additional relationship with this outcome variable. The signi…cantly
negative point estimate of -.618 for the per-capita FFS expenditures variable suggests that fewer
insurers enter as a county’s fee-for-service expenditures gets closer to the threshold. This makes
sense as the gap between the plan reimbursement and FFS expenditures is declining in that measure
(as shown in Figure 1). Thus just as insurers appear to respond to the greater pro…t opportunities
caused by the higher ‡oor for urban counties, they also respond to the larger incentives in the
counties with very low fee-for-service spending.
The second speci…cation yields a similar picture by considering the e¤ect of URBAN status
on the HHI concentration index. Counties in metropolitan areas above the URBAN threshold
are signi…cantly less concentrated, with the point estimate of -1047 representing more than onefourth the mean HHI in our analysis sample. This is approximately equal to the HHI decline that
would occur when increasing from 4 to 7 equally sized insurers (though the actual impact is clearly
di¤erent given an average HHI of almost four thousand in our sample). Consistent with this, the
HHI increases as FFS spending rises and the gap between this and the payment ‡oor declines. As
expected, the other point estimates in column 2 have the opposite sign to those for the previous
speci…cation given that here a larger number represents fewer insurers operating.
Columns one and two of table four suggest that the additional reimbursement available to
plans in counties with the URBAN designation leads to more entry and a reduction in concentration.
The next three columns identify whether and to what extent the additional reimbursement leads
to more MA enrollment. The third column shows that the fraction of Medicare recipients enrolled
in Medicare Advantage HMO or PPO plans increases by 7 percentage points as a result of the
greater reimbursement, while column four shows a corresponding increase of 5.3 percentage points
in the share enrolled in MA private fee-for-service plans. Both estimates represent nearly 75 percent
of the sample means and thus our …ndings here suggest that the policy-induced increase in plan
reimbursement leads to a Medicare Advantage enrollment increase that is substantial. It is also
worth noting that - for both plan types - enrollment is declining in the level of per-capita fee-forservice expenditures. This evidence, coupled with the estimates for the URBAN status indicator,
22

demonstrate that …nancial incentives have a powerful impact both on insurer entry and on the
fraction of Medicare recipients enrolled in MA plans. This e¤ect is due to both increased enrollment
in plans that tend to exist in all counties and in marginal entrants.
In a companion set of speci…cations not summarized here, we investigated the relationship
between these outcome variables and URBAN status as in equation (2) above for the sample of
counties above the $662 threshold in per-capita fee-for-service expenditures. Our results there
are broadly consistent with those displayed in Table 4 for counties below this $662 threshold,
suggesting that the extra reimbursement resulting from URBAN designation for those counties
"partially treated" by it leads to more entry, lower concentration, and an increase in Medicare
Advantage enrollment.

5.3

Financial Characteristics of Plans
We next consider how the …nancial generosity of MA coverage varies with the additional policy-

induced reimbursement. As discussed in our theoretical framework above, insurers may respond to
the higher benchmarks in URBAN counties and to the resulting increase in competition by reducing
their premiums or out-of-pocket costs or by o¤ering additional services. To test this possibility, we
begin by exploring the relationship between URBAN status and the monthly MA plan premium,
which has an average value of approximately $30 in our analysis sample. This premium data is
available at the county-plan-year level, and our county-year measures are enrollment weightedaverages. As shown in the …rst column of Table 5, the point estimate for the URBAN indicator
is very small in magnitude (-0.76) and statistically insigni…cant. This suggests that despite the
substantially higher benchmarks in urban counties, MA enrollees do not bene…t in the form of
much lower premiums.
In the second column we consider the e¤ect on the amounts that insurers allocate toward
supplemental Medicare services through the rebates they are provided by CMS (if and when their
bids fall below the benchmarks). We only have rebate data for 2007 through 2010, and so our
analysis sample is 20 percent smaller as a result. But consistent with our estimate for the premium
measure, our results provide little evidence to suggest that benchmarks that are 72 dollars higher
per month lead to substantial additional bene…ts to enrollees. The point estimate of 3.594 represents
about 5 percent of the additional reimbursement and we can rule out an increase in the rebate of
23

more than 14 dollars (less than one-…fth of the additional reimbursement) at the 95 percent level
of con…dence.
In the third column, we investigate the e¤ect on out-of-pocket costs (OOPC). To the extent
that an insurer responds to the additional reimbursement by, for example, reducing deductibles or
o¤ering supplemental services such as vision coverage, it would be re‡ected in this measure. This
measure weights by MA enrollment, and the average OOPC in our analysis sample is approximately
$383 per month. The point estimate of -10 for the URBAN coe¢ cient is statistically insigni…cant.
With this point estimate, we can rule out an out-of-pocket cost reduction of more than 31 dollars
per month (about 40 percent of the benchmark increase) at the 95 percent level of con…dence.
In the fouth column, the outcome variable is a measure of total costs, based on the sum of
premiums and out-of-pocket costs indicators (rebates are not included to avoid double counting).
The statistically insigni…cant point estimate of -10.78 suggests that less than one-sixth of the
additional reimbursement is passed on to consumers and we can rule out a bene…t of more than 33
dollars (45 percent of the benchmark e¤ect) at the 95 percent level of con…dence.
As described above, the magnitude of the gap between a county’s per-capita FFS expenditures and the payment ‡oor is signi…cantly positively related with the number of insurers operating
and with total MA enrollment. However, the estimate for the FFS expenditure coe¢ cient in the
premium, plan rebate, and out-of-pocket cost speci…cations suggest very little link with the generosity of coverage, which also suggests limited pass-through. In fact, the signi…cantly negative
point estimate for this variable in the OOPC speci…cation suggests that - as the gap between the
‡oor and FFS expenditures grows - out-of-pocket costs actually increase. This could occur if, for
example, marginal entrants provide less generous coverage. Adding up the premium and OOPC
measures of …nancial generosity, our results provide little evidence to suggest that the larger gaps
that lead to more insurer entry and more MA enrollment are associated with better coverage on
this dimension.
In the …fth column, we consider the provision of drug coverage and - consistent with the
previous measures - …nd little evidence that this bene…t is more likely to be o¤ered by plans in
urban counties, as the point estimate on the URBAN indicator is actually negative. And as with
the OOPC variable, Part D coverage seems if anything to be less generous in counties with lower
FFS reimbursement, where more insurers enter. This could once again re‡ect marginal entrants
24

being less generous than incumbent …rms on this dimension.
Taken together, the results in this section suggest that the additional plan reimbursement
for plans in URBAN counties does not translate into more generous bene…ts for Medicare Advantage recipients. Similarly, a larger gap between the payment ‡oor and the county’s fee-for-service
expenditures is also not associated with increased …nancial generosity. These results are to some
extent surprising given that both of these variables have a powerful impact on insurer entry decisions, the concentration of the market, and on total MA enrollment. But the possibility of course
remains that MA plans are improving quality on other dimensions not captured by these …nancial
variables, such as the quality or breadth of provider networks, which motivates the analyses in the
next section.

5.4

Quality Characteristics
Higher MA reimbursements could also be passed on to consumers in the form of quality im-

provements. To identify possible changes to the quality of health care coverage (as distinct from
the …nancial measures considered above), we use respondent-level survey data from the CAHPS,
for 2007-2011. These data contain information on respondents’counties of residence, allowing us to
examine the relationship between county-level reimbursement variation and the measures included
in the CAHPS. We have nearly 82 thousand person-year level observations for the counties in our
analysis sample over this …ve-year period.
We examine the impact of additional plan reimbursement on respondents’overall ratings of
plan quality along di¤erent dimensions: health care received, the primary care provider, specialists
seen, and the plan overall. We run our results on data aggregated to a county-year level, while
restricting to counties in the 100-600k metro population range, with 2007 FFS values below the
‡oors. The main results are displayed in Table 7. We …nd no signi…cant relationship between a
county’s urban status and each of these rating measures. Using the approach introduced in Kling
et al (2007), we calculate standardized treatment e¤ects, to examine whether urban status has
an impact on these ratings measures, as a collective. These results also indicate no signi…cant
relationships between higher MA benchmarks and plan ratings.
We also consider the impact on measures of utilization and outcomes contained in the
CAHPS, such as number of specialist visits, number of personal MD visits, and self-reported health
25

statuses. To the extent that additional reimbursement leads plans to restrict care less or improve
health more, it could be captured by these estimates. These results, which are presented in Table 8,
provide no evidence of a signi…cant relationship between urban status and utilization or outcomes,
across the counties in our sample.
In Table 9, we examine possible impact on other measures of utilization, using discharge
data from the National Inpatient Sample (NIS). Throughout these analysis, we restrict to an
analogous set of counties, and run speci…cations that include hospital …xed e¤ects. These analyses
include both MA and FFS Medicare recipients and essentially explore whether the gap in care
between FFS and MA is signi…cantly di¤erent in urban counties, as opposed to non-urbans. To
the extent that, for example, plans use the additional reimbursement to allow patients to stay in
the hospital a bit longer or obtain more intensive treatment, these speci…cations could capture it.
The key independent variable throughout is the interaction term between MA status and the urban
status of the enrollee’s county. Altogether, results are consistent with those from the CAHPS, and
show no signi…cant association between the higher benchmarks in MA counties and measures such
as length of stay and number of procedures.
It is worth noting that these results on quality and intensity of care could be biased if
the increase in MA enrollment that we …nd in urban counties leads to a signi…cant change in the
composition of enrollees. If, for example, MA plans in urban counties had patients who were sicker
(or healthier) on average, then we might estimate a signi…cant di¤erence even in the absence of an
actual one. This motivates our analyses in the next section.

5.5

Compositional E¤ects
We do not …nd evidence of increased reimbursements being passed through to consumers in the

form of plan quality or treatment changes. However, our results could be biased by reimbursementdriven changes to enrollee composition within Medicare Advantage. As we showed in Table 4,
the 10.5 percent increase in benchmarks for ‡oor counties resulting from urban status leads to a
substantial increase in MA enrollment. As such, we test for possible compositional changes to MA
enrollment, which could accompany these increases to enrollment.
Using data from the CAHPS, we restrict to counties in the 100-600k metro population
range, with FFS values below the ‡oors. We then compile demographic and health metrics for
26

enrollees in urban and non-urban counties, respectively. As shown in Table 10, we do not …nd
substantial di¤erences in age, gender, race, or in other utilization measures across enrollees in these
counties. Of course, this does not rule out the possibility of unobserved di¤erences between the
marginal and average MA enrollee. In Table 11, we consider an additional metric-the mean risk
score of MA enrollees-to test for possible reimbursement-driven changes to enrollee composition.
These results also do not provide any evidence of changes to selection, as a result of increased
reimbursement.
These results from the CAHPS are reinforced by analyses from New York State Medicare
Denominator Data, for 1998-2003. This period encompasses a 2001 policy change-the introduction
of a di¤erentiated ‡oor for urban counties. Previously, there was a uniform ‡oor applying across
all counties. Using the exogenous reimbursement variation resulting from the introduction of this
‡oor, we test for impact of reimbursement on MA enrollees’demographic characteristics. In doing
so, we …nd no evidence of changes to MA enrollee composition (overall, as well as among the subset
newly eligible for Medicare & MA enrollment).16 These results are displayed in Table 12.

5.6

Advertising and Firm Returns
Our empirical results show that larger subsidies to Medicare Advantage plans lead to signif-

icantly more insurers operating and to less concentrated insurance markets. Furthermore, more
generous subsidies lead to higher Medicare Advantage penetration rates. Given these two facts, it
would be natural to assume that the higher subsidies are passed on to consumers in the form of
lower premiums, OOPC, or higher quality. Our empirical results do not support this conclusion.
The exogenous $72/month disparity in plan benchmarks across our population discontinuity is not
accompanied by signi…cant di¤erences in premiums, out-of-pocket costs, or rebates. While our
estimates are somewhat imprecise, we can rule out increased in overall generosity of $33/month or
more, and thus can reject that more than 45 percent of the subsidy is passed on to consumers at a
con…dence level of 95 percent. The point estimates suggest pass-through of just 15 percent.
These results could still be consistent with a perfectly competitive market if other measures
16

In a complementary study, Cabral et al (2014) examine the e¤ect of this new payment ‡oor on premiums and
other measures of plan quality. It is worth noting that during this period, MA enrollment was much lower than in
more recent years, and just one-in-eight counties had one or more MA plans operating in each year from 1998 through
2003.

27

of plan quality increased substantially or if enrollee composition changed signi…cantly as a result of
advantageous selection. However, our results utilizing the CAHPS & MA Risk score data do not
support either of these hypotheses. Additional analyses using the Medicare denominator …le (see
Table 12) also indicate limited advantageous selection.17 Given low pass-through of benchmarks to
consumers and limited evidence of meaningful selection on the margin, we argue that perfect competition is a poor benchmark for this market. While higher margins seem to stimulate competition,
competition has a limited e¤ect on the price and quality of MA plans.
Yet imperfectly competitive …rms must also compete for consumers. The increase in the
number of plans sold indicates that something must induce higher participation rates. We therefore
explore whether strategic advertising may drive enrollments. In order to calculate the impact of
benchmarks on marketing, we utilize data on TV spot advertising from Kantar Ad$pender . Kantar
tracks spending at the insurer line of business-DMA level. We keep only Medicare products and
aggregrate spending to the DMA level; there are 210 DMAs and we observe four years of data,
giving us 840 total observations.Here we include all counties because the DMA boundaries do not
line up neatly with the county and MSA boundaries in our analysis sample. The outcome of
interest is advertising spending per Medicare enrollee in a DMA. We regress this variable on a
number explanatory variables, including average benchmarks and FFS spending. We average our
measure of benchmarks to the DMA level using the number of Medicare enrollees in a county as
weights. Because our identi…cation strategy relies on county-level benchmarks rather than the urban
population threshold described above, these results using advertising data at the more aggregated
DMA level should be viewed as suggestive, rather than causal.
Table 13 presents the results. In the …rst speci…cation, we regress spending per enrollee on
the average benchmark, year …xed e¤ects, population, and population squared. The relationship is
positive, but statistically insigni…cant. However, benchmarks are likely to be correlated with FFS
costs. The second speci…cation regressed spending per enrollee on FFS costs; the coe¢ cient is negative and signi…cant, indicating that …rms advertise less in areas with expensive enrollees (Aizawa
and Kim 2013 show that advertising may drive advantageous selection). The third speci…cation
controls for FFS costs and benchmarks. In this speci…cation, we see a strong positive relationship
17

While this is true of the margin we examine, there is evidence of advantageous selection in Medicare Advantage
on the whole (Brown et al 2013).

28

between benchmarks and advertising: a $100 increase in the average benchmark is associated with
a $5 increase in advertising spending per Medicare enrollee. The results are similar in the fourth
speci…cation, which controls for an index of advertising prices.18
Our results indicate that higher benchmarks are associated with higher levels of advertising.
The point estimates suggest that moving from the twenty-…fth to seventy-…fth percentile of the
average benchmark is associated with a doubling in advertising spending.19 The e¤ects are large in
magnitude, and we feel they can rationalize much of the expansion of MA plans in urban counties.
Much of the additional advertising can be attributed to spending by large …rms with a presence
in most markets, rather than marginal entrants: Humana’s spending increases by just over $1 per
Medicare enrollee per year with each $100 increase in the monthly benchmark. Assuming a 20%
Medicare Advantage enrollment rate, this implies that …rms are spending $17.50 per additional
enrollee per year in urban ‡oor counties relative to rural ‡oor counties with the same level of
FFS spending. This additional spending can help justify strong relationship between the URBAN
dummy and MA penetration rates. Furthermore, these results provide evidence that increased
benchmarks need not accrue to insurers, but may ‡ow to other players in the supply chain. Other
work has shown a similar pattern, with rents accruing to insurance agents and brokers (Starc 2013).
Despite dissipation of some rents through marketing costs, it is plausible that insurers also
capture part of the increased benchmarks. Figure 2 shows dramatic increases in stock prices for the
four publicly traded health insurers with the most MA enrollment (Humana, United, Cigna, and
Aetna) as a result of a surprisly large increase in benchmarks on April 1, 2013. A simple pre-post
comparison of market capitalization for these four …rms, which accounted for about 44 percent
of MA enrollment at the time of the policy change, indicates a market capitalization increase of
approximately $2.7 billion. The announced benchmarks represented an increase of approximately
5.6 percent relative to what otherwise was speci…ed by legislation. Multiplying this percentage
by our estimate of baseline MA revenues for each insurer (calculated by multiplying enrollment
weighted benchmarks for each insurer by the average risk score of its enrollees) yields an estimated
increase in annual MA revenue of about $2.9 billion.
18

We use the primetime SQAD points (and SQAD points squared) as our measure of advertising costs. See
https://www.lib.umn.edu/faq/6521 for more information.
19
Our results are suggestive that the causal e¤ect may be even larger, as seen in columns 3 and 6. However, the
regressions are at the DMA-year level, and do not allow us to exploit the identi…cation strategy using only counties
with populations between 100,000 and 400,000.

29

It is important to note that investors apparently did expect a signi…cant increase in benchmarks around this time. For example according to Humana’s press release, the …rm had expected a
4.4 percent increase in benchmarks instead of 5.6 percent. If one assumes that this also accurately
captures the assumptions of investors, this would suggest that just $0.62 billion of the $2.9 billion
increase in annual MA revenues was a surprise. Using a discount rate of 5 percent, this implies
an increase in the present value of MA revenues of approximately $12.4 billion. Combining our
estimate of a $2.7 billion increase in market capitalization with the $12.4 billion increase in the
present value of MA revenues, we estimate that 22 percent of the increase in benchmarks is passed
through to insurers in the form of higher pro…ts. Of course, the precision of this estimate is necessarily more speculative than our estimates relating to consumers. But the sharp reaction of health
insurer stock prices to changes in the level of MA reimbursement strongly suggests that insurers
capture much of the bene…t of policy-induced increases in plan reimbursement.20
Our estimates and back of the envelope calculations indicate that, at most 50% of increased
reimbursement goes to consumers and approximately 22% goes to insurers. Our advertising results
suggest that some of the increased expenditure is dissipated through marketing costs. Theory suggests that hospitals, physicians, and other health care providers could also capture some of the
increased reimbursements, by virtue of market power. However, the aforementioned calculations
leave relatively little for providers. The absence of stock price reaction from the largest publiclyowned hospital operator, HCA, on April 1, 2013, is also suggestive of limited bene…ts to providers.
Altogether, increased …nancial generosity, increased insurer pro…ts, and increased marketing account for nearly all of the increased government expenditures. Exploring the interaction between
government reimbursement and insurer-provider bargaining is an important avenue for future work.
20

The benchmark increase of 5.6% applied not only to 2014 benchmarks, but also to all future year benchmarks;
for 2014, this resulted in a benchmark that was 1.2% higher than the expectation. In our calculations, we thereby
assume that all future year benchmarks would also be 1.2% higher than expected. However, for some of these years,
higher benchmarks may have already been anticipated; congressional action on Medicare SGR policies would produce
a benchmark increase of commensurate magnitude and would supercede CMS’s action. While CMS preempted such
legislation through its unilateral action, following any Congressional legislation, past CMS action (or lack thereof)
would not a¤ect subsequent benchmarks. In our calculations, we do not account for this possibility. As such, our
estimate of the unexpected revenue increase, from CMS’s action, represents an upper-bound, meaning that our
estimated pass-through rate to insurers represents a lower-bound.

30

6

Conclusion
Our results strongly suggest that increased subsidies for private insurance in the Medicare

market result in increased insurer advertising, but little additional monetary or medical bene…t for
consumers.21 Low pass-through cannot be attributed to selection and is, more likely, a result of
market power. Altogether, the results indicate that incidence of the subsidy falls on the supply
side of the market. This …nding is further supported by insurer stock price movements throughout
the passage and enactment of the A¤ordable Care Act.
While we …nd no direct evidence that benchmarks meaningfully bene…t consumers, such bene…ts could exist. Given that MA penetration rates increase alongside reimbursements, a revealed
preference argument would imply that MA is more valuable to consumers when the benchmark is
higher. The impact on consumer surplus may also depend on the welfare consequences of advertising. Furthermore, higher benchmarks may improve treatment quality and health outcomes in
ways that we are unable to measure. All of this notwithstanding, the measures of plan …nancial
characteristics and quality that we use suggest that only about one-sixth of the policy-induced
increase in plan reimbursement is captured by consumers.
While reimbursement increases have an ambiguous welfare impact on consumers, they unambiguously increase costs, through increased numbers of MA enrollees and through increased government spending per MA enrollee. A back-of-the-envelope estimate suggests that this additional
spending amounted to approximately $6.4 billion during the …nal year of our sample period.22
Therefore, policy-makers should carefully weigh the possible gains in consumer welfare against the
costs to the federal government, and future work should attempt to quantify the full welfare bene…t
of increased reimbursements.
21

The advertising is clearly market expanding if Medicare Advantage is the relevant market. However, the extent
to which this is welfare enhancing depends on the view of advertising. We simply highlight that insurers in this
market, as well as other insurance markets (Starc 2013), tend to compete on advertising, rather than plan generosity
or innovative bene…t packages.
22
Approximately 5.0 million MA enrollees resided in ‡oor counties in 2011. In non-‡oor counties, the benchmark
is on average 6.1 percent higher than the lagged 5-year average FFS expenditure measure. If this same 6.1 percent
ratio existed in ‡oor counties, monthly (annual) benchmarks would be $63.09 ($757.08) lower and spending for the
5.0 million MA enrollees would be $3.8 billion lower. Additionally, our estimates for the e¤ect of benchmarks on MA
enrollment suggest the $63.09 benchmark increase leads to about a 10.9 percentage point increase in MA enrollment.
With 20.1 million Medicare recipients in ‡oor counties, this represents about 2.2 million additional MA recipients.
Recent research (Brown et al, 2014) indicates that switching into MA increases Medicare spending by more than
$1,200 per recipient because of favorable selection and this suggests about $2.6 billion more in Medicare spending.

31

7

References
Abaluck, J.T. and Gruber, J. "Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence from Plan

Choice in the Medicare Part D Program." The American Economic Review, Vol. 101, (2011), pp.
1180-1210.
Afendulis, C., Chernew M., and Kessler, D. "The E¤ect of Medicare Advantage on Hospital Admissions and Mortality." NBER Working Paper No. 19101 National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, 2013.
Al-Ississ, M. and Miller, N. "What Does Health Reform Mean for the Health Care Industry?
Evidence from Massachusetts Special Senate Election." The American Economic Association, Vol.
5, (2013), pp. 1-29.
Balsa, A.I., Cao, Z., and McGuire, T.G. "Does Managed Health Care Reduce Health Care
Disparities Between Minorities and Whites." The Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 26, (2007),
pp. 101-121.
Brown, J., Duggan, M., Kuziemko, I., and Woolston, W. "How Does Risk Selection Respond
to Risk Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program."The American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Cabral, M., Geruso, M., and Mahoney, N. "Does Medicare Advantage Bene…t Patients or
Insurance Providers? Evidence from the Bene…ts Improvement and Protection Act." Working
Paper, 2013.
Cabral, M. and Mahoney, N. "Externalities and Taxation of Supplemental Insurance: A Study
of Medicare and Medigap." Working Paper, 2013.
Cawley, J., Chernew, M., McLaughlin, C. "HMO Participation in Medicare + Choice." Journal
of Economics & Management Strategy, Vol. 14, (2005), pp. 543-574.
Chernew, M., Cutler, D., and Keenan, P. "Increasing Health Insurance Costs and the Decline
in Insurance Coverage." Health Services Research, Health Research and Educational Trust. (2005),
pp. 1021-1039.
Clemens, J. and Gottlieb, J.D. "Bargaining in the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s In‡uence
on Private Payment Systems." NBER Working Paper No. 19503, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, 2013.

32

Center for Health Strategies Inc. (2006). "Medicare Advantage Rate Setting and Risk Adjustment."
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2013). "National Health Expenditure Projections
2012-2022."
Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2012). "E¤ects of the Repeal of H.R. 6079."
Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2013). "Updated Budget Projections: Fiscal Years 2013 to 2023."
Dafny, L. "Are Health Insurance Markets Competitive?" The American Economic Review, Vol.
100, (2010), pp. 1399-1431.
Dafny, L. and Dranove, D. "Do Report Cards Tell Consumers Anything They Don’t Already
Know? The Case of Medicare HMOs." RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 39, (2008), pp. 780-821.
Dafny, L., Duggan, M., and Ramanarayan, S. "Paying a Premium on Your Premium? Consolidation in the U.S. Health Insurance Industry." The American Economic Review, Vol. 102 (2012),
pp. 1161-1185.
Dunn, A. "The E¤ect of Health Insurance Competition when Private Insurers Compete with a
Public Option." (2011).
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Schrimpf, P. "The Response of Drug Expenditures to Non-Linear
Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D." NBER Working Paper No. 19393, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 2013.
Finkelstein, A., et al. "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First
Year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, (2012), pp 1057-1106.
Frakt, A.B., Pizer, S.D., and Feldman, R. "Payment Reduction and Medicare Private Fee-forService Plans." Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 30, (2009), pp. 15-24.
Gaynor, M. and Town, R. "Competition in Health Care Markets." Working Paper No. 12/282,
Centre for Market and Pulic Organisation, Bristol, 2012.
Gowrisankaran, G., Nevo, A., and Town, R. "Mergers When Prices Are Negotiated: Evidence
from the Hospital Industry." NBER Working Paper No. 18875, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, 2013.
Hall, A. "The Value of Medicare Managed Care Plans and Their Prescription Drug Bene…ts."
Federal Reserve Board of Governors, 2007.
Ho, K. and Lee, R. "Insurer Competition and Negotiated Hospital Prices." NBER Working
33

Paper No. 19401, Natural Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 2013.
Ketcham, J., Lucarilli, C., Miravete, E., and Roebuck, C. "Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to
Swim in Medicare Part D." The American Economic Review, Vol. 102, (2012), pp. 2639-2673.
Kli¤, S. "How insurers ‡ipped a Medicare pay cut into a pay raise." The Washington Post,
April 2010.
Kling, J., Liebman, J., and Katz, L. "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood E¤ects." Econometrica, Vol. 75, (2007), pp. 83-119.
Kling, J., Mullainathan, S., Sha…r, E., Vermeulen, L., and Wrobel, M. "Comparison Friction:
Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
127, (2012), pp. 199-235.
Landon, B, Zaslavsky, A., Saunders, R., Pawlson, L., Newhouse, J., and Ayanian, J. "Analysis Of Medicare Advantage HMOs compared with traditional Medicare shows lower use of many
services during 2003-09." Health A¤ airs, Vol. 31, (2012), pp. 2609–2617.
Lemieux, J., Sennett, C., Wang, R., Mulligan, T., Bumbaugh, J. "Hospital readmission rates
in Medicare Advantage plans." American Journal of Managed Care, Vol. 18, (2012), pp 96-104.
Lustig, J. "Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect Competition in
Privatized Medicare." Boston University, Department of Economics, Boston, 2010.
Mahoney, N., and Weyl, E.G. "Imperfect Competition in Selection Markets." Working Paper,
2013.
McGuire, T., Newhouse, J., and Sinaiko, A. "An Economic History of Medicare Part C." The
Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 89, (2011), pp. 289-323.
Neal, D. "How Vouchers Could Change the Market for Education." The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 16, (2002), pp. 25-44.
Nosal, K. "Estimating Switching Costs for Medicare Advantage Plans." Unpublished manuscript, University of Mannheim, Mannheim, 2012.
OECD (2011). "Government at a Glance: Size of public procurement market."
Pizer, S.D. and Frakt, A.B. "Payment Policy and Competition in the Medicare+ Choice Program." Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 24, (2002), pp. 83-94.
Rouse, C. "Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the Milwaukee
Parental Choice Program." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, (1998), pp. 553-602.
34

Pope, G., Greenwald, L., Healy, D., Kauter, J., Olmsted, E., West, N. “Impact of Increased
Financial Incentives to Medicare Advantage Plans.” RTI International, 2006.
Song, Z., Landrum, M., and Chernew, M. "Competitive bidding in Medicare Advantage: E¤ect
of benchmark changes on plan bids." Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 32, (2013), pp. 1301-1312.
Starc, A. "Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap." RAND Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Town, R. and Liu, A. "The Welfare Impact of Medicare HMOs." RAND Journal of Economics,
Vol. 34, (2003), pp. 719-736.
Weyl, G., and Fabinger, M. "Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principle of Incidence under
Imperfect Competition." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 121, (2013), pp. 528-583.

35

Tables and Figures

550

County Month. Benchmark (2004)
600
650
700
750
800

850

8

400

450

500
550
600
650
700
750
5 y r County FFS Spending/Enrollee (2004)

800

850

Figure 1: County Benchmarks and FFS Costs in 2004
22

For fewer than 10% of counties, 2007 county benchmarks do not correspond to either a ‡oor (two horizontal
lines) or to a county’s 5-yr FFS spending/enrollee (primary diagonal). This is due to ideosyncrasies in how county
benchmarks were determined following 2004 (see CHS, 2006). For benchmarks as of 2007, see Appendix Figure 1.

36

8
Percent Change in Price
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
0
3:00

3:59
Time
Aetna
Cigna

UnitedHealth
Humana

Figure 2: Stock Returns of Major MA Insurers, 3-4 pm on April 1, 2013

Figure 3: Nationwide Distribution of Floor Counties

37

Figure 4: Pass-Through Under Advantageous Selection

P1
P2
AC1

AC2

MR

D

Figure 5: Pass-Through Under Constant Average Cost and Monopoly

38

Appendix Figure I: FFS Costs and County Benchmarks

Appendix Figure II: 2014 Medicare Advantage Market Penetration, By State

39

Appendix Figure III: 2014 Medicare Advantage Market Penetration, By County

Appendix Figure IV: 2014 Texas Medicare Advantage Market Penetration, By County

40

Table 1: Summary Statistics: County & Financial
All
Sub-Group 1
Sub-Group 2

Sub-Group 3

Per Capita 2007 FFS Rest:

None

Below 662

Above 662
& Below 732

Above 732

Metro Pop (thousands)

472
(1,209)
96
(306)
680
(104)
14.79
(39.66)
0.12
(0.10)
0.05
(0.04)
5,117
(2,212)
0.62
(0.49)
764
(75)
3044

239
(661)
50
(105)
615
(60)
8.33
(14.93)
0.12
(0.10)
0.06
(0.05)
5,168
(2,244)
0.92
(0.26)
726
(32)
1850

616
(1,103)
104
(243)
732
(29)
15.98
(33.28)
0.11
(0.09)
0.04
(0.03)
5,070
(2,168)
0.27
(0.44)
771
(32)
667

1,109
(2,180)
246
(631)
839
(72)
35.98
(79.47)
0.14
(0.13)
0.02
(0.03)
5,002
(2,155)
0.00
(0.00)
888
(84)
527

380.1
(38.8)
58.3
(22.5)
32.3
(19.8)
412.5
(43.7)
356.4
(61.2)
3028

391.7
(32.7)
53.6
(15.7)
31.2
(18.4)
423.2
(35.7)
372.6
(45.0)
1840

369.6
(33.0)
59.3
(17.8)
33.4
(19.2)
403.0
(38.2)
344.3
(51.6)
666

352.6
(47.0)
73.3
(37.0)
34.6
(24.5)
387.2
(59.6)
314.3
(91.7)
522

County Pop (thousands)
Monthly Per Cap. FFS
Medicare Enroll (thousands)
MA Penetration Rate
PFFS Penetration Rate
HHI Index
Floor Status (2007)
MA Benchmark (Monthly)
N
Out of Pocket Costs (monthly)
Rebate Payment (monthly)
Premium (monthly)
Premium+OOPC
Premium+OOPC-Rebate Pmt
N

Notes: The …rst panel presents summaries of demographic, MA penetration, and other characteristics for di¤erent sets
of counties. The second panel presents summaries of the …nancial characteristics of MA plans, across di¤erent sets of
counties. Measures are denoted per enrollee, per month. The unit of observation is aggregated to the county level, for
the 2007-2011 period, and is weighed based on plan enrollment. The original data is obtained from publicly available
CMS …les, including simulated out of pocket cost information, premium metrics, as well as other data.

41

Table 2: Most Active Firms in Markets of Interest
All
Sub-Group 1
Sub-Group 2

Sub-Group 3

Per Capita 2007 FFS Rest:

None

Below 662

Above 662
& Below 732

Above 732

Humana Inc.
UnitedHealth Group, Inc.
Universal American Corp.
Coventry Health Care Inc.
WellPoint, Inc.
Aetna Inc.
XLHealth Corporation
WellCare Health Plans, Inc.
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan

12,998
7,146
5,844
5,463
5,100
4,042
2,099
1,910
1,466
15,020

8,094
4,444
3,511
3,427
3,303
1,826
974
980
620
9,430

2,840
1,407
1,356
1,121
1,082
1,077
677
410
425
3,160

2,064
1,295
977
915
715
1,139
448
520
421
2,430

Notes: Table presents number of county-year units through which any given …rm o¤ers contracts, where enrollment
exceeds 10. This analysis extends for the period 2007-2011. The original data is obtained from publicly available CMS
…les, including contract-county level enrollment data and contract characteristics data.

42

Table 3: First Stage Regression Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

71.56***
(0.79)

71.46***
(2.37)

20.01***
(3.44)

22.72*
(11.55)

3.31
(5.99)

-22.15*
(12.93)

0.078
(0.517)
0.017
(0.039)
0.035
(0.099)
0.000
(0.002)
0.039***
(0.005)

-1.674
(1.496)
0.515
(0.478)
0.608
(3.021)
-0.097
(0.371)
0.038***
(0.013)

-0.532
(0.813)
0.019
(0.026)
0.664**
(0.285)
-0.008*
(0.005)
0.665***
(0.056)

-1.660
(5.104)
0.181
(0.948)
1.594
(13.582)
-0.282
(1.610)
0.549***
(0.136)

-1.891***
(0.612)
0.025***
(0.008)
0.490*
(0.272)
-0.005**
(0.002)
1.142***
(0.038)

Pop.
FFS (2007)

None
<662

100-600k
B<662

None
>662
& <732

100-600k
>662
& <732

Observations
R-squared

9,230
0.945

1,740
0.970

3,330
0.630

650
0.673

VARIABLES
Urban

(5)
(6)
County Benchmark

(7)

(8)

-8.322
(7.832)
0.616
(1.447)
22.989*
(13.297)
-2.234
(1.743)
1.063***
(0.061)

0.50
(4.32)
46.44***
(5.68)
10.99*
(5.79)
-1.310***
(0.463)
0.020***
(0.007)
0.459**
(0.209)
-0.005***
(0.002)
1.157***
(0.032)

-10.55
(9.20)
55.24***
(13.48)
2.81
(13.88)
-6.879
(4.411)
0.799
(0.817)
8.753
(9.941)
-0.797
(1.211)
1.154***
(0.049)

None
>732

100-600k
>732

None
>662

100-600k
>662

2,640
0.892

490
0.799

5,970
0.904

1,140
0.873

Urban*GAP
GAP
County Pop (100k)
County Pop (100k) Sq

43

Metro Pop
Metro Pop Sq
2007 FFS 5-Yr

Notes: Table presents results of our …rst-stage regression, a linear model with MA Benchmark as the outcome and urban as the instrument
of interest. T = (732.04 - FFS Avg) /69.7 if FFS Avg is >662.3 and <732.04 and otherwise 0. The unit of observation is at the county-year
level, for the 2007-2011 period. The original data is obtained from publicly available CMS …les, including enrollment and other data. Note
that populations are stated in terms of 100k.

Table 4: Reimbursement Impact: Market Structure and Plan Penetration
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
VARIABLES Insurers
HHI
HMO+PPO Sh. PFFS Sh.
MA Sh.
Urban
2007 FFS 5-yr (100s)
Metro Pop (100k)
Metro Pop (100k) Sq
Cnty Pop (100k)
Cnty Pop (100k) Sq

1.917***
(0.532)
-0.618***
(0.236)
-0.434
(0.699)
0.028
(0.106)
3.682***
(0.338)
-0.543***
(0.107)

Additional Controls
Counties
Mean

N
R-squared

-1,047**
(466)
596***
(182)
331
(587)
-27
(80)
-1,413***
(251)
260***
(69)

0.070***
(0.024)
-0.034**
(0.017)
-0.009
(0.025)
0.001
(0.004)
0.044***
(0.011)
-0.007**
(0.003)

0.053***
(0.015)
-0.033***
(0.008)
-0.021
(0.018)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.002)

0.123***
(0.027)
-0.067***
(0.017)
-0.030
(0.026)
0.002
(0.004)
0.043***
(0.012)
-0.008**
(0.003)

Year
Metro 100-600k, FFS 5 yr Under 662 (from 2007)
6.17
(2.940)

3,937
(1,849)

0.092
(0.106)

0.074
(0.061)

0.167
(0.109)

1,740
0.557

1,728
0.187

1,740
0.285

1,740
0.271

1,740
0.304

Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are measures of MA market structure and the
…nancial characteristics of MA plans. The unit of observation is aggregated at the county-year, for the 2007-2011 period.
The original data is obtained from publicly available CMS …les, including enrollment, landscape, OOPC, and other data.
We exclude counties whose adjusted FFS level-as of 2007-was above that of the lowest possible ‡oor. Finally, we restrict
to those counties within the speci…ed population band. We include controls for year and 2007 per capita Medicare FFS
spending. We also include quadratic population controls, for counties as well as metros. Populations are stated in terms
of 100k. Standard errors are clustered at the metro-level.

44

Table 5: Reimbursement Impact: Plan Characteristics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
VARIABLES Premium Rebate
OOPC
Premium+OOPC
Urban
2007 FFS 5-yr (100s)
Metro Pop (100k)
Metro Pop (100k) Sq
Cnty Pop (100k)
Cnty Pop (100k) Sq

-0.760
(5.829)
2.958
(3.167)
-8.714
(6.577)
1.285
(0.957)
5.357*
(2.924)
-0.957
(0.882)

Additional Controls
Counties
Mean

N
R-squared

3.594
(4.510)
-1.807
(1.851)
3.074
(4.751)
-0.382
(0.614)
-0.589
(1.807)
0.416
(0.520)

-10.021
(10.436)
-11.039***
(4.011)
12.293
(9.661)
-2.075*
(1.252)
-17.473***
(4.154)
3.561***
(1.135)

-10.780
(11.185)
-8.081*
(4.366)
3.578
(10.214)
-0.790
(1.340)
-12.116**
(4.811)
2.604*
(1.333)

(5)
Drug Cov.
-0.063
(0.080)
0.114***
(0.031)
0.086
(0.085)
-0.006
(0.011)
-0.042
(0.027)
0.009
(0.007)

Year
Metro 100-600k, FFS 5 yr Under 662 (from 2007)
30.46
(24.08)

57.02
(18.08)

382.50
(38.26)

412.97
(39.38)

0.66
(0.24)

1,701
0.173

1,360
0.320

1,701
0.313

1,701
0.129

1,701
0.137

Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are …nancial characteristics of MA plans. The
unit of observation is aggregated at the county-year, for the 2007-2011 period. The original data is obtained from publicly
available CMS …les, including enrollment, landscape, OOPC, and other data. We exclude counties whose adjusted FFS
level-as of 2007-was above that of the lowest possible ‡oor. Finally, we restrict to those counties within the speci…ed
population band. We include controls for year and 2007 per capita Medicare FFS spending. We also include quadratic
population controls, for counties as well as metros. Populations are stated in terms of 100k. Standard errors are clustered
at the metro-level.

45

Table 6: Summary Statistics: CAHPS Data
All
100-600k 100-600k, FFS Blw Floors
Urban
Non-Urban
Overall Healthcare Received
Primary Care Physician
Specialist Physicians Seen
Overall Health Plan
Prescription Drug Bene…ts

Specialists Seen
Visits to Personal MD
Visits for Routine Care

Self-Reported Overall Health Status
Self-Reported Mental Health Status
No. Obs

8.45
(0.71)
9.00
(0.58)
8.85
(0.79)
8.30
(0.80)
8.32
(0.86)

8.49
(0.49)
9.02
(0.37)
8.90
(0.50)
8.34
(0.58)
8.33
(0.57)

8.52
(0.38)
9.03
(0.31)
8.92
(0.32)
8.42
(0.43)
8.40
(0.38)

8.48
(0.60)
9.03
(0.45)
8.89
(0.69)
8.30
(0.70)
8.27
(0.69)

1.66
(0.44)
2.01
(0.63)
2.29
(0.66)

1.70
(0.31)
1.97
(0.51)
2.33
(0.48)

1.67
(0.24)
1.94
(0.39)
2.28
(0.35)

1.64
(0.35)
1.89
(0.59)
2.29
(0.62)

2.96
(0.41)
2.27
(0.42)
2,923

2.95
(0.31)
2.27
(0.31)
560

2.93
(0.26)
2.27
(0.26)
167

2.94
(0.37)
2.28
(0.37)
195

Notes: This panel presents summaries of self-reported plan ratings, utilization, and outcomes for MA enrollees,
across di¤erent sets of counties. Measures are denoted for each enrollee, per year. The unit of aggregation is at
the county-year level. The original data is taken from the CAHPS and was at an individual respondent level.
SRH refers to self-reported health.

46

Urban
2007 FFS 5-yr (100s)
Metro Pop (100k)
Metro Pop (100k) Sq
Cnty Pop (100k)
Cnty Pop (100k) Sq

Table 7: CAHPS Ratings
(1)
(2)
(3)
Overall
Overall
PCP
Health Plan Healthcare
-0.044
-0.177
-0.204**
(0.157)
(0.126)
(0.083)
0.061***
0.010
-0.000
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.014)
0.157
0.076
0.215**
(0.173)
(0.139)
(0.097)
-0.022
-0.001
-0.021*
(0.022)
(0.018)
(0.012)
-0.012
-0.019
-0.044
(0.065)
(0.056)
(0.047)
0.001
0.006
0.008
(0.016)
(0.013)
(0.011)

(4)
Specialist
Seen
-0.050
(0.116)
0.003
(0.019)
0.092
(0.129)
-0.009
(0.016)
-0.055
(0.059)
0.006
(0.014)

(5)
Drug
Bene…ts
-0.067
(0.126)
0.023
(0.018)
0.228
(0.161)
-0.028
(0.020)
-0.034
(0.066)
0.007
(0.016)

Stand. Treat. E¤ect

-0.119
(0.083)

Additional Controls
Counties

Year
Metro 100-600k, 2007 FFS 5-yr Blw Floors

Mean

8.39
(0.92)

8.51
(0.81)

9.02
(0.63)

8.9
(0.86)

8.35
(0.98)

N
R-squared

1,657
0.029

1,641
0.023

1,625
0.015

1,545
0.007

1,588
0.025

Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are enrollee-reported levels of
plan quality, levels of utilization, and health status. The unit of observation is at the county-year level, for
the 2007-2011 period. The original data is obtained from CMS, from the CAHPS survey of MA enrollees;
while the data was originally at an individual respondent level, we aggregate this data to the county-year
level for purposes of our analysis. We exclude counties whose adjusted FFS level-as of 2007-was above
that of the lowest possible ‡oor. Finally, we restrict to those counties within the speci…ed population
band. We include controls for year and 2007 per capita Medicare FFS spending. We also include quadratic
population controls, for counties as well as metros. Populations are stated in terms of 100k. Standard
errors are clustered at the metro-level. Standardized treatment e¤ects are calculated consistent with the
approach in Kling et al (2007) and Finkelstein et al (2012). All speci…cations include controls for age
categories, race, and gender.

47

Urban
2007 FFS 5yr (in 100s)
Metro Pop (100k)
Metro Pop (100k) Sq
Cnty Pop (100k)
Cnty Pop (100k) Sq

Table 8: CAHPS Utilization and Health
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Specialist Personal Routine
SRH
Visits
MD Visits
Visits
Overall
-0.029
0.054
-0.070
0.094
(0.080)
(0.110)
(0.121)
(0.081)
0.011
0.007
-0.001
-0.012
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.009)
0.080
-0.065
0.068
-0.010
(0.088)
(0.114)
(0.136)
(0.089)
-0.011
0.010
-0.006
-0.004
(0.011)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.012)
0.054
-0.139**
-0.042
-0.131***
(0.040)
(0.054)
(0.053)
(0.043)
-0.007
0.028*
0.010
0.025**
(0.009)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.010)

(5)
SRH
Mental Health
0.121
(0.084)
-0.005
(0.009)
-0.126
(0.083)
0.013
(0.011)
-0.146***
(0.042)
0.029***
(0.010)

Stand. Treat. E¤ect

0.071
(0.110)

Additional Controls
Counties

Year
Metro 100-600k, 2007 FFS 5 yr Blw Floors

Mean
N
R-squared

1.66
(0.50)
1,554
0.009

1.90
(0.67)
1,651
0.014

2.27
(0.75)
1,661
0.010

2.92
(0.47)
1,661
0.034

2.26
(0.46)
1,662
0.024

Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are enrollee-reported levels of plan
quality, levels of utilization, and health status. The unit of observation is at the county-year level, for the 20072011 period. The original data is obtained from CMS, from the CAHPS survey of MA enrollees; while the data
was originally at an individual respondent level, we aggregate this data to the county-year level for purposes of
our analysis. We exclude counties whose adjusted FFS level-as of 2007-was above that of the lowest possible
‡oor. Finally, we restrict to those counties within the speci…ed population band. We include controls for year and
2007 per capita Medicare FFS spending. We also include quadratic population controls, for counties as well as
metros. Populations are stated in terms of 100k. Standard errors are clustered at the metro-level. Standardized
treatment e¤ects are calculated consistent with the approach in Kling et al (2007) and Finkelstein et al (2012).
All speci…cations include controls for age categories, race, and gender.

48

VARIABLES
MA*Urban
MA

Controls
Counties

Table 9: Discharge Analyses
(1)
(2)
(3)
Length of Stay Num Proc
Tot. Charges
0.088
0.076
-391.8
(0.147)
(0.050)
(824.7)
-.186**
-.051**
-488.8*
(0.077)
(0.022)
-248.2
Year, Hospital FE’s, Age, Gender
Metro 100-600k, 2007 FFS 5 yr Blw 662

Mean

5.249
(6.232)

1.687
(2.238)

28872
(37,550)

N
R-squared

285,448
0.557

285,450
0.187

285,414
0.285

Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are hospital
utilization measures such as length of stay and number of procedures. The unit of
observation is at the individual discharge level and spans the 2007-2010 period. The
original data is obtained from the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) and is limited to
states that track hospital county location and MA status. We limit the discharge data
to Medicare discharges. Finally, we restricted to those counties within the speci…ed
population band. We include controls for individuals’gender and age range. Finally,
we include hospital …xed e¤ects. Standard errors are clustered at the metro-area level.

Table 10: MA Enrollment Composition Analyses: From CAHPS Data
100-600k Metro &
2007 FFS Below Floors
Urban
Non-Urban
Age
65-74
31.9%
29.5%
75-80
24.7%
24.6%
81-84
17.2%
17.9%
85+
12.0%
13.1%
Unknown
7.5%
8.8%
White
Female
MD Visits
Specialist Visits
Routine Care Visits
General Health Self-Assess
Mental Health Self-Assess

90.2%
54.1%

91.8%
53.7%

1.77
1.67
2.17
2.77
2.11

1.76
1.66
2.18
2.78
2.12

Note: The original data is obtained from the CAHPS survey, at an
individual respondent level, for the years 2007-2011. These summary
statistics are based on individual respondent-level data.

49

Table 11: MA Composition & Bid Analysis
(1)
(2)
Mean Enrollee
Bid, as
Risk Score
Fract of Bnchmk
Urban

0.021
(0.025)

(3)
Bid
Tot Amount

0.004
(0.008)

Instr. County Benchmark
2007 FFS 5yr (in 100s)
Metro Pop (100k)
Metro Pop (100k) Sq
Cnty Pop (100k)
Cnty Pop (100k) Sq

0.065***
-0.009
0.005
(0.029)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.013
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.002)

0.004
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.009)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.001)

Additional Controls
Counties

Mean

N
R-squared

0.933***
(0.082)
2.634
(2.411)
-4.106
(6.215)
0.507
(0.805)
0.699
(2.398)
-0.524
(0.69)

Year
Metro 100-600k,
& 2007 FFS 5 yr Blw 662
0.885
(0.081)

0.897
(0.034)

665.76
(52.55)

1,724
0.197

1,360
0.339

1,360
0.858

Notes: Table presents linear regression model, where outcome variable include average risk scores of MA
enrollees and plan bids. The unit of observation is aggregated to the county-year level. The underlying
data is from CMS, with the risk score data covering the 2007-2011 period and the bid data covering the
2007-2010 period.

Table 12: MA Composition-New York State Analysis
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Female
Age
White
Black
Floor Prem (in hundreds/month)
0.10%
0.23 2.3%** -0.82%
(0.52) (0.24) (1.01)
(0.54)
Controls
Year, County
Mean
56.2%
74.6
93.7%
3.7%
(9.2)
(2.2)
(9.8)
(6.8)
N
366
366
366
366
R-Squared
0.89
0.87
0.99
0.99

(5)
Hispanic
-0.17%**
(0.08)
1.0%
(2.9)
366
0.99

Note: Regressions run at a county-year level for all Medicare recipients in New York State, for the 1998-2003
period. Underlying data sourced from Medicare denominator data for New York State for that same period.

50

Table 13: Advertising Spending
(1)
(2)
(3)
Benchmark

0.169
(1.101)

(4)

pop

-2.541***
(0.808)
pop

5.373***
(1.555)
-5.378***
(1.148)
pop

Mean

5.898

5.898

5.898

4.510***
(1.534)
-5.256***
(1.133)
pop
ad price
5.898

Observations
R-squared

840
0.041

840
0.053

840
0.066

840
0.108

Current FFS Spending
Controls

Notes: Table presents results of an OLS regression with TV spot advertising expenditures, per
Medicare bene…ciary per year, as the dependent variable, and the benchmark (per MA enrollee
per month) as the explanatory variable of interest. The unit of observation is the DMA-year.
Benchmarks are expressed in hundreds of dollars. Population controls are metro population and
metro population squared, and the advertising price index is SQAD points.

51

