                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PUTTING INTEGRITY INTO FINANCE:
                               A PURELY POSITIVE APPROACH

                                            Werner Erhard
                                           Michael C. Jensen

                                         Working Paper 19986
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19986


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2014


We are indebted to Sandra Carr, Miriam Diesendruck, Anders Dillan, James Poterba, Allan Scherr,
Gonneke Spits, Sue Strober, and Steve Zaffron for their willingness to share their efforts, knowledge
and insights into matters relevant to this paper, and especially Kevin Murphy for his insightful challenges,
questions, and comments on this paper, and his willingness to share with us his knowledge, data and
exhibits relevant to executive compensation. We acknowledge our students and seminar participants
for their contribution to us, in particular the critical lessons about the viability of the material and
themethodology for mastering it. We are also indebted to two anonymous referees for their valuable
comments,criticisms, and suggestions. All errors are our responsibility. Jensen has received financial
supportfrom the Harvard Business School Division of Research. Both authors are associated with
the non-profitErhard-Jensen Ontological / Phenomenological Initiative (from which the authors receive
no financialbenefit other than a reimbursement of travel expenses when dealing with the Initiative’s
activities).The purpose of the Initiative is to stimulate and support research into and the application
of the ontological/ phenomenological perspective on human nature and behavior, and the impact of
such a perspective on life, living, and self. Various management consulting and public program delivery
firms (some from which the authors derive a financial benefit) utilize some of the ideas presented
in this paper in their consulting activities or programs. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Putting integrity Into Finance: A Purely Positive Approach
Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 19986
March 2014
JEL No. G02

                                             ABSTRACT

The seemingly never ending scandals in the world of finance with their damaging effects on value
and human welfare (that continue unabated in spite of all the various efforts to curtail the behaviorthat
results in those scandals) argues strongly for an addition to the current paradigm of financial economics.
We summarize here our new theory of integrity that reveals integrity as a purely positive phenomenon
with no normative aspects whatsoever. Adding integrity as a positive phenomenon to the paradigm
of financial economics provides actionable access (rather than mere explanation with no access) to
the source of the behavior that has resulted in those damaging effects on value and human welfare,
thereby significantly reducing that behavior. More generally we argue that this addition to the paradigm
of financial economics can create significant increases in economic efficiency and productivity.


Werner Erhard
P O Box 31791
Grand Cayman Island KY1-1207
Cayman Islands
werhard@ssrn.com

Michael C. Jensen
7858 Sanderling Road,
Sarasota, FL 34242
and NBER
mjensen@hbs.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19986
                                                   2                                       19 March 2014


       1.    INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

       a.    A Warning and Invitation

       This paper is profoundly different from the way we economists normally model aspects
of the world, how we think about measuring the effects of different policy choices on human
beings and how we communicate the results of that research.
        What we will say about integrity here will stretch most of us. Bear with us since while
what we will be saying about integrity will not fit the current worldview or mindset of most
economists, if we are successful it will shift your worldview to a more powerful place. What we
are discussing is highly relevant to and complementary to economics, business and management,
but it is not economics as it is generally thought of and it draws on insights from other
disciplines. The roots of what we are dealing with here are in ontology (the philosophy and
science of the nature of being) and phenomenology (ontology’s methodology). Yet integrity (as
we define it) or the lack thereof on the part of individuals or organizations has enormous
economic implications (for value, productivity, quality of life, etc.). Indeed, integrity is a factor
of production as important as labor, capital, and technology. Without a clear, concise and
actionable definition of integrity, economics is far less powerful than it can be. So too finance
and management.
        We argue here that there are large increases in workability, value, and quality of life to be
realized by putting integrity as a positive phenomenon into the theory and practice of finance.
        Given the radical departure from the current understanding of what integrity is that is
generated by this new model – that is, given the radical departure from the way in which
integrity has historically occurred for us – we ask our readers to suspend judgment of the
elements until the whole of the model has been laid out.

       b.    Empirical Evidence

        Up to now, we have not been able to run formal large-scale empirical studies of the
impact of integrity on human performance. We are now in the process of formulating and
funding large-scale empirical tests that will likely begin in 2015 and run over a number of years.
We look forward to the results of these empirical studies. We do, however, have our own
experiences with the impact of our model of integrity on our personal and professional lives. In
addition, we regularly receive substantial feedback (solicited, unsolicited and non-random)
feedback from the instructors and attendees at seminars, programs and courses that include our
positive model of integrity. These individuals number in the thousands and range from students
to top-level executives and scholars. They consistently report that engaging with integrity as a
positive phenomenon has resulted in substantial and productive changes in their overall quality
of life, including personal well-being, family and professional lives, and organizational
performance.
       For an example of the formal measurement of the statistically significant increase in
performance see the study of the effect of integrity on student performance outcomes associated
with increased student integrity by Isberg, Thundiyil and Owen (2012)



              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    3                                       19 March 2014


http://ssrn.com/abstract=2148783 We await the completion of additional formal statistical tests
of the impact of our model of integrity.
        Paul Fireman, former CEO of Reebok, US, implemented at Reebok an early version of
the integrity model discussed here. You might be interested in his assessment of the major
impact of that implementation on his and Reebok’s remarkable success. See his Commencement
Address to the Suffolk University Sawyer Business School on May 19th, 2013, Boston, MA.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?gl=US&hl=en&client=mv-google&v=lTw0GX4nVXs&nomobile=1


        c.    Integrity As We Define It

       In our positive theory of integrity, integrity is defined as: “the state of being whole,
complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition” – we often refer to this as “whole
and complete”. This definition (virtually the first two definitions of integrity in Webster’s
Dictionary) does not define a virtue. There is nothing inherently good, bad or virtuous about
being whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition. Something just is
“whole and complete”, or it isn’t. We go on to specify what must be whole and complete for 1)
an object, or for 2) a system to be in integrity (see Section 3.c, p. 15. And, we specify (see
Section 3.d, p. 16) what must be whole and complete for 3) a human being (a person), or for 4)
any other human entity (such as a corporation) to be in integrity.
         For most people it is obvious that for an object like a bicycle wheel to be whole and
complete that bicycle wheel must have all of its parts in working order. We show that the same
is true for a system. It is not so obvious (and we explicate this in detail below), that for a person
or a human entity (such as a corporation) to be whole and complete that person’s or human
entity’s word must be whole and complete. In our model, a person’s word is whole and
complete when that person honors his or her word (as we define “honor” and as we define the six
components of one’s word).

        d.    Integrity As A Positive Phenomenon

        In our model, we define integrity as a positive phenomenon. As is the case with any
positive phenomenon – for example, gravity – there are effects caused by actions related to that
phenomenon. The action of stepping off a cliff will, as a result of gravity being a positive
phenomenon, cause an effect (whether one likes the effect or not). Likewise, action that is
consistent or inconsistent with integrity as a positive phenomenon will also cause an effect
(again, whether one likes the effect or not).
      When integrity is treated as a positive phenomenon as it is in our model, the relation
between integrity, workability and performance is as follows:
    1   Maximum workability is a necessary (although not sufficient) condition for maximum
          performance,
    2   Integrity as we distinguish and define it is a necessary and sufficient condition for
            maximum workability,
    3   It follows that integrity is a necessary (although not sufficient) condition for maximum
             performance, and


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                      4                                        19 March 2014


   4     It follows that as integrity declines, the opportunity for performance declines.
   5     This leads to the empirically refutable proposition that, ceteris paribus, as integrity
            declines, performance declines.

         e.    Actual Access To The Source Of Out-Of-Integrity Behavior

        We identify eleven factors that contribute to what we call the “Veil of Invisibility” that
hides the actual source of out-of-integrity behavior (see Section 3.h, p. 19 below). Because the
actual source of out-of-integrity behavior is almost always hidden, the damaging effects of out-
of-integrity behavior are attributed to sources other than out-of-integrity behavior – that is, these
damaging effects are attributed to false causes. Common examples of false causes that explain
the factors that generate the actions that result in these damaging effects are properties inherent
in certain individuals or organizations – that is, a person or an organization is immoral, greedy,
dishonest, or selfish. While such false causes seem to provide a satisfying explanation for the
actions, note that they provide no actionable access to altering the actions. In fact, the almost
universal assignment of false causes of the actions that result in these damaging effects actually
obscures the real source of those actions. We argue that the real source of those actions is an
individual’s or organization’s word being out of integrity (as we have said, not whole, complete,
unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition).

         2.    DIFFICULTIES WITH THE CURRENT PARADIGM OF FINANCIAL
               ECONOMICS

         a.    An “Obscure Puzzle” in Finance that Calls for a New Paradigm

        There is a continuous and seemingly endless stream of reports of value-destroying
behavior by individuals, groups, and organizations in the financial world. For short, we refer to
these as “the scandals” (see Appendix 1, p. 47 for a brief summary of what we refer to as “the
scandals”). The fact that these scandals keep arising in spite of the ongoing and varied attempts
to curtail such behavior amounts to an “obscure puzzle”. The persistence of these scandals in
spite of all of the efforts to curtail them (a perfect example of what Thomas Kuhn (2012) calls
“anomalies and crises” within the prevailing paradigm) is, we argue, strong evidence that the
prevailing paradigm of financial economics requires some transformation.
         However, as Kuhn (2012, p. 122) points out in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
       Paradigms are not corrigible [changeable] by normal science at all. … normal science ultimately
       leads only to the recognition of anomalies and to crises [within the prevailing paradigm].

        To resolve the “anomalies and crises” of the seemingly unstoppable scandals in the
financial world, we propose an addition to the generally accepted financial economics paradigm.
This addition to the prevailing paradigm opens up a perspective that reveals the actual source of
these scandals, and explains why the best efforts of regulatory agencies, the legal authorities, the
media, etc., etc. have so far failed to stem the tide. Our proposed addition to the financial
economics paradigm reveals actionable opportunities for effectively dealing with the actual
source of the continuing stream of value-destroying behavior by individuals, groups, and
organizations in the world of finance.


                Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                         5                                          19 March 2014


        Given that we are proposing a change to a prevailing paradigm, much of what we present
in this paper is outside the accepted boundaries of the current paradigm of financial economics.
So in the spirit of full disclosure, we caution our readers that we will be introducing terms,
perspectives, and ideas that may at first seem strange, and some that will be familiar but are used
here in an unusual way. Moreover, when viewed from within the confines of the current
paradigm what is being dealt with in this paper may seem irrelevant or just plain wrong, or
simply inappropriate and not to be dealt with in a financial economics journal.
        For example, to start with, finance and economics scholars tend to avoid discussions or
considerations of “integrity” because integrity is for them normative (occurs for them as
normative). That normative presumption makes it challenging to even begin to consider integrity
constituted as a purely positive phenomenon as it is in this paper. Kuhn (1996, p. 122) comments
on the challenge of introducing a new paradigm (and we would argue adding to an established
paradigm):
      “… normal science, an enterprise that, as we have already seen, aims to refine, extend, and articulate
      a paradigm that is already in existence. … But that interpretive enterprise [normal science] … can
      only articulate a paradigm, not correct it. Paradigms are not corrigible by normal science at all.”

       By the way, should you begin to see some value in our model, because it is simply
impossible to be complete in one paper on the huge topic dealt with here, you will certainly have
questions and challenges regarding certain specifics that we will not have addressed or at least
have not fully addressed.2 By the same token, we will have established a new perspective from
which to view the source of these scandals. When these scandals are viewed from this new
perspective one sees possibilities for effectively dealing with them – possibilities that were not
apparent from the current perspective on these scandals.
        In any case, we ask our readers to keep an open mind – that is, willingly suspend the
immediate need to accept or reject what is presented until it is fully presented – and then to fully
“try on” this new perspective to determine if from within this perspective there is a new
possibility that promotes value-enhancing behavior by individuals, groups, and organizations.
We rely on Thomas Kuhn (p. 122) as follows for the foundation for making this request. Kuhn,
speaking about what is possible from within a new perspective, concludes,
      “… these [“anomalies and crises”] are terminated, not by deliberation and interpretation, but by a
      relatively sudden and unstructured event like the gestalt switch.”

        In Kuhn’s (p. 122) attempt to make clear what he means by “gestalt switch”, he says,
      “Scientists then often speak of the ‘scales falling from the eyes’ or of the ‘lightning flash’ that
      ‘inundates’ a previously obscure puzzle, enabling its components to be seen in a new way that for
      the first time permits its solution.” [italics and underlining added]

        The basis for 1) our proposal to add to the generally accepted financial economics
paradigm, and the basis for 2) our request to our readers to try on seeing a problem and therefore
its solution in an unfamiliar new way is our desire to (quoting Kuhn) “inundate a previously


2      We are in the process of drafting a more complete treatment of our positive theory of integrity in
our book, with the working title “A Positive Theory of the Normative Virtues”, to be published by
Cambridge University Press.


                Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                      6                                         19 March 2014


obscure puzzle, enabling its components to be seen in a new way that for the first time permits its
solution”.

       b.     Behavioral Economics and Behavioral Finance: Providing Explanations Rather
              Than Providing Access To Altering Human Behavior

        The progress in economics and finance over the last two-plus decades – founded on the
paradigm-altering insights from psychology about human behavior by scholars such as
Kahneman, Tversky, Thaler, Sunstein and others – has been huge. This paradigmatic revolution
has allowed the profession to focus on the existence and significant impact of widespread
counter-to-self-interest behavior that was heretofore unnoticed. Until Kahneman and Tversky’s
(1979) Econometrica paper “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk”, such
counter-to-self-interest behavior was in a sense invisible when viewed through the lens of the
prevailing rational/self-interest theory/paradigm. Or, that behavior was simply dismissed as
irrational and therefore an irrelevant anomaly (consistent with what Kuhn (1996, pp. 111-135)
termed “theory-dependence of observation”3 in his chapter “Revolutions as Changes of World
View). Indeed, behavioral economics and behavioral finance have now become major areas of
research on their own. The insights in these areas flow from our finally recognizing that there is
something about us human beings such that we often behave in ways that are contrary to our
self-interest (unfortunately still often explained away as “irrational behavior”).
        The contributions from behavioral economics and behavioral finance have been
extraordinarily powerful in providing explanations for the widespread existence of counter-to-
self-interest behavior. However, as powerful as these contributions have been in explaining this
behavior, they have been much less successful in providing access to altering human behavior.
Here we are highlighting the contrast between a model that explains a category of behavior, and
a model of that same category of behavior that provides actionable access to altering the
behavior.
       Kahneman (2011, p. 417) himself acknowledges that even clear explanations for a certain
category of behavior do not lead to altering that behavior. In this case, the explanations are
“biases” and the category of behavior is so-called “irrational” behavior. As Kahneman says:
      “What can be done about biases? … The short answer is that little can be achieved without a
     considerable investment of effort.” (p. 417)

      Speaking about his own personal experience of the lack of impact of even considerable
knowledge about what explains our so-called “irrational behavior”, Kahneman continues:
     “Except for some effects that I attribute mostly to age, my intuitive thinking is just as prone to
     overconfidence, extreme predictions, and the planning fallacy as it was before I made a study of
     these issues.”4 (p. 417)




3     See Bird (2011) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry “4.2 Perception, Observational
incommensurability, and World-Change”: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2011/entries/thomas-
kuhn/
4     In his review of Kahneman’s book Thinking, Fast and Slow, theoretical physicist and
mathematician Freeman Dyson (2011) reflecting on Kahneman’s thinking about this phenomenon says:


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    7                                       19 March 2014


       Kahneman’s statements, and the need to resort to nudging (see directly below), lead one
to conclude that even powerful explanations for behavior do not necessarily provide any
powerful access to altering that behavior. At least this is the case with the biases of intuition and
simplifying heuristics that explain counter-to-self-interest behavior.
        To deal with the problem that explanations do not alter behavior, Thaler and Sunstein
(2008) in their book Nudge provide a workaround for this problem. They argue persuasively that
people can be directed (nudged) into acting in their own self-interest. Nudging accomplishes this
by avoiding the requirement to make a decision between the alternatives. And avoiding the
requirement to make a decision is a way to work around the biases of intuition and simplifying
heuristics that are triggered when one must make a decision. For the most part, nudging avoids
the requirement to decide between alternatives by presenting the alternatives with a default
condition. Nudging nudges people into acting in the way those who structure what is being dealt
with conclude is in the person’s, group’s, or organization’s own self-interest.5
        However, nudging is not a resolution of the problem of altering the counter-to-self-
interest behavior associated with biases and heuristics. By providing the no-need-to-choose
default selection, nudging removes the necessity for the nudgee to make a decision. And,
removing the requirement to decide, removes the impact on behavior of biases and heuristics
(which are triggered when confronted with a decision). Again, this is a workaround.
       As Thaler and Sunstein acknowledge (see Chapter 17, p. 235), nudging is paternalistic (in
their words, “libertarian paternalism”), but as they also acknowledge, when employed by the
unscrupulous, nudging can be downright manipulative and used to exploit people.
        By contrast, unconcealing the actual nature of integrity (which happens as the result of
the new way we model integrity) makes present in real time the relation between a certain
behavior (in this case, acting with integrity or not) and the consequences of such behavior (in this
case, on value or more generally on workability and the opportunity for performance). In other
words, this new model of integrity not only reveals the counter-to-self-interest impact on an
individual, group, or organization that results from out-of-integrity behavior, it does so such that
acting without integrity occurs for a person along with the undesirable impact on value and
performance. In short, acting with integrity or the lack of it, and the resulting desirable or
undesirable impact on value and performance, arise together. It is critical to note that when an
out-of-integrity action occurs to (shows up for) an individual, group, or organization (or even for
you or me) as counter to its self-interest, the likelihood of acting in that way is significantly
diminished.
       While we will explicate more fully what we mean by “occur”, an oversimplified example
of what we mean by “occur” shows up in the following: The way something is understood by us
or seems to be for us is a result of the way we frame it. Consequently, change your frame for
something and the way you understand it and the way it seems to be for you will change – that is,
the way in which it occurs for you will change.



“We also know that, even when we become aware of the bias and the illusions, the illusions do not
disappear. What use is it to know that we are deluded, if the knowledge does not dispel the delusions?”
5        For a series of experimentally-based effective persuasion techniques, see Goldstein, Martin and
Cialdini (2007).


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   8                                       19 March 2014


        This is in sharp contrast with the way biases of intuition and simplifying heuristics
function, where at the time of the behavior that results from these biases and heuristics the
damaging impact on one’s self interest is obscured. In fact, at the time, it actually appears to the
person that the resultant behavior is in their self interest. It is only from a third-person
perspective that the behavior that results from biases and heuristics is seen as counter to one’s
self interest. And this includes the person, group, or organization themselves when later they
have the distance for a third-person perspective on their earlier behavior. It is important to keep
in mind, that even the knowledge that biases of intuition and simplifying heuristics will result in
actions that are counter to self interest does not impact people’s behavior. And, this includes
even people with the knowledge and experience of Daniel Kahneman (as he himself
acknowledges in the above quotes).
       Rather than an explanation for the behavior, this new model of integrity makes present
the consequences of the behavior at the time of deciding how to behave. And, when the
consequences of this or that behavior are palpably present in making a decision about how to
behave, one is more likely to behave in one’s actual self-interest.
        In addition, our new model of integrity reveals exactly what constitutes out-of-integrity
behavior. And that contrasts dramatically with the way in which integrity currently occurs for
people wherein a great deal of out-of-integrity behavior does not even occur as out-of-integrity.
This shift in the way out-of-integrity behavior occurs to an individual, group, or organization (in
fact so that it occurs as out-of-integrity behavior, and at the same time it occurs as counter to its
own self-interest) is the access this new model of integrity provides to altering behavior.

       c.    The Counterproductive Effects of the Term “Irrational Behavior”

        There is no doubt that the twenty or so biases of intuition and simplifying heuristics
described by Kahneman and Tversky cogently explain what is termed “irrational behavior”.
While we have no argument with the accuracy of the explanations, we argue that the counter-to-
self-interest behavior is identified as “irrational behavior” because it was researched within the
context of the rational-mind paradigm of psychology, and within the utility-maximizing
individuals acting in perfect markets (people acting in their own self-interest) paradigm of
economics. Unfortunately, labeling the behavior irrational, while explaining the behavior
perfectly, obscures the source of that behavior. Moreover, using irrational to counter or contrast
with rational elicits an analysis not of the observed behavior but an explanation of its presumed
irrationality.
        In fact, assuming that the behavior associated with the biases and heuristics identified by
Kahneman and Tversky is irrational obscures something critically important about the impact of
those biases and heuristics. A person with a normal brain acts in what appears to that person (to
that person’s brain) to be in his or her self interest. That is, a person acts in what appears to be
their self-interest given the way in which what they are dealing with or are confronted with
occurs or shows up for them.6 Saying the same thing in another way, given the way what we are
dealing with or confronted with occurs for us, we make what appear to be rational choices given
that occurring. While as we said above, from a third-person perspective (and even for the person

6      Erhard, Jensen, and Barbados Group, “A New Paradigm of Individual, Group, and
Organizational Performance” (2010). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437027


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                        9                                         19 March 2014


themselves when later they have the distance for a third-person perspective on their earlier
action), the action that at the time appeared to be in a person’s self-interest may in fact prove to
be counter to their self interest.7
        We argue that the biases and heuristics described by Kahneman and Tversky do more
than merely explain counter-to-self-interest behavior. We argue that those biases and heuristics
actually alter the way in which what-a-person-is-dealing-with occurs for that person. And in the
occurring altered by those biases and heuristics, the action that subjectively appears to be in
one’s self interest (the apparent rational choice) is in fact objectively counter to one’s self
interest. In summary, given the impact of those biases and heuristics on the way what-a-person-
is-dealing-with occurs for that person, the objectively counter-to-self-interest behavior
subjectively appears perfectly rational.
        As a consequence of the foregoing, we strongly prefer “counter-to-self-interest behavior”
over “irrational behavior”. As Kahneman himself declares:
      “Like most protagonists in debates, I have few memories of having changed my mind under
      adversarial pressure, but I have certainly learned more than I know. For example, I am now quick to
      reject any description of our work as demonstrating human irrationality. When the occasion arises, I
      carefully explain that research on heuristics and biases only refutes an unrealistic conception of
      rationality, which identifies it as comprehensive coherence. Was I always so careful? Probably
      not.”8

        Carefully examining every dumb act in our own lives it is clear that each seemed like “a
good idea at the time”, i.e., desirable and perfectly rational in that the costs were less than the
benefits given the way in which what we were dealing with occurred for us at the time. What
made the act dumb was not irrationality, rather it was the way Kahneman and Tversky’s biases
and heuristics caused what we were dealing with to occur or show up for us.
       By labeling the behavior “irrational”, we scholars end up skewing our research to find the
source of irrationality, rather than to find the source of the behavior. So the use of that label gave
people an answer (that it was irrational) before they did the careful looking to actually see the
behavior. If what we have to explain is irrational behavior, we are now not looking for what
causes the behavior, we are looking for what causes the irrationality.
       The fact that I am likely to apply a bias or heuristic to what I am dealing with (a fact
made available by Kahneman, Tversky and others) can be understood in one of two ways. It can
be framed 1) as leaving me acting irrationally, or it can be framed 2) as distorting the way in
which what I am dealing with occurs or shows up for me.
        When biases or heuristics are framed as leaving me acting irrationally, I am left with no
awareness of, and consequently no access to dealing with, the distortion from the bias or
heuristic on the way what I am dealing with occurs or shows up for me. And, as a consequence


7        For an extended discussion of the proposition that action is a correlate of the way in which what
one is dealing with or is confronted with, see Erhard, Jensen, and Barbados Group, A New Paradigm of
Individual,    Group,     and     Organizational    Performance      (2010).     Available    at    SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437027
8        Kahneman, Daniel, “Nobel Prize Autobiography”, accessed March 4, 2012
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/2002/kahneman-autobio.html


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                        10                                           19 March 2014


my actions will be a correlate of the distorted way in which what I am dealing with occurs for
me. Such actions are more likely to be contrary to my self-interest.
        As we said, Kahneman himself says,
      “What can be done about biases? … Except for some effects that I attribute mostly to age, my
      intuitive thinking is just as prone to overconfidence, extreme predictions, and the planning fallacy as
      it was before I made a study of these issues.” 9 (p. 417)


        d.     Out-of-Integrity Behavior: The Unnoticed Elephant in the Living Room of
               Behavioral Puzzles

        Our focus in this paper is integrity – that is, what is discovered when integrity is revealed
as a positive phenomenon (as it is in our new model of integrity).
        Given the pervasive understanding of integrity as a normative phenomenon – which
makes seeing the function and consequences of integrity as a positive phenomenon very difficult
– in this section we ask forgiveness for being a bit laborious in our explication of the function
and consequences of integrity as a positive phenomenon.
        In spite of the enormous damaging impact on human welfare from out-of-integrity
behavior, the universal prevalence of out-of-integrity behavior has gone unnoticed in the
behavioral literature that has evolved in the last 30 years. This, even though out-of-integrity
behavior (while generally not recognized as such) is in fact a significant portion of all counter-to-
self-interest behavior. By the way, the damage from such behavior that makes the headlines is a
small portion of the actual total damage from out-of-integrity behavior.
        The widespread damage to human welfare caused by out-of-integrity behavior is not
identified as being caused by out-of-integrity behavior. This is the result of most out-of-integrity
behavior not being recognized as actually being out-of-integrity. Consequently, a good deal of
the enormous costs to individuals, groups, and organizations that actually result from out-of-
integrity behavior are mistakenly explained as coming from other causes. Thus, all of us
engaging in this explanatory behavior short-circuit the search for the actual source of the
damage.
        In addition, even when an individual, group, or organization’s out-of-integrity behavior
shows up for them as out-of-integrity behavior, it often occurs as damaging to others and not to
the individual, group, or organization that is engaging in such behavior – at least not damaging to
them as long as they “don’t get caught” or will at least “get away with it”. No matter how great
or small the damage to others from one’s out-of-integrity behavior, one’s out-of-integrity
behavior is as we will show is always damaging to oneself. In speaking about the “enormous
costs” resulting from out-of-integrity behavior we are not speaking merely about the
consequences of getting caught. As we will show, even when we “don’t get caught” or we “get
away with it”, the costs to ourselves of out-of-integrity behavior are enormous.


9      In his review of Kahneman’s book Thinking, Fast and Slow, theoretical physicist and
mathematician Freeman Dyson (2011) reflecting on Kahneman’s thinking about this phenomenon says:
“We also know that, even when we become aware of the bias and the illusions, the illusions do not
disappear. What use is it to know that we are deluded, if the knowledge does not dispel the delusions?”


                Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   11                                      19 March 2014


         We demonstrate that a powerful opportunity to support people, groups and organizations
to act in their own self-interest begins (but only begins) with the recognition that as we have said
each of us (individuals, groups, and organizations) inflicts enormous damage on ourselves and
others as a result of our widespread and systematic out-of-integrity behavior. However, as a
consequence of the way integrity is currently understood (currently occurs or shows up for
people), again, as we have said much out-of-integrity behavior is not recognized by people,
groups, and organizations as being out of integrity. As a consequence, for the most part, people,
groups, and organizations do not recognize that the damage inflicted on themselves and others
from their out-of-integrity behavior is in fact a result of their own out-of-integrity behavior.
        What integrity actually is, and the way integrity functions and the consequences of the
way it functions, is misidentified by virtually all people, and as a result they explain the damage
as coming from some cause other than their out-of-integrity behavior, or they explain away the
damage as, “that’s just a part of the way people, life, business, or the world is”. As a result of this
misidentification, just what integrity is, as well as what it is to act with integrity or act without
integrity, and the consequences of either type of action, is for all practical purposes invisible.
       Summarizing the foregoing: dealing effectively with out-of-integrity behavior begins
with a clear recognition of the following four facts regarding integrity, which recognition the
model of integrity introduced in this paper makes available:
       1) Just how widespread out-of-integrity behavior actually is, and
       2) the enormity of the cost of out-of-integrity behavior.
       3) Given the way integrity is currently understood, our out-of-integrity behavior does not
       occur for us as such, and as a result
       4) we ascribe the cause of the damage from our out-of-integrity behavior to something
       other than our out-of-integrity behavior.
        These four facts are only a beginning because, as is the case with the counter-to-self-
interest behavior explained by the biases and heuristics identified by Kahneman, Tversky and
others, the knowledge of such information by itself does little to alter behavior. What else is
required to provide a powerful opportunity for people, groups and organizations to act in their
own self-interest with regard to integrity?
        Integrity must occur (be understood and show up) for people, groups and organizations in
a radical new way. Integrity must occur for people, groups and organizations such that:
       1) Out-of-integrity behavior actually shows up for them as being out-of-integrity, and
       2) The damaging consequences of that behavior, whether immediate or long term, show
       up for them in present time right along with the behavior, and
       3) Those damaging consequences show up for them as being caused by the out-of-
       integrity behavior.
        When people, groups and organizations see integrity through the lens of this new model,
1), 2), and 3) are realized naturally. To be clear, from within this new model of integrity,
integrity occurs for people (is understood by people, shows up for people) such that 1) out-of-


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   12                                      19 March 2014


integrity behavior actually shows up for people as out-of-integrity behavior, but most
importantly, 2) the damaging consequences of that behavior, whether immediate or long term,
show up in present time right along with the behavior, and finally 3) the damaging consequences
show up as being caused by the behavior.
        As we said above in Section 1.c, people with normal brains act in what appears to them to
be in their self interest, but in their self interest given the way in which what they are dealing
with occurs or shows up for them. The way in which integrity is currently understood often
makes what one is dealing with occur such that out-of-integrity behavior actually appears to be
in one’s self interest, or the behavior is not even recognized as being out of integrity.
        If out-of-integrity behavior shows up for me as actually being out-of-integrity, and if the
damaging consequences of out-of-integrity behavior show up for me in present time right along
with the behavior, and if those damaging consequences show up as being caused by out-of-
integrity behavior, it is obvious that I am less likely to behave out-of-integrity. (Speaking about
this in another way, our brains evolved to generate reward-resulting behavior and avoid
punishment-resulting behavior, but the behavior the brain does generate, it generates given the
way in which our perception of what we are dealing with occurs in our brain.)
         Summarizing fully what we have said is required in addition to a clarity about the four
facts listed above in this section: the actual source of people, groups, and organizations acting
out of integrity and ascribing the resultant damage to causes other than acting out of integrity is a
product of the way in which integrity is currently “understood” – that is, is a product of the way
in which integrity currently occurs for people. In short, what we mean by “understood” is
people’s understanding of what for an object, system, person, or other human entity constitutes
being in or out of integrity, and the consequences that result from being in or out of integrity.
More precisely, what we mean by “the way in which integrity is currently understood” is the way
in which integrity as a phenomenon currently occurs for people. Just what acting with integrity
and acting without integrity actually is depends on the way integrity as a phenomenon occurs for
people. Finally, our awareness of what the real damage is from out-of-integrity behavior and
what the benefits are from acting with integrity also depends on the way integrity as a
phenomenon occurs for people.
       In the next Section we summarize our purely positive model of integrity (not to be
confused or conflated with the normative phenomena of morality, ethics, or character). This
forms the foundation for our main task in this paper: analyze the many ways in which finance
can be dramatically improved by putting a model of integrity as a positive phenomenon into the
theory and practice of finance.
        We will first reveal integrity as a positive phenomenon, and as a positive phenomenon
what integrity is for objects and systems, and what integrity is for persons and other human
entities. We then discus the consequences of behaving consistent with and inconsistent with the
nature of integrity as a positive phenomenon, and the consequences of each kind of behavior to
self interest. We go on to discuss what has gotten in the way of seeing integrity as a positive
phenomenon (what we call the “veil of invisibility”). This inability to see integrity as a positive
phenomenon results in misidentifying out-of-integrity behavior as something other than out-of-
integrity behavior. And, this in turn results in misidentifying the cause of many counter-to-self-
interest outcomes.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    13                                      19 March 2014


        3.    A PURELY POSITIVE MODEL OF INTEGRITY
        It took economics over 100 years to wake up to the fact that the presumption of self-
interest was flawed, even though the counter-to-self-interest behavior was right in front of us all
those years. The breakthrough in behavioral economics in large measure rewrites the economic
script for analyzing human behavior. In this paper we argue that the longstanding naive
presumption of self-interest is parallel to the total lack of recognition that integrity is a factor of
production that is as important to success in all aspects of life as knowledge, technology and
human and physical capital – and that importance has been invisible to us even though it is in
plain sight. Integrity as a factor of production is undistinguished and therefore unmanaged – and
as we said, its actual impact on life is huge. We have been involved in this research into a purely
positive theory of integrity since 2004 and the work is as yet incomplete.10
        The way integrity has been historically framed and as a consequence the way in which
integrity occurs for people obscures the powerful impact of integrity on the functioning of the
world and on life, for every human being and human entity. Resolving this issue so that the
impact of integrity becomes easily visible has required us to establish a new conversational
domain for integrity, morality, ethics, and legality. This conversational domain retains the primal
and fundamental meaning of each of these concepts as expressed in their dictionary definitions,
but clarifies the definitions and makes each term distinct from the other by eliminating the
mischief of the ambiguity and confounding of their overlapping definitions.11 Unfortunately most
people resist the creation of a new conversational domain because by definition it is unfamiliar to
them, and the reaction often is “Don’t use all these new words and concepts, just use the plain
English of the domain I am an expert in (say economics)”. This is equivalent to a first-year-
student of mathematics saying to the teacher: “Don’t use all these strange terms to communicate
mathematics to me (like calculus or number theory), just use plain English”, and similarly with
someone dealing with medicine, engineering or physics. Obviously that will not work because it
is the conversational domain of each of these areas that provides access to being a master of the
discipline.



10       See the following for extended discussions of this work, much of which deal with the modeling
issues in more detail than we have room for in this paper. Some chapters from our forthcoming book to
be published by Cambridge University Press are contained in, Erhard, Werner and Jensen, Michael C., A
Positive Theory of the Normative Virtues (December 7, 2011). Harvard Business School NOM Unit
Working Paper No. 12-007; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 11-06. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1906328 and our earlier papers: Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and
Zaffron, Steve, Integrity: A Positive Model that Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics
and Legality (March 23, 2009). Harvard Business School NOM Working Paper No. 06-11; Barbados
Group Working Paper No. 06-03; Simon School Working Paper No. FR 08-05. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=920625 or Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and Zaffron, Steve, Integrity: A
Positive Model that Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics, and Legality - Abridged
(English Language Version) (March 7, 2010). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 10-
061; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 10-01; Simon School Working Paper No. 10-07. Available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1542759 and Jensen, Michael C. and Erhard, Werner, A 'Value-Free'
Approach to Values (PDF File of Powerpoint Slides) (April 11, 2011). Harvard Business School NOM Unit
Working Paper No. 11-010; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 10-06; Simon School Working Paper No.
FR10-26. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1640302
11      See Erhard and Jensen (2011, Chapter 1) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1906328


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    14                                      19 March 2014


       Our purpose here is to summarize our new model of integrity, introduce its required new
terminology, and deal with the actual effects of integrity in life, with particular focus on
corporate, market, personal and policy issues in finance, governance and compensation.

        a.    Integrity: Definition

We start with the dictionary definition of integrity using Webster’s New World Dictionary
(1998):
        1. the quality or state of being complete; unbroken condition; wholeness; entirety
        2. the quality or state of being unimpaired; [in] perfect condition; soundness
        3. the quality or state of being of sound moral principle; uprightness, honesty, and
        sincerity
        We use the word “integrity” in this work following Webster’s definitions 1 and 2. Note
that those two definitions define a purely positive phenomenon with no normative content. As
we distinguish and use the word “integrity”, we do not include Webster’s definition 3. That is,
we do not use “integrity” to refer to the normative concepts of “being of sound moral principle;
uprightness, honesty, and sincerity”, or to refer to an ethical or moral code or standard, or to
denote anything about right vs. wrong, good vs. bad, or desirable vs. undesirable. Note that using
“moral” in the definition of integrity confuses and confounds the meaning of each.
        What follows are the rigorous definition of integrity, the relation between integrity and
workability, the relation between workability and performance, the relation between integrity
and performance, the law of integrity, and the relation between integrity and value, derived in
our in-process book “A Positive Theory of the Normative Virtues” Erhard and Jensen (2011,
Chs. 1, 2 and 3). These are some of the fundamental terms that make up this new conversational
domain that gives us access to integrity and its impact on the world.
             Integrity Defined: For an object, system, person, or other human entity or practice,
              the state of being whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect
              condition.

             The Relation between Integrity and Workability: Integrity (the state of being
              whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition) is the
              necessary and sufficient condition for maximum workability (capable of producing
              the desired effect or result).12

             The Relation between Workability and Performance: Workability (capable of
              producing the desired effect or result) is a necessary but not sufficient condition for
              performance (however one wishes to define performance).


12      The New Oxford American Dictionary (2010) defines workable as “capable of producing the
desired effect or result …” Workability (the noun form of workable, the definition of which is derived from
the adjectival form of the word) denotes the degree to which something is capable of producing the
desired effect or result, ranging from no opportunity for producing the desired effect or result to the
maximum opportunity for producing the desired effect or result.


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   15                                      19 March 2014


            The Relation between Integrity and Performance: Integrity (the state of being
             whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition) is thus a
             necessary but not sufficient condition for performance.

            The Law of Integrity: As the integrity (the state of being whole and complete,
             etc.) of an object, system, person, or other human entity or practice declines,
             workability declines, and as workability declines the opportunity for performance
             declines.

            The Relation between Integrity and Value: Integrity is therefore a necessary but
             not sufficient condition for long-run value maximization.

       b.    The Long-Neglected Positive Role of Integrity in Finance and Economics

        As we have said, finance and economics scholars tend to avoid discussions or
considerations of integrity because it has occurred to them as “normative”. However, integrity as
we have defined it in this new model is a purely positive phenomenon. For any object, system,
human entity, or human practice, integrity (as we distinguish it for each of these four) is
observable. That is, an object, system, human entity, or human practice is either observably
whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition, or it is not. Furthermore, it
is an inescapable conclusion that as whole and complete, etc. declines, workability declines.
And, as workability (capable of producing the desired effect or result) declines the opportunity
for performance declines (however one wishes to define performance). Hence, the effect of
integrity on the opportunity for performance, including value, productivity, quality of life (and
the like), is a purely positive proposition.
       Our posited link between integrity and workability (and consequently, value) is no more
normative than the posited link between the traditional net present value rule for investment
decisions and corporate value. “Long-run value maximization requires integrity” is a positive
proposition that is testable and refutable. And the empirical effects of integrity or its absence
have too long been ignored in finance and economics.
        In our framework, as we have said, integrity is a necessary but not sufficient condition for
long-run value maximization. For example, if you have integrity and thus a large opportunity for
performance, but you are committed to only a small game in life (for example: I will get up in
the morning) then you are not likely to create anything of value, in spite of having integrity. In
fact for an organization to create maximum value, it must also create and execute brilliant
competitive, organizational, technological, and human strategies in addition to integrity.

       c.    Integrity for an Object or System

        An object or system has integrity when it is whole and complete. An object without
integrity doesn’t work. Think of a wheel with missing spokes, it is not whole and complete, and
therefore is not stable. It will become out-of-round, work less well and eventually stop working
entirely.
       For an object or system to be in integrity it must satisfy the following conditions:



              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    16                                       19 March 2014


        1.    The Design must be in integrity – that is, the design must be whole, complete,
              unbroken, sound, in perfect condition. Specifically, the design when executed must
              be capable of producing the intended result or performance13).

        2.    The Implementation of the design must be in integrity – that is, the
              implementation of the design must be whole, complete, unbroken, sound, in perfect
              condition. Specifically, the implementation of the design must in fact realize the
              object or system as designed.

        3.    The Use of the implemented object or system must be in integrity – that is, the use
              of it must be whole, complete, unbroken, sound, in perfect condition. Specifically,
              the use of the object or system must be allowed by its design and be consistent with
              its designed purpose.

                  o For example, a 200-pound man using a life vest designed for a 50-pound
                    child will drown unless he can swim.
        By the way, the foregoing also applies to the integrity of a human system as a system.

        d.    Integrity for a Person or other Human Entity (family, group, organization,
              society, and nation)

       Integrity for a person or other human entity is a matter of that person’s or entity’s word –
nothing more and nothing less.
        In the matter of integrity (being whole, complete, etc.) it is not too much to say that a
person or other human entity is their word – that is, is constituted by their word. It follows that
when a person’s or other human entity’s word is less than whole, complete, unbroken, sound, in
perfect condition, that person as a person or that entity as a human entity is less than whole,
complete, unbroken, sound, in perfect condition. This results in the person or entity as less
workable, and therefore with a diminished opportunity for performance. Conversely, it also
follows that when a person’s or other human entity’s word is whole, complete, unbroken, sound,
in perfect condition, that person as a person and that entity as a human entity is whole,
complete, unbroken, sound, in perfect condition. This results in the person as a person or human
entity as a human entity being fully workable, and therefore with a maximum opportunity for
performance.
       For a person or other human entity to be in integrity they must satisfy the following
conditions:




13       “Intended result or performance” includes all aspects of the results or performance of an object or
system, including all relevant concerns in the design, implementation, and use of that object or system;
for a few obvious examples, construction, operating, and maintenance costs, as well as durability and all
relevant aesthetic requirements.


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   17                                      19 March 2014


       1.    The person’s or other human entity’s word must be whole, complete, unbroken,
             sound, in perfect condition.

       2.    For the word of a person or other human entity to be whole, complete, unbroken,
             sound, in perfect condition, they must keep their word, or when they will not be
             keeping their word, they must maintain their word as whole, complete, etc. by
             honoring their word.

       e.    Integrity: Keeping or Honoring One’s Word

        1. Briefly summarized a person’s or other human entity’s word includes the following
(see the Online Appendix at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19986/ for a precise and complete
definition of what we mean by each of the following 6 aspects of one’s word);
            Word-1: What you said you would do or not do

            Word-2: What you know to do or not to do

            Word-3: What is expected of you by those with whom you desire a workable
             relationship (that is, their expectations that are in fact unexpressed requests of you),
             unless you have specifically declined this or that of those expectations

            Word-4: What you say is so (your evidence for what you say is so, would satisfy
             your listener)

            Word-5: What you stand for

            Word-6: Moral, Ethical and Legal Standards
                o The social moral standards, the group ethical standards and the
                  governmental legal standards of right and wrong, good and bad behavior, in
                  the society, groups and state in which one enjoys the benefits of membership
                  are also part of one’s word (what one is expected to do) unless a) one has
                  explicitly and publicly expressed an intention to not keep one or more of
                  these standards, and b) one is willing to bear the costs of refusing to conform
                  to these standards (the rules of the game one is in).
      2. For a person or other human entity, keeping your word means you fulfill your
commitments and promises in full and on time.
        However, if you always keep your commitments and promises you are undoubtedly not
playing a big enough game in life. For example, as we suggested above, you might commit to
nothing more than that you will wake up each morning. While you will only fail at that once, you
will certainly be playing a small game in life.
       3. For a person or other human entity, honoring your word means that you either:
            Keep your commitments and promises, and on time, or




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                      18                                      19 March 2014


               When you have failed (or expect to fail) to keep a commitment or promise on time,
                you honor your word by:
                   o Acknowledging that failure as soon as you realize it, and saying by when
                     you will now keep that word, or that you never will keep that word, and
                   o Cleaning up any mess you created for those who were counting on you to
                     keep your word (your commitments and promises) on time.
        For a person or other human entity, honoring your word means that you are honest and
straightforward: This means nothing is hidden, no deception, no untruths, no violation of
contracts or property rights, etc. And (as explained above) because your word also includes
conforming to the rules of the games you are in (for example, ethical standards of the profession
or organization you are in, and the moral standards of the society and legal standards of the
government entity you are in). If you refuse to play by any of the rules of the games you are in,
integrity requires you to make this refusal clear to all others and to willingly bear the costs of
doing so. (Gandhi is an example.)
        As we have indicated, all this applies not only to a person, but to a human organization
(such as a university, partnership or corporation) as well. As we define integrity, an organization
or any other human entity is in integrity when it’s word is whole and complete. This means it
honors its word, both to its employees and to its customers, suppliers and other stakeholders.
Again, this means nothing is hidden, no deception, no untruths, no violation of contracts or
property rights, etc. And if the organization or other human entity refuses to play by any of the
rules of the game it is in, integrity requires it to make this clear to all others and to willingly bear
the costs of not playing by one or more of the rules of the game.

       f.       Workability: The Bridge between Integrity and Value Creation

       The more a person or other human entity is out of integrity (the less whole, complete, etc.
their word is), the smaller their opportunity for performance. This, is a result of the decline in
workability. Put simply (and somewhat overstated):
               “Without integrity nothing works.”
       We use this as a heuristic. Put more rigorously:
        As integrity (whole and complete) declines, workability (capable of producing the desired
effect or result) declines, and as workability declines, the opportunity for performance declines
(however one chooses to define performance). Thus, value maximization requires integrity.

       g.       An Example of the foregoing: Results from Applying these Principles of
                Integrity at SSRN

        The above definitions of integrity (including the three simple aspects of the definition of
integrity for objects and systems) have provided enormous power at SSRN (http://ssrn.com)
where Michael (a co-author of this paper and Integrity Officer at SSRN14) has used them in

14     In the spirit of full disclosure, Michael is also cofounder and Chairman of the Board of SSRN.


                 Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    19                                      19 March 2014


bringing about a culture of integrity that has produced major increases in productivity. Bringing
about increases in the integrity of SSRN’s staff as individuals (including himself) and in the
integrity of SSRN both as an organizational system and as a human entity enabled increases in
productivity at SSRN of 300% over the first three years of SSRN’s efforts in this domain.
Interestingly those productivity increases have also been associated with substantial increases in
the satisfaction and happiness of SSRN’s staff. SSRN has also experienced large increases in
productivity as ITX (http://www.itx.com/), SSRN’s outside vendor of web technology services,
learned about integrity through its interaction with SSRN and adopted integrity (as distinguished
in this paper) as a major element of its own organizational strategy. It is worth contemplating
how it could have been that such huge increases in productivity were lying around without being
noticed – another important example of counter-to-self-interest behavior that was invisible in the
way the world occurred to the relevant parties at both SSRN and ITX. The size of the increases
in productivity reported here may tempt some of our readers to dismiss them. Howerver, you
should know that SSRN’s productivity has continued to increase subsequent to these first three
years.

        h.    The “Veil of Invisibility”

        Given the significant contribution to performance and quality-of-life that we discovered
from acting consistent with the Law of Integrity, and conversely the devastating impact on
performance from violating the Law of Integrity,15 we were dumbfounded that the actual source
of these benefits and costs has remained invisible. Faced with that puzzle, we spent two years
focused on determining what created that invisibility.
        We discovered eleven distinct factors that create what we call the Veil of Invisibility16
that for human beings and other human entities makes invisible the impact of integrity on their
opportunity for performance. Each of these eleven factors contributes to obscuring for human
beings and other human entities the negative impact on performance when their actions are
inconsistent with the Law of Integrity, and conversely obscures the positive impact on
performance when their actions are consistent with the Law of Integrity.
        Ignorance of the Law of Integrity, kept in place by the eleven factors of the Veil of
Invisibility, prevents us from seeing the actual source of the devastating impact that out-of-
integrity behavior has on our lives, and the lives of our families, groups, organizations, societies,
and nations. Furthermore, ignorance of the Law of Integrity and of its relation to performance
leads to explanations for poor performance that, while seemingly valid, hide the actual cause of
that performance. Diagnosis of less than desirable performance and prescriptions for addressing
that diagnosis that are not informed by the Law of Integrity are generally unreliable and often
downright ineffective in providing an effective pathway for resolving performance issues. Some
evidence for this is the media reports of the unrelenting “scandals” we have mentioned.
        For now we provide a brief listing and description of the eleven factors of the veil of
invisibility that prevent us human beings from seeing and therefore accessing the power that

15       “As the integrity (the state of being whole and complete, etc.) of an object, system, person, or
other human entity or practice declines, workability declines, and as workability declines the opportunity
for performance declines.”
16      Playing on Harsanyi (1953, 1955) and Rawls (1971, 2001) “Veil of Ignorance”.


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   20                                      19 March 2014


acting consistent with the Law of Integrity actually adds to performance and quality-of-life for us
as individuals, and for our families, groups, organizations, societies, and nations. Mastering these
eleven factors will give you access to vast increases in integrity and performance.

       1.    Not seeing that who you are as a person is your word

             That is, thinking that who you are as a person is anything other than your word.
             For example, thinking that who you are is your body, or what is going on with you
             internally (your mental/emotional state, your thoughts/thought processes and your
             bodily sensations), or anything else you identify with such as your title or position
             in life, or your possessions, etc… leaves you unable to see that when your word is
             less than whole and complete you are diminished as a person.
             A person is constituted in language. As such, when a person's word is less than
             whole and complete they are diminished as a person.

       2.    Living as if my Word is only What I Said (Word 1) and What I Assert Is True (Word 4)

             Even if we are clear that in the matter of integrity our word exists in six distinct
             ways, most of us actually function as if our word consists only of what I said or
             what I assert is true. This guarantees that we cannot be men or women of integrity.
             For us, Words 2, 3, 5, and 6 are invisible as our word:
                 •   Word-2: What You Know to do or not to do
                 •   Word-3: What Is Expected of you by those with whom you wish to have a
                     workable relationship (unless you have explicitly declined those
                     unexpressed requests)
                 •   Word-5: What You Stand For
                 •   Word-6: Moral, Ethical and Legal Standards of each society, group, and
                     governmental entity of which I am a member
             When we live (function in life) as though our word is limited to Word 1: What I
             Said and Word 4: What I say is so, we are virtually certain to be out of integrity
             with regard to our word as constituted in Words 2, 3, 5 and 6. In such cases, all the
             instances of our word (be it the word of an individual or organization) that are not
             spoken or otherwise communicated explicitly are simply invisible as our word to
             such individuals or organizations. In our lives, all the instances of our Words 2, 3,
             5 and 6 simply do not show up (occur) for us as our having given our word.

       3.    “Integrity is a virtue”

             For most people and organizations, integrity exists as a virtue rather than as a
             necessary condition for performance. When held as a virtue rather than as a factor
             of production, integrity is easily sacrificed when it appears that a person or
             organization must do so to succeed. For many people, virtue is valued only to the
             degree that it engenders the admiration of others, and as such it is easily sacrificed


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   21                                      19 March 2014


             especially when it would not be noticed or can be rationalized. Sacrificing integrity
             as a virtue seems no different than sacrificing courteousness, or new sinks in the
             men’s room.

        4.   Self Deception about being out-of-integrity

             People are mostly unaware that they have not kept their word. All they see is the
             ‘reason’, rationalization or excuse for not keeping their word. In fact, people
             systematically deceive (lie to) themselves about who they have been and what they
             have done. As Chris Argyris concludes: “Put simply, people consistently act
             inconsistently, unaware of the contradiction between their espoused theory and
             their theory-in-use, between the way they think they are acting and the way they
             really act.”17
             And if you think this is not you, you are fooling yourself about fooling yourself.
             Because people cannot see their out-of-integrity behavior, it is impossible for them
             to see the cause of the unworkability in their lives and organizations – the direct
             result of their own attempts to violate the Law of Integrity.

        5.   Integrity is keeping one’s Word

             The belief that integrity is keeping one’s word – period – leaves no way to maintain
             integrity when this is not possible, or when it is inappropriate, or when one simply
             chooses not to keep one’s word. This leads to concealing not keeping one’s word,
             which adds to the veil of invisibility about the impact of violations of the Law of
             Integrity.

        6.   Fear of acknowledging that you are not going to keep your word

             When maintaining your integrity (i.e., acknowledging that you are not going to
             keep your word and cleaning up the mess that results) appears to you as a threat to
             be avoided (like it was when you were a child) rather than simply a challenge to be
             dealt with, you will find it difficult to maintain your integrity. When not keeping
             their word, most people choose the apparent short-term gain of hiding that they will
             not keep their word. Thus out of fear we are blinded to (and therefore mistakenly
             forfeit) the power and respect that accrues from acknowledging that one will not
             keep one’s word or that one has not kept one’s word.

        7.   Integrity is not seen as a factor of production

             This leads people to make up false causes and unfounded rationalizations as the
             source(s) of failure, which in turn conceals the violations of the Law of Integrity as
             the source of the reduction of the opportunity for performance that results in

17      Argyris, Chris. 1991. Teaching Smart People How to Learn. Harvard Business Review: May-
June.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                            22                                      19 March 2014


      failure.

8.    Not doing a cost/benefit analysis on giving one’s word

      When giving their word, most people do not consider fully what it will take to keep
      that word. That is, people do not do a cost/benefit analysis on giving their word. In
      effect, when giving their word, most people are merely sincere (well-meaning) or
      placating someone, and don’t even think about what it will take to keep their word.
      (How often do we all say something like “let’s have lunch sometime” with out
      actually intending to set a date and place.) Simply put, this failure to do a
      cost/benefit analysis on giving one’s word is irresponsible. Irresponsible giving of
      one’s word is a major source of the mess left in the lives of people and
      organizations. People generally do not see the giving of their word as: “I am going
      to make this happen,” but if you are not doing this you will be out-of-integrity.
      Generally people give their word intending to keep it. That is, they are merely
      sincere. If anything makes it difficult to deliver, then they provide reasons instead
      of results.

9.    Doing a cost/benefit analysis on honoring one’s word

      People almost universally apply cost/benefit analysis to honoring their word.
      Treating integrity as a matter of cost/ benefit analysis guarantees you will not be a
      trustworthy person, or with a small exception, a person of integrity.
      If I apply cost/benefit analysis to honoring my word, I am either out of integrity to
      start with because I have not stated the cost/benefit contingency that is in fact part
      of my word (I lied), or to have integrity when I give my word, I must say
      something like the following:
      “I will honor my word when it comes time for me to honor my word if the costs of
      doing so are less than the benefits.”
      Such a statement, while leaving me with integrity will not engender trust. In fact
      that statement fundamentally says that my word is meaningless.

10.   Integrity is a Mountain with No Top

      People systematically believe that they are in integrity, or if by chance they are at
      the moment aware of being out of integrity, they believe that they will soon get
      back into integrity.
      In fact integrity is a mountain with no top. We will never get to the place of 100%
      integrity. However, the combination of 1) generally not seeing our own out-of-
      integrity behavior, 2) believing that we are persons of integrity, and 3) even when
      we get a glimpse of our own out-of-integrity behavior, assuaging ourselves with the
      notion that we will soon restore ourselves to being a person of integrity keeps us
      from seeing that in fact integrity is a mountain with no top. To be a person of
      integrity requires that we recognize this and “learn to enjoy climbing”.


       Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   23                                      19 March 2014




       11.   Not having your word in existence when it comes time to keep your Word

              People say “Talk is cheap” because most people do not honor their word when it
              comes time to keep their word. A major source of people not honoring their word,
              is that when it comes time for them to do so, their word does not exist for them in a
              way that gives them a reliable opportunity to honor their word.
              Most people have never given any thought to keeping their word in existence so
              that when it comes time for them to keep their word there is a reliable opportunity
              for them to honor their word. This is a major source of out-of-integrity behavior
              for individuals, groups and organizations.
              In order to honor your word, you will need an extraordinarily powerful answer to
              the question, “Where Is My Word When It Comes Time For Me To Keep My
              Word?” If you don’t have a way for your word to be powerfully present for you in
              the moment or moments that it is time for you to take action to honor your word,
              then you can forget about being a person of integrity.
        In Erhard, Jensen and Zaffron (2009, pp. 70-87) we distinguish each of these eleven
factors in a way that gives one access to integrity, that is in a way that enables one to do the work
required to pierce the Veil of Invisibility, and by doing so be left in the presence of the power
that integrity confers on human beings and on human entities. In our experience individuals and
organizations that master the eleven factors of the Veil of Invisibility provide themselves with
access to a life of integrity with the power that integrity confers.
        Thus in this work we go beyond “nudging” to actually give human beings and human
entities access to eliminating or at least significantly reducing their out-of-integrity behavior. We
must emphasize, however, that as we said above, integrity is a mountain with no top. Therefore
those who set off on this task must learn to enjoy climbing because there is no end to the process.
And as the climb continues life continues to get better.
         In a very real sense being a person of integrity starts with me giving my word to myself –
that is, my word to myself that I am a person of integrity.
       And, as a person of integrity, when I give my word to anything, it is as though I have said
to myself:
       “I am going to make this happen.” And, being a person of integrity, it is a part of who I
am that when I do not keep my word, without question I honor my word.
       I never say to myself:
      “I am going to try to make this happen” or “I hope this will happen” or even “I will do
my best to make this happen”.

       i.    A Picture of What It Looks Like To Be In Integrity

       We do not have the space here, nor is it appropriate in this paper, to do what is necessary
to provide our readers with a complete exposition required for full access to integrity.


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   24                                      19 March 2014


Nevertheless, we have provided some access so that you can, if you choose to, experiment with
living with integrity in your personal and professional life. To aid in that experimenting, here is a
picture that provides a sense of what it is like to live a life of integrity.
        Since it is my word through which I define and express myself, both for myself and for
others, it is not too much to say that who I am is my word, both who I am for myself and who I
am for others. In any case, for a human being or other human entity integrity is a matter of one’s
word, nothing more and nothing less.
          A Picture of Integrity. Illustrating with one’s self what it means for a person, group, or
entity to have integrity, picture what your life would be like, and what your performance would
be, if it were true that:
            You have done what you said you would do, and you did it on time.

            You have done what you know to do, you did it the way it was meant to be done,
             and you did it on time.

            You have done what those with whom you desire a workable relationship
             expect you to do (even if they never asked you to do it and you never said you
             would do it), and you did it on time. Or, you have informed them in this or that case
             that you will not meet their expectations of you.

            Conversely, you have informed others of your expectations of them and have
             made explicit requests to those others.

            Whenever you have given your word as to the existence of some thing or some state
             of the world (assert something), you are willing to be held accountable that your
             evidence for what you are asserting would satisfy your listener(s) that your
             assertion is valid.

            And, whenever you realized that you were not going to do any of the foregoing, or
             not going to do it on time:
                 o You have said so to everyone who might be impacted, and you did so just
                   as soon as you realized that you wouldn't be doing it, or wouldn't be doing it
                   on time, and
                 o If you are going to do it in the future you have said by when you would
                   do it, or if you are not going to do it at all, you have said so, and
                 o You have dealt with the consequences of your not doing it on time, or
                   not doing it at all, for all those who are impacted by your not doing it on
                   time, or not doing it at all.

            Putting the foregoing all together: You have done what you said you would do,
             what you know to do, and what others expect you to do, or you have said you
             are not doing it, or not doing it on time, and you have cleaned up the mess you
             have caused by not doing it at all or not doing it on time. You have expressed
             your expectations of others through explicit requests. You are willing to be held


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   25                                      19 March 2014


             accountable that your evidence for what you assert would satisfy the others.
             Finally, if you are not going to obey the rules of the game you are playing in,
             you have informed all others playing with you of that fact, and you willingly
             bear the consequences. In short, you have nothing hidden; you are truthful,
             forthright, straight, and honest.

            And, almost unimaginable: What would it be like if others operated in this way with
             you?
       It follows then, that in order to be whole and complete as a person, my word to
myself and to others must be whole and complete. What then is it like to be whole and
complete as a person? When you keep or honor your word to yourself and others:
            You are at peace with yourself, and therefore you act from a place where you are at
             peace with others and the world, even those who disagree with you or might
             otherwise have threatened you.

            You live without fear for who you are as a person.

            You have no fear of losing the admiration of others.

            You do not have to be right; you act with humility.

            Everything or anything that someone else might say is ok for consideration. There is
             no need to defend or explain yourself, or rationalize yourself, you are able to learn.

            This state is often mistaken as mere self-confidence rather than the true courage that
             comes from being whole and complete, that is, being a man or woman of integrity.

       4.    A BRIEF LOOK AT SOME AREAS IN FINANCE THEORY AND
             PRACTICE WHERE INTEGRITY IS LACKING
        We turn now to a discussion of the application of this purely positive theory of integrity
to finance. We start with some common beliefs, recommended practices, and theory in finance
that are inconsistent with being a person or a firm or a system of integrity. We list here some of
these propositions and provide a detailed analysis below. Consider the following:
        The long history in finance (not the law) of implicitly defining the fiduciary duty of
managers to be to current shareholders only, and therefore ignoring future shareholders and
current and future bondholders and other claimants on the firm.
            As an example of this we point to the common recommendation for managers with
             an overvalued stock to issue new stock at the current high price (or make
             acquisitions using overvalued shares as payment) to benefit current shareholders at
             the expense of future shareholders, and (implicitly) to hide what they are doing.

            Common budgeting practices and target-based compensation plans that pay people
             according to how close they meet their targets.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   26                                      19 March 2014


            “Managing relations” with capital markets in a way that views financial reporting
             choices as strategic and must be made to both manage what the “street” expects and
             to give the street what it expects (basically manipulation of the “street”).
        Each of these recommended practices is out of integrity and leaves the entity being out of
integrity – that is, not whole and complete as to its word. These practices thus create
unworkability and therefore destroy value.
        Consider, for example, the common recommendation (noted above) for firms whose
equity or debt is overvalued to sell stock or bonds at those overvalued prices. That out-of-
integrity recommendation (not whole and complete as to its word) is bound to lead to value
destruction. The same is true of advice to use that over-valued equity to acquire a less-
overvalued firm for stock (implicitly hiding what is being done). In both of these cases the
management of the overvalued firm is violating the firm’s implicit word to its financial claimants
that it will not intentionally take actions that harm them. This is an example of the situation
where an individual or an organization is out of integrity if that individual or organization does
not either 1) comply with the expectations of their financial claimants that are unexpressed
requests (expectations based on the firm’s implicit word to its financial claimants), or 2)
explicitly and clearly decline those expectations. (See the definition of Word-3 and Word-4
discussed above in Section 2 and more completely in the online Appendix 2: One’s Word
Defined) available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19986/
       When new shareholders discover that they were taken, workability will decrease and
value will be destroyed.
        Note, however, that the law does provide some obligation of the firm to future
bondholders and shareholders through disclosure rules and regulations. But consider the attitudes
of sellers of new issues and the investment bankers who counsel them. Few CEOs and few
investment bankers who advise them seem to take seriously any obligation of the firm to future
bondholders and shareholders when pricing a new issue.
        When a CEO takes a firm public by selling shares or bonds to the public, he or she is
creating a fiduciary relationship between himself and his company and the holders of those
securities. The word he or she gives implicitly and explicitly to those purchasers regarding the
value of those securities is an important part of that relationship. That word must be given with
the same standards as that of the fiduciary relationship the sale creates. If the CEO or investment
bankers speaking for the firm misrepresent, withhold information, or otherwise mislead those
purchasing the securities, the firm is out of integrity and the fiduciary relationship the transaction
creates is sullied. Therefore the ongoing workability of that relationship is damaged.

       5.     THE PUZZLING STATE OF LOW-INTEGRITY BEHAVIORAL
              STANDARDS IN CORPORATIONS AND CAPITAL MARKETS
       Here is a list (albeit incomplete) of common actions and activities that result in the word
of executives and firms being less than whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect
condition. In short, these common actions and activities leave those executives and those firms
“out-of-integrity”. Out-of-integrity behavior results in reduced workability and a reduced
opportunity for performance, and therefore destroys value. The remainder of this paper is
focused on surveying from the integrity perspective examples of these practices so that we begin


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
	                                                27	                                     19	  March	  2014	  


to focus on the value that can be created by putting the system back in integrity and correcting
the apparent non-value maximizing equilibrium that exists in financial markets.
a. Financial Reporting
        Managers regularly choose to treat the firm’s relations with the capital markets as a game
where financial reporting is not driven by creating long-term value but is little more than a
strategy for managing and meeting analyst expectations. Managing earnings, income smoothing,
and manipulating financial analysts does not leave the word of executives or the word of the firm
whole and complete. These practices invariably leave executives and firms out-of-integrity with
respect to Word-4 (“one’s word as to the existence of some thing or some state of the world
includes being accountable that the other would find valid for themselves the evidence that one
has for asserting something to be the case” – see pages 17, and 56.18
        Until recently it was generally considered part of every top manager’s job to “manage
earnings” – that is, to report earnings other than as they actually are (and while somewhat less so
now, this still tends to be true . When managers give their word to something other than what is
actually so (in this case, their word as to the accuracy of the firm’s reported financial statements),
this leaves them less than whole and complete, and diminishes the opportunity for performance.
That is, such fudging undermines the opportunity for maximizing firm value. For too long we in
finance have implicitly condoned or even collaborated in these activities. Specifically we are
referring to “managing earnings”, “income smoothing”, etc. These issues are not merely one of
deciding on a strategy – they directly involve integrity and the generally unappreciated, negative
long-run value effects of such out-of-integrity behavior.
        Making organizational operating decisions other than those that maximize long-term firm
value so as to manage reported earnings is a violation of Word-4. If the markets had the evidence
that we managers had when making such earnings management decisions the markets would
come to a different conclusion about the meaning of those managed earnings. That, incidentally,
is the reason the various manipulations of accounting and real operating decisions are not fully
disclosed to the markets. In everyday language violating Word-4 is “lying”. When we use terms
other than lying to describe a violation of Word-4 we inadvertently encourage the sacrifice of
integrity. We have observed perfectly honest upstanding people in their roles as board members
condone manipulation of financial reports because it does not occur to them as lying—it occurs
to them as just part of what it means to manage. Such language effectively disables even the
normal social sanctions that would limit such behavior in boardrooms and among managers as
they openly discuss how to “manage earnings”.

       As we said above, language affects the way in which what is being dealt with occurs to
people. And the way what is being dealt with occurs to people affects their behavior.19 When

18       See Fuller, Joseph and Jensen, Michael C., Just Say No to Wall Street: Putting a Stop to the
Earnings Game (April 5, 2010). Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 22, No. 1, Winter 2010;
Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 10-090. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1583563
19       See Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and Group, Barbados, A New Paradigm of Individual,
Group, and Organizational Performance (November 17, 2010). Harvard Business School NOM Unit
Working Paper No. 11-006; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 09-02. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437027


             © Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
	  
                                                        28                                           19 March 2014


executives and firms give their word to something other than what is actually so (that is, manage
earnings), it shifts the way in which the firm occurs to its executives. Their focus shifts away
from maximizing value to how to win the short-term gains from manipulating analysts and the
expectations of the market.
         b. Investment Banks Defrauding Clients
        On the part of banks and investment banks misleading clients with misleading investment
recommendations that clients have been led to believe are intended to serve the client is not
whole and complete with regard to their word. Goldman Sachs, for example, was accused of
intentionally misleading its clients in the Abacus mortgage backed securities which were
intentionally structured to fail (for which Goldman paid a $550 million settlement, at the time the
largest ever in the history of the SEC).20 21 Consistent with the dramatic decline in organizational
integrity at Goldman Sachs in recent years, Greg Smith resigned as executive director and head
of Goldman’s United States equity derivatives business in Europe, the Middle East and Africa on
March 14, 2012 with his New York Times Op Ed article entitled “Why I am Leaving Goldman
Sachs”.22 Quoting Smith:
     After almost 12 years [at Goldman Sachs] . . . I believe I have worked here long enough to
     understand the trajectory of its culture, its people and its identity. And I can honestly say that the
     environment now is as toxic and destructive as I have ever seen it. To put the problem in the
     simplest terms, the interests of the client continue to be sidelined in the way the firm operates and
     thinks about making money. . . . culture was always a vital part of Goldman Sachs’s success. It
     revolved around teamwork, integrity, a spirit of humility, and always doing right by our clients. The
     culture was the secret sauce that made this place great and allowed us to earn our clients’ trust for
     143 years. It wasn’t just about making money; this alone will not sustain a firm for so long. . . .

     . . . Today, if you make enough money for the firm (and are not currently an ax murderer) you will
     be promoted into a position of influence.

     What are three quick ways to become a leader [at Goldman]? a) Execute on the firm’s “axes,” which
     is Goldman-speak for persuading your clients to invest in the stocks or other products that we are
     trying to get rid of because they are not seen as having a lot of potential profit. b) “Hunt Elephants.”
     In English: get your clients — some of whom are sophisticated, and some of whom aren’t — to trade
     whatever will bring the biggest profit to Goldman. Call me old-fashioned, but I don’t like selling my
     clients a product that is wrong for them. …

     … I attend derivatives sales meetings where not one single minute is spent asking questions about
     how we can help clients. It’s purely about how we can make the most possible money off of them.

     …It makes me ill how callously people talk about ripping their clients off. Over the last 12 months I
     have seen five different managing directors refer to their own clients as “muppets,” sometimes over


20     See Dealbook (2010), and the Appendix to Jensen, Michael C. and Erhard, Werner, A 'Value-
Free' Approach to Values (PDF File of Powerpoint Slides) (April 11, 2011). Harvard Business School
NOM Unit Working Paper No. 11-010; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 10-06; Simon School Working
Paper No. FR10-26. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1640302
21       Securities and Exchange Commission, “Goldman Sachs to Pay Record $550 Million to Settle
SEC       Charges      Related       to    Subprime Mortgage    CDO”,     July   15,      2010.
http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2010/2010-123.htm
22       “Why I am Leaving Goldman Sachs”, New York Times, March 14,                                            2012,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/14/opinion/why-i-am-leaving-goldman-sachs.html?_r=1&hp


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                          29                                        19 March 2014


       internal e-mail. … No humility? I mean, come on. Integrity? It is eroding. I don’t know of any
       illegal behavior, but will people push the envelope and pitch lucrative and complicated products to
       clients even if they are not the simplest investments or the ones most directly aligned with the
       client’s goals? Absolutely. Every day, in fact.

       It astounds me how little senior management gets a basic truth: If clients don’t trust you they will
       eventually stop doing business with you. It doesn’t matter how smart you are.

       … People who care only about making money will not sustain this firm — or the trust of its clients
       — for very much longer.

        Based on the evidence summarized by Smith, the conversation within Goldman Sachs
about its relation to clients (or stated as a matter of integrity, “the firm’s word to itself about its
relation to clients”) is obviously inimical to the interests of its clients. What is clearly hidden
from Goldman Sachs’ management is that such behavior, because it is out-of-integrity, is also
inimical to Goldman’s own interests. You will see the out-of-integrity behavior in the conflict
between the firm’s word to itself about its relation to clients, and its word to its clients. And as
Smith says about the resulting damage to the firm from such behavior, “If clients don’t trust you
they will eventually stop doing business with you”.
 On its website, Goldman Sachs represents itself and gives its word to the world (including its
clients) in the statement of its “Business Principles and Standards: Goldman Sachs Business
Principles”.23 The first and last of Goldman’s 14 business principles state:
       Our clients’ interests always come first. Our experience shows that if we serve our clients well, our
       own success will follow.

       Integrity and honesty are at the heart of our business.

         This specific out-of-integrity behavior in the financial world is not limited to Goldman
Sachs.
         Given what Smith reveals about the conversation within Goldman Sachs about the firm’s
relation to clients (the firm’s word to itself), Goldman Sachs’ word to its clients is clearly not
whole, and is incomplete and broken – the very definition of out-of-integrity. The obvious cost to
Goldman Sachs and other firms of not seeing the impact of out-of-integrity behavior is the cost
of lawsuits, penalties, and settlements. But the impact on clients’ behavior, and the extent of the
impact on the reputation and morale of the firm is much less obvious, and sometimes dismissed
as just the cost of doing business.
        Smith is dumbfounded at the firm’s not seeing the self-inflicted damage from its out-of-
integrity behavior, “… how little senior management gets a basic truth: If clients don’t trust you
they will eventually stop doing business with you.” [emphasis added] The source of what
dumbfounds Smith (what hides the damage from out-of-integrity behavior) is discussed above in
Section 2.i on page 17. The Veil of Invisibility. In that Section we argue that mastering the eight
factors that constitute the Veil of Invisibility creates actionable access to eliminating the damage




23   See http://www.goldmansachs.com/who-we-are/business-standards/business-principles/index.html


                 Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
	                                                       30	                                         19	  March	  2014	  


done by out-of-integrity behavior, or at least unconceals the behaviors that are generating the
damage. 24
      Consistent with Smith’s judgments regarding Goldman Sachs’ out-of-integrity behavior,
Bodnaruk, et al (2007), in their study of "The Dark Role of Investment Banks in the Market for
Corporate Control" find the behavior goes far beyond just Goldman Sachs. As they conclude (p.
1):
       We argue that advisors are privy to information about the deal that they directly exploit in the market
       by investing in the target. We show that the banks’ advisors to the bidders tend to have positions in
       the target before the deal. The existence of a direct stake of the advisor to the bidder increases the
       probability of the bid and the target premium. Advisory banks profit from such a position. A trading
       strategy that conditions on the stake of the advisors delivers a net-of-risk performance of 4.08% per
       month. This cannot be replicated with available information. We also show that advisors not only
       take positions in the deals they advise on, but also directly affect the outcome of the deal and its
       probability of success. This has negative implications for the viability of the new entity.

           c. Money Managers Defrauding Clients
        Money managers have allowed certain favored investors to engage in market-timing
operations (for example, after-hours trading at stale prices) that allowed these favored investors
to sell or purchase shares at prices above or below the actual value of those shares. Such
practices allow those favored investors to transfer wealth from non-favored fund investors to
themselves. Well-known fund organizations that were accused of allowing such behavior (and
fired employees as a result of the investigations and/or paid penalties to settle the charges)
include Putnam Investments, Strong Capital Management, Morgan Stanley, Janus Capital Group,
Bear Stearns, Bank of America and Invesco.25 In some cases the managers of the funds (for
example, Strong Capital Management) engaged in such trading themselves in personal violation
of their fiduciary duties to fund investors.26




24       Interestingly, Smith’s book, Why I Left Goldman Sachs: A Wall Street Story, has been criticized
by figures in the financial press and members of the financial community. Smith’s book clearly indicates a
serious lack of integrity at Goldman, and it is consistent with the out-of-integrity actions that Goldman has
taken in such deals as the Abacus 2007-AC1 mortgage backed securities issue. We conjecture that many
in the Wall Street community considered the book’s accusations unimportant because they expected and
did not find documentation of actual illegal behavior in the book. There is considerable discussion of out-
of-integrity behavior and the damage it is likely to cause, although Smith does not use that specific
language. That itself says something about the culture of the Wall Street finance community.
25      See Burton (2003), Smith and Lauricella, “Moving the Market: Bear Stearns to Pay $250 Million
Fine; Net Rises 36%,” Wall Street Journal (2006) and Anand, “Harmed Investor? Just Wait – Brokerage
Firms Pay $255 Million, but Getting It Takes Time,” Wall Street Journal (2006).
26      See Lauricella and Oster, “Strong Funds And Regulators To Settle Case – Agreement Would
Clear the Way For Possible Sale to Wells Fargo; Considerable Challenges Ahead,” Wall Street Journal
(2004), Lauricella and Oster, “Second Strong Executive Snagged in Probe – Anthony D’Amato of CEO’s
Office Was Involved in a Deal to Allow Canary to Rapidly Trade Shares,” Wall Street Journal (2003), and
Lauricella, “Strong Steps Down From Board But Stays On as Head of Firm,” Wall Street Journal (2003).

                © Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved

	  
                                                      31                                      19 March 2014


       6.       CORPORATE GOVERNANCE: PUTTING INTEGRITY INTO THE
                ORGANIZATION AS A SYSTEM AND AS A HUMAN ENTITY

       a.       Put Integrity Into Boards of Directors

       Boards of directors are ultimately accountable for the performance of the organization as
a whole. This accountability for performance includes the performance of 1) the organization as
a system, and 2) the organization as a human entity.
                 We specify the organization as a system as follows: the design of the system, the
                  implementation of the design, and the use of the system.

                 We specify the organization as a human entity as follows: the word of the entity
                  itself (includes those individuals who are taken to speak for the organization), and
                  the word of the individuals who make up the entity.

                 When an organization is out of integrity, be it out of integrity as a system or out of
                  integrity as a human entity, (or both) the organization is in some way less than
                  whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition.

                 When an organization as a system or as a human entity is less than whole,
                  complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition, the workability of
                  the organization as a system or as a human entity (or both) is diminished.

                 When the workability of an organization as a system or as a human entity is
                  diminished, the organization’s opportunity for performance is diminished.
        Given that boards of directors are ultimately accountable for organizational performance,
and given that out-of-integrity behavior of the organization as a system or as a human entity
diminishes the organization’s opportunity for performance, this necessarily leaves boards of
directors accountable for the integrity of the organization – the organization both as a system and
as a human entity.
        An organization’s executive compensation plan is an example of the organization as a
system. The board of directors is ultimately accountable for the workability and performance of
that system. The board of directors is therefore necessarily accountable for the integrity of 1) the
design of the system (the organization’s executive compensation plan), 2) the implementation of
that design, and 3) the use of the implemented system. An example of an out-of-integrity design
of an organization’s executive compensation plan is the budget or target-based executive
compensation plan that most companies use.27
        In addition, what gets said and what is unsaid in an organization’s boardroom is an
example of the organization as a human entity. Integrity for a human entity is a matter of that
entity’s word, nothing more and nothing less. When what is said in the organization’s boardroom
is less than whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition, such out-of-

27     See Murphy, Kevin J. and Jensen, Michael C., CEO Bonus Plans: And How to Fix Them
(November 19, 2011). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper 12-022; Marshall School of
Business Working Paper No. FBE 02-11. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1935654


                 Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   32                                      19 March 2014


integrity behavior diminishes the workability of the board. When workability is diminished, the
opportunity for performance is diminished.
        An example of out-of-integrity behavior in boards of directors (or for that matter,
executive teams) is the existence of “undiscussables” in the board room – that is, what the firm
may be getting by with, but is so questionable that if it is put up on the table it probably has to
cease. Anything that is undiscussable leaves the board as a human entity less than whole,
complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition. As a result, workability and value
are sacrificed. No human entity in which there are issues that are undiscussable can be whole and
complete.
        If you doubt that there are undiscussables in the background of most board meetings and
indeed most executive committees just try raising the issue of one or more undiscussables. You
will quickly discover that it is undiscussable that there are undiscussables. These undiscussables
are always trouble waiting to happen and there is no way to head off the trouble as long as the
issues are undiscussable.

       b.    Indicators of the Lack of Integrity In the Governance and Management of
             Financial Firms and their Advisors

        These indicators of a lack of integrity includes those professional firms who serve both
the supply and demand side of financial services. Specifically this includes, law firms, banks,
investment banks, brokerage firms, accounting firms, and consulting firms (especially
compensation consultants) as well as other financial service firms including mutual funds, hedge
funds, and private equity funds.
        For managers and directors of financial firms and their advisors Forstmoser (2006), in his
speech “Integrity in Finance” given to the Swiss Banking Institute, offers some all-too-common
explicit indicators of the existence of out-of-integrity behavior in their organizations:
     “Everyone else is doing it.”
     “We’ve always done it.”
     “This is the way this business works.”
     “If we don’t do it, somebody else will.”
     “Nobody’s hurt by it.”
     “It doesn’t matter how it gets done, as long as it gets done.”
     “It works, so let’s not ask too many questions.”
     “No one’s going to notice and besides we will fix it before they do.”
     “It’s legal, but . . .”
     “It’s too expensive.”
     “It has to be done to save the organization, and by the way a lot of jobs.”
        Because the widespread lack of integrity in organizations reduces long-term value, it
raises the question: How can it persist if it destroys long-run value? We address this issue in the
next section.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   33                                      19 March 2014


       7.    THE GENERAL LACK OF INTEGRITY IN RELATIONS WITH CAPITAL
             MARKETS
        There are many reasons for the lack of integrity in the relations between firms and
capital markets, but a major contributor to this situation is that markets reward and punish
managers in ways very similar to those budget-based compensation systems that “pay people to
lie”. That is, systems that pay people to “under promise and over deliver”. Indeed, many readers
have undoubtedly heard managers and executives explicitly announce “under promise and over
deliver” as a management philosophy. It is certainly out of integrity.
        Stripping away the politeness, a management or behavioral philosophy of “under promise
and over deliver” actually means in many situations: “lie and lie”. I lie to you about what I can
deliver, and I lie to you about what is actually delivered – another example of violations of
Word-4. Put this way it is obvious what happens to integrity, trust and reliability in cultures
where such behavior becomes generally accepted. We now turn to an analysis of one of the
market forces that encourage managers to engage in gaming behavior such as under promise and
over deliver.
       Figure 1 below from Skinner and Sloan (2002, p. 209) illustrates vividly how markets
reward and punish managers for meeting or beating the analysts’ consensus quarterly earnings
forecast over the period 1984-1996. The graph plots quarterly abnormal returns for growth firms
and value firms as a function of earnings surprise at the end of the quarter. Forecast error is
measured as the earnings surprise relative to the quarter-end stock price. Growth firms are those
with high market value to book value ratios, and Value firms are those with low market value to
book value ratios. Data is from I/B/E/S database for the final month of the fiscal quarter for
which earnings is being forecast. Sample size is 103,274 firm-quarter observations in the period
1984-1996.
        A 1% positive earnings surprise results on average in a 10% abnormal stock return for
growth firms and approximately a -15% abnormal stock return for missing the quarterly earnings
forecast by 1%. For value firms (non-growth firms) the comparable abnormal returns are 6% and
-3% respectively. Managers of a firm facing these sorts of rewards and punishments from the
capital markets have incentives to take long-run value-destroying actions to satisfy the market’s
short-run expectations.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                     34                                      19 March 2014



     Figure 1: How Markets Reward and Punish Managers for
              Meeting or Beating Consensus Forecasts




Source: Skinner & Sloan (2002, p. 209)


        Interestingly, the relation between a firm’s top-management team and the capital markets
has resulted in an equilibrium that replicates many counterproductive aspects of corporate
internal budget or target-based bonus systems. Thus, the capital markets provide further short-
run incentives for manager’s to take out-of-integrity actions to meet market expectations.28
        For corporate executives holding large quantities of restricted stock and stock options,
Figure 1 portrays the pay-performance relation that defines how meeting, beating or missing
analyst forecasts affects the value of their equity-based holdings. Figure 1 has the same general
shape as a smoothed version of the typical non-linear managerial bonus pay-performance relation
depicted in Fig. 2 below and discussed in Murphy and Jensen (2011), and produces the same
counterproductive incentives. Therefore we discuss in some detail the incentives managers face
under the bonus plans represented in Fig. 2.29




28      See, for example, Murphy and Jensen (2011) “CEO Bonus Plans and How to Fix Them,” and
Jensen (2001), “Corporate Budgeting Is Broken: Let’s Fix It”, and Jensen, Michael C., Paying People to
Lie: The Truth About the Budgeting Process (Revised September, 2001).
29      For an excellent article on the history and structure of CEO pay see: Murphy (forthcoming 2013)
“Executive Compensation: Where We Are, and How We Got There”.


                Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                        35                                     19 March 2014



     Figure 2: How Typical Management Bonus Plans Reward
       and Punish Managers for Meeting or Beating Internal
                     Performance Targets30

                Cash
                                                     The "Incentive Zone"
         Remuneration

        Base Salary +
          Bonus Cap


        Base Salary +
        Target Bonus                                                        Pay-Performance
                                                                                Relation

        Base Salary +
     Threshold Bonus


         Base Salary




                        0
                        5
                        0                                                             Performance
                                           Threshold            Target                    Measure
                                          Performance        Performance



        Figure 2 illustrates the common management compensation practice in which a
manager’s salary plus bonus is constant until a minimum “threshold performance” is reached –
commonly 80% of the “target” or budgeted performance level. At 80% of the target performance
the manager receives a bonus for making the threshold performance target. This bonus is often
substantial, and as performance increases above this hurdle the bonus increases until it is capped
at some maximum (120% of the target performance is common). Performance above this upper
limit generates no additional bonus.
        Consider managers’ incentives when they are struggling to reach the minimum hurdle. In
this situation as long as they believe they can make the threshold performance, managers will
engage in actions to increase their performance, and this can be done by legitimate or illegitimate
means. When the measure is profits, or some variation of profits, managers have incentives to

30     Source: Jensen (2001) “Paying People to Lie: The Truth About the Budgeting Process”, and
Murphy and Jensen (2011), “CEO Bonus Plans and How to Fix Them”.




                  Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   36                                      19 March 2014


increase this year’s profits at the expense of future year’s profits by moving expenses from this
year to the future (by delaying purchases, for example) or by moving revenues from future years
into this year by booking orders early, by announcing future price increases, by giving special
discounts this year, or by guaranteeing to repurchase goods in the future, and so on). When these
actions simply move profits from one year to another the adverse impact on firm value is
probably small. But, it can pay managers today to engage in actions that reduce the total value of
firm cash flows by moving profits to the current period even when future profits are dramatically
reduced.
        When managers conclude that they cannot make the minimum threshold hurdle, their
incentives shift dramatically because if the manager is going to miss the bonus this year, there is
no further reduction in compensation from performance that is even farther away from the lower
threshold amount (subject always to the condition that the manager is not fired). In this situation
managers have incentives to do the opposite of what we just described, that is they now have
incentives to move profits (if that is the performance measure) from the present to the future.
They can do this by moving expenses from the future to the present period (by prepaying
expenses, taking write-offs for restructuring, etc.), and by moving revenues from the present to
the future.31 This is the “big bath theory”, and the phenomenon is regularly observed when firms
faced with missing analyst expectations take a “big bath” to improve their ability to meet analyst
expectations in the future.
       Finally, manager’s who are within reach of the bonus cap have incentives to not exceed
the cap because they get no rewards beyond that point (and these perverse incentives are even
stronger if this year’s performance is used in setting next year’s targets). In this situation
managers have incentives to move expenses from the future to the present and revenues from the
present to the future to avoid exceeding the bonus cap this year and to increase bonuses in future
years. And again, managers have incentives to do this even if it imposes real costs on the
company.
         Suffice it to say that all of the behavior described above is a violation of Word-4 and is
therefore out of integrity and leads to unworkability and value destruction. And note that all this
destructive behavior by the human beings in the organization is motivated by the fact that this
common bonus plan is out-of-integrity in its design as a system. Eliminating this
counterproductive behavior must start by eliminating the lack of integrity in the design of the
compensation system. Asking the human beings operating in this badly designed system to
change their behavior will fail unless and until the compensation system itself is redesigned to
put it into integrity.
       Popular recommendations to solve these incentive problems in the banking and financial
industry as a whole tend to focus on eliminating bonuses, often motivated by the perception that
the way the bonus plan works leaves top people paid “too much” rather than that the bonus plan
rewards people in the wrong way and for the wrong things. This approach addresses nothing
about the design of these plans and ignores the potentially huge damaging effects associated with
a mass exodus of highly qualified people from the banking and financial industry.



31     Healy (1985) provides an excellent study of the effects of bonus schemes on managers’ choice of
accounting policies.


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   37                                      19 March 2014


       8.    FURTHER EVIDENCE ON MANAGEMENT MANIPULATION OF
             EARNINGS

       a.    Evidence from a survey of 401 CFO’s reveals a fundamental lack of integrity

         Graham, Harvey & Rajgopal’s survey32 of 401 CFOs find that 78% of surveyed
executives are willing to knowingly sacrifice value to smooth earnings. While it seems that
recent scandals have made CFOs less willing to use accounting manipulations to manage
earnings, this survey indicates that to meet short-run earnings targets CFOs are willing to change
the real operating decisions of the firm and thereby destroy long run value. When smoothing
earnings, it is true that a CFO would maintain his/her integrity (their word, and their firm’s word,
being whole, complete, etc.) by making something like the following public announcement each
time they make such value-destroying decisions, “Given how I am paid, I am rejecting or
delaying a firm-value-increasing project in order to meet analysts’ consensus earnings forecast so
as to increase my own pay.” We would guess that relatively few CEOs and CFOs would actually
make such announcements to their board of directors, the analysts, and the public.

       b.    Aggregate evidence on the manipulation of corporate earnings.

        Figure 3 displays the aggregate evidence from the DeGorge, Patel and Zeckhauser (1999,
p. 20) study of the errors (measured in cents per share of corporate earnings) between actual
earnings and analyst consensus earnings forecast for over 100,000 quarterly observations on over
5,000 firms in the 1974-1996 period. The distribution is not symmetrically distributed around
zero. In fact, there are far too many observations at exactly 0 as indicated by the center tall bar.
        Indeed, the black areas below the X-axis denote the deficiency in frequency of
observations in the intervals of the distribution that would be expected if the true underlying
distribution were symmetrical around zero. There are far too few observations in the intervals
between -4 cents per share and -1 cent per share (where firms have missed analysts’ consensus
earnings forecast by a small amount) and far too few observations in the intervals greater than +4
cents per share (where firms significantly exceeded the analyst forecasts).
        These results are consistent with the hypothesis that management is manipulating
earnings to show far too many instances of quarterly earnings reports that exactly meet or just
beat analyst expected earnings and far too few instances of quarterly earnings reports in the
interval of -1 and -4 cents per share below analysts expected earnings. This is accomplished by
reporting lower than actual earnings when earnings would be substantially above analyst
expectations and “storing” the hidden earnings so that the firm could report just meeting or
beating analyst expectations when the firm’s earnings actually would have come in below those
expectations.




32     Graham, John R., Harvey, Campbell R. and Rajgopal, Shivaram, The Economic Implications of
Corporate Financial Reporting (January 11, 2005). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=491627


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                    38                                      19 March 2014



      Figure 3: Aggregate Evidence on the Manipulation of
                           Earnings




Source: DeGorge, Patel and Zeckhauser (1999)

        Figure 3 displays the frequency distribution of the the aggregate evidence from the
DeGorge, Patel and Zeckhauser (1999, p. 20) study of the errors between actual earnings and
analyst consensus earnings forecast (measured in cents per share of corporate earnings) for over
100,000 quarterly observations on over 5,000 firms in the 1974-1996 period. The distribution is
not symmetrically distributed around zero. In fact, there are far too many observations at exactly
0 as indicated by the center tall bar. The black areas below the X axis denote the deficiency in
frequency of observations in the intervals of the distribution that would be expected if the true
underlying distribution were symmetrical around zero. There are far too few observations in the
intervals between -4 cents per share and -1 cent per share (where firms have missed analysts’
consensus earnings forecast by a small amount) and far too few observations in the intervals
greater than +4 cents per share (where firms significantly exceeded the analyst forecasts).

        c.     And the manipulation of earnings extends to the reporting of hedge fund
               returns

        It appears that hedge funds regularly report smooth month-to-month returns. This
apparently results from the fact that being able to say: “We have only had X months of negative
returns” (X being a very small number) has a big impact on attracting investors to the fund. This
means that reporting a return of +.01% rather than -.01% in any month leads to a large advantage
in recruiting and retaining investors. And consistent with this, the evidence indicates that the


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                       39                                          19 March 2014


distribution of returns for “hard to value” hedge funds shows way too many monthly returns just
above zero and way too few just below zero.33 This is consistent with the hypothesis that hedge
funds systematically underprice the value of the fund during the year so that they can smooth out
the returns from month to month and avoid reporting negative returns in any month.
        Consistent with this hypothesis that hedge funds manipulate the month-to-month value of
their funds to serve their own interest, the contractual features of hedge funds provide them
strong incentives to inflate returns in December of each year. And the evidence indicates they do
so. Hedge funds earn incentive fees if they beat their contractual benchmarks and better
performance increases investor contributions to the fund. Agarwal, Daniel and Naik (2010).
provide strong evidence documenting this phenomenon. They find that the average December
return is more than twice as high as the average returns for the entire 11 months January through
November (Table II). In the authors’ words (p. 37):
     “In this paper, we provide strong evidence of hedge funds inflating their returns in an opportunistic
     fashion to increase their compensation. Specifically, we find funds that stand to gain the most from
     good performance, the funds that stand to lose the most from poor performance, and the funds that
     have greater opportunities to engage in return inflation exhibit the greatest spike in December
     returns. … We also provide evidence on two potential mechanisms employed by hedge funds to
     manage returns. [The] first method involves funds underreporting their returns in the early part of
     the year in order to create reserves for possible poor performance later in the year (saving for the
     rainy day). In case some of these reserves are left unutilized, they get added to the December returns
     resulting in the spike. [The] second mechanism involves funds borrowing from their January returns
     of the subsequent year to improve their December returns. This can be achieved by funds pushing up
     the security prices at December-end by last-minute buying, which is followed by price reversals in
     January.”


       d.     And This Violation of Word-4 (the other would find the evidence for my
              assertion also valid for themselves) Extends to the Reporting of Analyst
              Recommendations

        Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2007) in their paper "Rewriting History" study the
major historical database of financial analyst stock recommendations and find substantial
evidence that the historical record, as reported in the widely used I/B/E/S database produced by
Thomson Financial, does not represent the recommendations that were actually made by many of
the analysts. They conclude:34
     Comparing two snapshots of the entire historical I/B/E/S database of research analyst stock
     recommendations, taken in 2002 and 2004 but each covering the same time period 1993-2002, we
     identify tens of thousands of changes which collectively call into question the principle of
     replicability of empirical research. The changes are of four types: 1) The non-random removal of
     19,904 analyst names from historic recommendations (“anonymizations”); 2) the addition of 19,204
     new records that were not previously part of the database; 3) the removal of 4,923 records that had


33      See Pool, Bollen, Nicolas P.B., "Do Hedge Fund Managers Misreport Returns? Evidence from
the Pooled Distribution" (2007) and Abdulali, “The Bias Ratio™: Measuring the Shape of Fraud” (2006).

34      Note: We apologize to the reader for the long quotation summarizing Ljungqvist, Malloy, and
Marston’s results rather than simply summarizing them. Thomson has been quite litigious regarding the
issues researched and discussed by Ljungqvist, et al.


               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   40                                           19 March 2014


been in the data; and 4) alterations to 10,698 historical recommendation levels. In total, we
document 54,729 ex post changes to a database originally containing 280,463 observations. (p. 1).
As of February 2007, Thomson Financial’s position is that “changes to Recommendation History
have occurred as part of necessary processes and maintenance.” Previously, Thomson had indicated
that the anonymizations were the result of three software glitches. The first produced incorrect start
and end dates for some analysts’ employment histories. The second caused selective ticker histories
for certain analysts to be anonymized, in connection with attempts to consolidate duplicate analyst
identifiers. The third, which can still occur, results in recommendations being attributed to an analyst
who has departed; subsequent corrections involve anonymizing such recommendations. (fnt. 1 p. 2)

  Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2007) continue:
 “At the recommendation level, the collective effect of the changes is to make the overall distribution
of historic recommendations issued for U.S. companies between October 1993 and July 2002 appear
more conservative in 2004 than it did in 2002, with considerably fewer strong buys and buys, and
more holds, sells, and strong sells.” (p. 2)

“Broker-level [data], which can be used to predict the profitability of stock recommendations
(Barber et al. (2006)) change even more dramatically. One reason why these findings are important
is that the apparently optimistic bias in the historical distribution of recommendations was a
frequently cited impetus to the regulatory proceedings that culminated in the Global Research
Analyst Settlement of 2003 between New York attorney general Eliot Spitzer, the SEC, NASD,
NYSE, North American Securities Administrators Association, state regulators, and twelve
brokerage firms.” (p. 3) . . .

 “Similarly, the changes impact the implementation of popular trading strategies based on analyst
consensus recommendations. . . A simple trading strategy that buys stocks in the top consensus
change quintile and shorts stocks in the lowest quintile each month performs 15.9% to 42.4% better
on the 2004 tape than on the 2002 tape, suggesting that the changes to the I/B/E/S database have
resulted in the appearance of more profitable analyst research.”

 “Track records of individual analysts are also affected. . . Among the group of analysts with
anonymized recommendations, we find that abnormal returns following subsequently anonymized
upgrades-to-buy are significantly lower than are abnormal returns following upgrades by the same
analysts that remained untouched. The return differential is large, ranging from 3.6% to 4.0% p.a.
over the 1993-2002 period. It is even larger in the most recent, post-bubble period (as high as 7.4%
p.a.), and for the sub-sample of bolder recommendations (5.2% and 9.1% p.a. in the full-sample and
post-bubble periods, respectively).”

“Analysts whose track records are affected are associated with more favorable career outcomes over
the 2003-2005 period than their track records and abilities would otherwise warrant. Following the
career path modeling in Hong, Kubik, and Solomon (2000) closely, we find that analysts associated
with anonymizations experience a more than 60% increase in the likelihood of subsequently moving
from a low-status to a high-status brokerage firm. This effect is much larger than any other in our
career outcome models. The magnitude of the effect of additions on career outcomes is also large,
boosting the likelihood by more than 40%. Similarly, analysts are more likely to be rated the top
stock picker in their sectors by the Wall Street Journal, which relies on Thomson Financial data, if
some of their recommendations have been dropped or added.”

“Collectively, our findings raise serious doubts about the replicability of past, current, and future
studies using the I/B/E/S historical recommendations database.” (pp. 3-5)




          Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   41                                      19 March 2014


       9.    COLLUSION BETWEEN ANALYSTS AND FIRMS?
        Hutton’s (2004) study of firms’ audits of analysts’ spreadsheet earnings models result in
the following:
        Of 421 firms responding to the NIRI 2001 survey, 85.5% reviewed analysts models (she
labeled these “guidance firms”). These analysts showed more accurate forecasts in the sense of
lower mean squared errors. But, these analysts’ forecasts were systematically downward biased
therefore yielding systematic positive earnings surprises.
       Analysts of the no-guidance firms walk down their estimated earnings in response to
negative earnings surprises (47% with 3 to 4 quarters of negative earnings news) during the year.
        However, analysts of the guidance firms walk down their earnings estimates even though
49% of the firms have 3 to 4 quarters of positive earnings news. This walkdown gives
management a year end boost and indicates a positive beginning-of-year bias. The walk-down
practice is consistent with the hypothesis that these analysts ended up issuing forecasts that
resulted in systematically positive earnings surprises so as to incur favor with the management
team. If this hypothesis is correct, then in return for such positive earnings surprises, analysts
receive favors from management that enable them to make more “accurate” (although more
biased) forecasts.
        Matsumoto (2002) (see Fig. 4 below) and Bartov, Givoly and Hayn (2002) document that
the managing earnings game seems to have arisen in the mid-1990s. They find that over the
period from 1983-93 to the period 1994-97, the proportion of:
      Negative end-of-quarter earnings surprises fall from 48% to 31%

      Positive end-of-quarter earnings surprises increase from 40% to 50%

      Zero earnings surprises increase from 12% to 19%

      The upward bias in the 1-quarter ahead forecast increased

      A 3% premium return arose for meeting or beating analyst forecasts at the end of quarter

      A small penalty for negative revisions of forecast during quarter arose




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
	                                                                                              42	                                     19	  March	  2014	  



                                                  Fig. 4: The Managing Earnings Game Seems To Have
                                                                Arisen in the Mid 1990’s


                                                  Percentage of Firms Meeting or Beating Analyst Forecasts
                                                  .75
       Proportion Meeting Earnings Expectations




                                                   .7

                                                  .65

                                                   .6

                                                  .55
                                                   .5

                                                  .45
                                                   .4

                                                  .35

                                                   .3

                                                  .25
                                                    85




                                                                   87




                                                                                 89




                                                                                              91




                                                                                                            93




                                                                                                                          95




                                                                                                                                       97
                                                  19




                                                                 19




                                                                               19




                                                                                            19




                                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                        19




                                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                               Year
                                                        Source: Matsumoto (2002)




                                                   10. THE PECULIAR EQUILIBRIUM BETWEEN ANALYSTS AND FIRMS
        Analysts long-run (12-month ahead) forecasts are systematically biased high. These
forecasts are then walked down so that at the realization date they are systematically low. See
Figure 5. In this situation investors appear to get taken (fooled) in both cases (as indicated by the
positively biased forecasts at the beginning of the period and the walk down to the negatively
biased forecasts at the end of the period). On the face of it this seems highly inconsistent.
        One potential hypothesis to explain this inconsistency is that analysts appear to be
colluding with managers to allow them to have the benefits of excessively high long-term
forecasts while allowing the managers to meet or beat the short-run forecasts at the end of
quarter. But it seems impossible for effective collusion to take place amongst so many players.




                                                           © Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
	  
                                                                                    43                                      19 March 2014



              Fig. 5: Analysts issue optimistic earnings forecasts and then
              “walk down” these estimates to a level firms can beat at the
                            official earnings announcement

                                     0.008
(Forecast - Actual Earnings)/Price




                                     0.007

                                     0.006

                                     0.005

                                     0.004

                                     0.003

                                     0.002

                                     0.001

                                     0.000

                                     -0.001   -11    -10     -9     -8     -7     -6     -5     -4      -3     -2     -1        0
                                                     Months relative to actual earnings announcement

         Figure 5 is based on aggregate 1984-2001 data from Richardson, Teoh, and Wysocki
 (2004) (provided by the authors), and shows the median difference of the forecast earnings per
 share and actual earnings per share, scaled by the prior-year share price. The sample consists of
 all individual analyst forecasts for firms with data on both I/B/E/S and Compustat, and shows
 that the median consensus analysis forecast is initially positively biased, but that analysts walk
 down these forecasts each month. By the month of the actual earnings announcement, the median
 consensus forecast is negatively (and statistically significantly) biased; that is, the median
 company reports earnings slightly exceeding the year-end analyst forecast.

                                        a.    The Walk Down Results from Management Pressure and Analyst Self
                                              Selection

         One explanation of this peculiar phenomenon is as follows: Suppose management
 imposes costs on analysts who are pessimistic (or not sufficiently optimistic) about the future
 results of the firm. Suppose such analysts opt out of reporting their bad news on companies
 (without announcing why they opt out), or perhaps they drop their coverage of the firm
 completly. McNichols and O’Brien (1997) provide an intuitively appealing explanation of this
 hypothesis and present evidence that the observed phenomenon is not due to analysts making



                                               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                        44                                           19 March 2014


systematically biased estimates but rather due to analysts that self-select out of reporting bad
news on companies.
        If there is a range of analyst opinions about a company in any given month, and the
analysts with the most negative opinions or information systematically choose not to offer a
report, the resulting consensus opinion (consisting only of analysts who actually report) will be
upward biased, even if each reporting analyst is unbiased in his or her opinion.
        Analysts with the negative opinions may well opt out of, or delay issuing a
recommendation until late in the period (and may drop their coverage of a stock entirely) to
avoid the negative repercussions from management and others who are long the stock of the
company. It is well known, for example, that analysts seldom issue sell recommendations and
frequently delay issuance of reports downgrading a firm. The fact that analysts seldom issue sell
recommendations and often delay downgrades of a firm is consistent with this hypothesis. The
resulting consensus forecast is then biased upward.35 Consistent with this hypothesis, Skinner &
Sloan (2002) conclude: “Analysts’ long run EPS forecasts are systematically overoptimistic for
growth firms, and . . . [this] is systematically related to the inferior stock price performance of
growth firms”). See also Dechow, Hutton and Sloan (1999, Abstract) who conclude:
     “. . . sell-side analysts’ long-term growth forecasts are systematically overly optimistic around equity
     offerings and that analysts employed by the lead managers of the offerings make the most optimistic
     growth forecasts. Additionally, we find a positive relation between the fees paid to the affiliated
     analysts’ employers and the level of the affiliated analysts’ growth forecasts. We also document that
     the post-offering under performance is most pronounced for firms with the highest growth forecasts
     made by affiliated analysts.”

        These facts are also consistent with a system that is out of integrity and thereby destroys
value. In this case the managers that punish analysts who publish accurate but negative (or less
positive) forecasts or recommendations are out of integrity because the actions of such managers
are not consistent with the expectation (unexpressed request) of holders of the firm’s securities
that management provide the market with accurate and unbiased financial reports on the firm’s
performance.

       11. MORE EVIDENCE THAT BOTH MANAGERS AND ANALYSTS
              MANIPULATE EARNINGS
            Marquardt and Wiedman (2002) find that managers use accruals to manage earnings
             either up or down in situations to fit their own interests. At times of equity issues
             firms use accruals to increase earnings and therefore stock price. In management
             buyout situations firms use accruals to decrease earnings and therefore stock price.

            The frequency of small quarterly profits is unusually large and the frequency of
             small losses is unusually small. And so too for small increases and decreases in
             profits. Burgstahler and Dichev (1997)




35     See McNichols & Obrien (1997)




               Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   45                                      19 March 2014


            Managers change real operating decisions such as reducing research and
             development or advertising expenditures to meet benchmarks. See Dechow and
             Sloan (1991), Bushee, (1998), Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005),
             Rowchowdhury (2004)

            Managers manipulate earnings upward around new equity offerings. Teoh, Welch &
             Wong (1998), and Rangan (1998), Darrough & Rangan (2005)

            Systematically overly optimistic analyst long-term growth forecasts around equity
             offerings are associated with the largest post IPO under performance. Rajan &
             Servaes (1997)

            Myers, Myers and Skinner (2005) find huge numbers of firms with consecutive
             strings of quarterly EPS non-decreases relative to the expected number. They “find
             evidence consistent with the hypothesis that managers of sample firms take actions
             to (i) increase reported EPS when EPS would otherwise decline, and (ii) decrease
             reported EPS when EPS would otherwise increase by more than necessary to record
             an increase”. Their evidence indicates this is done by strategically reporting special
             items, strategically timing stock repurchases, and exercising discretion over
             accounting for taxes to smooth changes in EPS. They conclude: “. . .of all
             Compustat firms with at least 40 quarters of available data, 811 firms report
             earnings strings of at least 20 quarters; the corresponding expected [number of
             firms] varies between 28 and 71, again depending on the [assumed time series]
             model [generating quarterly earnings]. (p. 16)

       12. IN CONCLUSION
        We argue that the financial economics paradigm is incomplete. The evidence for any
paradigm being incomplete is the presence of a significant continuing breakdown in the
discipline, along with the discipline’s continuing ineffectiveness in dealing with that breakdown
(what Kuhn (2012) termed “crises and anomalies” in a discipline). In the world of finance, the
combination of 1) the extent of out-of-integrity behavior and its consequent impact on value,
coupled with 2) the financial economics discipline having provided little or nothing that has been
effective in stemming this out-of-integrity behavior, is evidence for our argument that the
financial economics paradigm is incomplete.
        The out-of-integrity behavior we termed the “scandals” in Section 2 and the various
examples of out-of-integrity behavior discussed in Sections 3 through 10 (mostly unrecognized
as out-of-integrity behavior) are important examples of what contributes to the general
atmosphere of low integrity in the world of finance (albeit not identified as such and certainly not
spoken of). Out-of-integrity behavior has become virtually institutionalized. The environment of
low integrity is so pervasive it seems to be nothing more than business as usual, or just a part of
the nature of finance. Forstmoser’s (2006) first three indicators of the lack of integrity (listed in
Section 5.b) “Everyone else is doing it.”, “We’ve always done it.”, and “This is the way this
business works.” illustrate this environment.
When we speak of “integrity”, in the case of a system (or object) we mean nothing more than but
nothing less than that the design, the implementation of the design, and the use of the system (or


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   46                                      19 March 2014


object) are whole, complete, unbroken, sound, in perfect condition. When we speak of integrity
for a person or other human entity, we mean nothing more than but nothing less than that the
word (as defined earlier) of the person or other human entity is whole, complete, unbroken,
sound, in perfect condition. We have shown that integrity dealt with in this way is an important
factor of production.
        However, integrity as it is currently understood has been undistinguished as a factor of
production, with the result that its effect on workability, and therefore productivity and value (by
its presence or absence) has been wrongfully assigned to other causes. Integrity, as we define it,
matters. Not because it is virtuous, but because it creates workability. And workability increases
the opportunity for performance, and maximum workability is necessary for realizing maximum
value. Note that describing the effects of integrity is not normative. In addition, we make no
admonition to act with integrity; it doesn’t work to tell people what to do. We don’t tell people
what to do, rather we give a picture of reality (in this case of the reality of integrity revealed as a
positive phenomenon) that naturally alters their correlated behavior.
         As the Law of Integrity states: As the integrity (the state of being whole and complete,
etc.) of an object, system, person, or other human entity or practice declines, workability
declines, and as workability declines the opportunity for performance declines. Note however
that when the behavior is not recognized as out of integrity, the decline in the opportunity for
performance will be explained in some other way.
        The model of integrity introduced in this paper makes clear just how widespread out-of-
integrity behavior actually is, and the enormity of the cost of out-of-integrity behavior. The
model also makes clear that given the way integrity is currently understood, our out-of-integrity
behavior does not occur for us as such, and as a result we ascribe the cause of the damage of out-
of-integrity behavior to something other than our out-of-integrity behavior. But the recognition
of the foregoing is only a beginning for persons, groups, and organizations to have access to
acting with integrity.
        From within our new model of integrity when it is fully understood, integrity occurs for
people (is understood by people, shows up for people) such that 1) out-of-integrity behavior
actually shows up for people as out-of-integrity behavior, but most importantly, 2) the damaging
consequences of that behavior, whether immediate or long term, show up in present time right
along with the behavior, and 3) the damaging consequences show up as being caused by the
behavior. This profoundly alters the way out-of-integrity behavior occurs or shows up for people.
As we have said, people with normal brains act in what appears to them to be in their self
interest, but in their self interest given the way in which what they are dealing with occurs or
shows up for them.
       Our purpose here has been to show that including integrity as a purely positive
phenomenon, and as such an important factor of production in the paradigm of financial
economics, would allow financial economics’ scholars to develop the tools to effectively deal
with the “crises and anomalies” of the value destroying out-of-integrity behavior in the world of
finance, and ultimately to transform the culture of finance to be one of integrity.
        What makes this addition to the current financial economics paradigm challenging for
most professionals is that the “proof” of a paradigm is the “testing” of it in practice, rather than
in the a priori theoretical proof of it. While the proposition that “as integrity (whole and


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   47                                      19 March 2014


complete) decreases, workability decreases” is unmistakably valid, the proposition that “any
diminution in the integrity (wholeness and completeness) of an individual’s or other human
entity’s word results in a diminution of workability for that individual or entity” is a heuristic. It
just works. When that it actually works in practice becomes a clear-cut personal discovery, that
naturally alters future behavior.

       13. APPENDIX 1: A CONTINUING SERIES OF SCANDALS IN FINANCE
        There has been a continuing stream of scandals in the financial sector in the last 10 years
(all involving out-of-integrity behavior) that has imposed huge costs on the entities that have
been the source of the out-of-integrity behavior as well as other organizations and individuals
who were merely customers, associates, or bystanders in these events. These continuing scandals
have played a non-trivial role in the world-wide decline in business conditions, steep financial
losses in the private sector, massive government bailouts of financial institutions and continuing
high unemployment in many areas of the world. What follows is an iincomplete listing and brief
description of some of the major recent scandals.

       a.     The Goldman Sachs Abacus 2007-AC1 Mortgage Backed Securities

        In 2007 Goldman Sachs created its Abacus 2007-AC1 $2 billion Synthetic CDS (credit
default swap) issue of mortgage backed securities product in which the actual mortgage
securities incorporated in Abacus were selected by Paulson and Company who intended to short
the securities. The pitch book indicated the securities in the vehicle were selected by ACA
Capital which had contracted to manage the vehicle. Paulson and Company paid millions of
dollars to Goldman to create the vehicle so Paulson could sell it short.
        The majoriity of the mortgages in the deal defaulted within six months of its issue,
leading to billions of dollars in losses to clients that Goldman sold the deal to. On July 15, 2010
Goldman paid a then record $550 million to settle SEC charges related to the Abacus subprime
mortgage CDS and acknowledged that Goldman should have revealed Paulson’s role in selecting
the securities in the deal. See Securities and Exchange Commission (2011) for details on the
settlement. Importantly, Goldman’s actions in this case violated 7 of Goldman’s 13 business
principles as they are published on Goldman’s web site.36 Note these principles are formally
Goldman’s word to its clients, employees and others.

       b.     JP Morgan Chase & Co. Sued on Mortgage Backed Securities

        The New York attorney general filed suit in NY state court alleging widespread fraud in
the packaging and sale of mortgage backed securities that failed generating $22.5 billions of
losses to the investors in those securities issued by Bear Stearns & Company in 2006 and 2007
before Bear nearly collapsed and was taken over by JP Morgan.



36      See the Appendix to the following talk (Erhard and Jensen 2011, “A Value-Free’ Approach to
Values” at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1640302 ) for a discussion of the Goldman Sachs Abacus 2007-AC1
CDS mortgage backed securities fiasco.


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   48                                      19 March 2014



     “The lawsuit quotes from emails and messages purportedly sent within Bear Stearns
     that it says showed the bank was aware it was selling poor quality investments. In
     one, a Bear Stearns employee described one securitization in an internal email as a
     "sack of s***," according to the lawsuit.”37
       The suit argues that Bear Stearns knew these mortgage backed securities would fail and
indeed, the losses on the mortgage-backed securities were “astounding”, totaling more than 25%
of the original principal balance. The suit asks that the company be made to pay damages
“caused, directly or indirectly, by the fraudulent and deceptive acts.”
        This conflict is remarkably similar to the difficulties created by Goldman Sachs in the
structuring and sale of the Abacus mortgage backed securities discussed directly above. in
Section 4.b in the text.

       c.    The Bernard Madoff Ponzi Scheme

        On Dec. 10, 2008 Bernard Madoff admitted to his sons that the asset management arm of
his firm was a Ponzi Scheme. “On March 12, 2009, Madoff plead guilty to 11 federal crimes,
including securities fraud, wire fraud, mail fraud, money laundering, perjury, and falsifying files
with the SEC. Refusing to name accomplices, he claimed sole responsibility for the Ponzi
scheme and defrauding his clients of $65 billion. … Former SEC Chairman Harvey Pitt
estimated the actual net fraud to be between $10 and $17 billion. (Note this calculation does not
include the fictional returns Madoff credited to his customer accounts.) Prosecutors identified
$13.2 billion in losses in accounts opened since 1996.”38 He was sentenced to 150 years in
prison. Interestingly, Madoff was Chairman of the Board of Directors and on the Board of
Governors of the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD).

       d.    HSBC Violation of Money Laundering Laws

        In December, 2012 HSBC, the global UK bank agreed to pay a record $1.9 billion in U.S.
penalties for violations of money laundering laws in its dealings with various questionable and
criminal enterprises.
       “The Department of Justice and U.S. Treasury said Tuesday that HSBC allowed the most
       notorious international drug cartels to launder billions of dollars across borders. In
       addition, the government said HSBC violated U.S. sanctions for years by illegally
       conducting transactions on behalf of customers in Iran, Libya, Cuba, Sudan and Burma.

       At a news conference in Brooklyn, N.Y., Assistant Attorney General Lanny Breuer said
       the settlement concluded a five-year investigation in which the department reviewed 9
       million documents.

       "HSBC is being held accountable for stunning failures of oversight," said Breuer in a
       department statement. "The record of dysfunction that prevailed at HSBC for many years

37     Eaglesham and Fitzpatrick (2012)
38     Source: Jewish Virtual Library: Bernard Madoff. Accessed Feb 26, 2013.


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                           49                                      19 March 2014


was astonishing."

HSBC CEO Stuart Gulliver accepted responsibility for the banks' mistakes. "We have
said we are profoundly sorry for them, and we do so again," Gulliver said in a statement.

The deal includes a deferred prosecution agreement with the Department of Justice. No
charges will be brought against the bank provided certain conditions are met. Breuer
didn't rule out individual prosecutions.

As part of the settlement, HSBC is required to take actions to strengthen its compliance
policies and procedures. HSBC has also replaced its senior management, and "clawed
back" deferred compensation bonuses given to its most senior officers in the money
laundering compliance division. . . .

In Mexico, HSBC became the preferred bank for drug cartels and money launderers,
according to the Justice Department. The government said the bank didn't raise red flags
even when billions of dollars in transactions took place in cash, the typical mode of
operation for drug dealers.

Between 2006 and 2009, according to DOJ, HSBC failed to monitor $670 billion in wire
transfers and $9.4 billion in cash transactions from its Mexico bank operations.

Because of these failures, at least $881 million in drug trafficking money -- including
those of the Sinaloa Cartel of Mexico and the Norte del Valle Cartel of Colombia -- were
laundered through HSBC, according to Justice.

The DOJ said HSBC also helped process $660 million in prohibited transactions from
Iran, Cuba, Sudan, Libya and Burma by deliberately hiding the identities of these
countries.

Record fines: 'New normal' for banks?

The London-based bank joins a long list of financial institutions that have faced scrutiny
from U.S. regulators over allegedly illicit money transfers, but the size of its combined
settlement with eight different U.S. authorities is unprecedented.

U.K. bank Standard Chartered agreed Monday to pay $327 million to settle charges
that it violated international sanctions on transactions with Iran, Burma, Libya and Sudan.

In June, Dutch bank ING agreed to pay a $619 million penalty for moving billions of
dollars through the U.S. financial system at the behest of Cuban and Iranian clients.

Back in 2010, Wachovia Bank paid $160 million to resolve allegations that its weak
internal controls allowed Mexican cartels to launder millions of dollars worth of drug
proceeds. Wells Fargo bought Wachovia in 2008.

And Swiss bank Credit Suisse paid $536 million in 2009 to settle U.S. claims concerning
business with Iran and other countries.


      Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   50                                      19 March 2014


       While HSBC's penalty dwarfs these other settlements, it's still just a fraction of the $16.8
       billion in profits the bank recorded globally last year. 39

        “As part of the agreement, the bank will admit to violating the Bank Secrecy Act, the
       Trading with the Enemy Act and other U.S. laws intended to prohibit money laundering,
       a government official said.” . . .

        “The report by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations detailed a
       regulatory culture at HSBC that shocked even its own employees, according to testimony
       provided to the committee and at a hearing.

       “Senate investigators concluded HSBC did little to clean up operations that should have
       raised concerns. HSBC's Mexico bank had a branch in the Cayman Islands that had no
       offices or staff but held 50,000 client accounts and $2.1 billion in 2008, the report said.

       "What is this, the School of Low Expectations Banking?" one HSBC Latin America
       compliance official wrote in a complaint about the practices at HSBC Mexico, according
       to the Senate report. The HSBC official said the Mexico bank's antimoney-laundering
       committee ‘can't keep rubber-stamping unacceptable risks because someone on the
       business side writes a nice letter.…We have seen this movie before, and it ends badly.’ "

       In 2010 Wachovia Bank paid $160 million to settle similar Justice Department charges.40

       e.    Manipulation and Rigging of the LIBOR Interest Rate Benchmark

         LIBOR is the London Interbank Offered Rate. This interest rate, set by submissions of
borrowing rates by a dozen banks, plays a major role in determining the interest rate on “$750
trillion worth of financial products, including mortgages, credit cards and student loans as well as
to set the prices of vast amounts of derivatives being traded.”41
       The New York Times (2013) reports that:
       “In 2012, Libor became the center of one of the biggest financial scandals in recent years,
       as investigators in the United States and Britain focused on possible criminal wrongdoing
       by a number of the world’s biggest banks over the manipulation of Libor. Questions have
       also been raised about the failure of regulators in both countries to stop the practice,
       despite evidence that both the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve of New York
       were aware of it.

       The scandal came to light in late June 2012, when Barclays, the British financial giant,
       agreed to pay $450 million to settle accusations by American and British authorities that
       some of its traders attempted to manipulate Libor rates to bolster profits. Authorities also
       accused Barclays of submitting low rates to deflect concerns about its health during the
       financial crisis. The scandal prompted the resignations of top bank officials, including the

39     O’Toole and Riley (2013)
40     Barrett and Perez (2012).
41     New York Times (2013)


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  51                                      19 March 2014


       chief executive, Robert E. Diamond Jr.”

       Protess and Scott (2012) report that: “In the Barclays case, regulators say they uncovered
       “pervasive” wrongdoing that spanned a four-year period and touched top rungs of the
       firm, including members of senior management and traders stationed in London, New
       York and Tokyo. A 45-page complaint laid bare the scheme that unfolded from 2005 to
       2009, describing how Barclays had made false reports with the aim of manipulating rates
       to increase the bank’s profits. Barclays was also accused of “aiding attempts by other
       banks to manipulate” Euribor. . . .

       The practice of submitting false numbers prompted unease among some employees, who
       worried the bank was “being dishonest by definition.” . . .

       Amid speculation that the bank was struggling to raise money, Barclays’ senior
       management asked employees to lower the rates submitted to the Libor committee,
       according to the regulatory filings. Management wanted the bank’s rates in line with
       rivals. Senior Barclays executives instructed employees not to put your “head above the
       parapet.” Some employees resisted, but eventually followed orders from top executives,
       according to regulatory documents. One concerned employee called the rates “patently
       false.”

      On July 1, 2012 The Telegraph42 newspaper published an article authored by an
employee at a large British bank (not Barclays) entitled: “Libor scandal: How I Manipulated the
Bank Borrowing Rate”. The Telegraph’s introduction to the article is as follows:
       “An anonymous insider from one of Britain's biggest lenders – aside from Barclays –
       explains how he and his colleagues helped manipulate the UK's bank borrowing rate.
       Neither the insider nor the bank can be identified for legal reasons.”

       In the insider’s own words, he goes on to explain as follows:
       “It was during a weekly economic briefing at the bank in early 2008 that I first heard the
       phrase. A sterling swaps trader told the assembled economists and managers that "Libor
       was dislocated with itself". It sounded so nonsensical that, at first, it just confused
       everyone, and provoked a little laughter.

       Before long, though, I was drawing up presentations to explain the "dislocation of Libor
       from itself" for corporate relationship managers. I was deciphering the subject in emails,
       internally and externally. And I was using the phrase myself openly with customers of the
       bank.

       What I was explaining was that the bank was manipulating Libor. Only I didn't see it like
       that at the time.

       What the trader told us was that the bank could not be seen to be borrowing at high rates,
       so we were putting in low Libor submissions, the same as everyone. How could we do

42     See Telegraph (2012)


             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   52                                      19 March 2014


       that? Easy. The British Bankers' Association, which compiled Libor, asked for a rate
       submission but there were no checks. The trader said there was a general acceptance that
       you lowered the price a few basis points each day.

       According to the trader, "everyone knew" and "everyone was doing it". There was no
       implication of illegality. After all, there were 20 to 30 people in the room – from
       management to economists, structuring teams to salespeople – and more on the
       teleconference dial-in from across the country.

       The discussion was so open the behaviour seemed above board. In no sense was this a
       clandestine gathering.

       …

       Looking back, I now feel ashamed by my naivety. Had I realized what was going on, I
       would have blown the whistle. But the openness alone suggested no collusion or secrecy.
       Management had been in the meeting, and so many areas of the Treasury division of the
       bank represented, that this was clearly no surprise or secret.”

        As an aside, please note in this excellent example how the “occurring” shaped how the
situation showed up for this person – how a patently illegal act showed up as something that was
perfectly honest and upstanding. And as we have said, when the occurring shifts behavior shifts
to be consistent with it.
        In December of 2012, the Swiss bank UBS, paid record total fines of $1.5 billion “for its
role in a multiyear scheme to manipulate interest rates”, its Japanese subsidiary plead guilty to a
charge of felony wire fraud, and the Justice Department “filed criminal charges against two
former UBS traders”. On December 19, 2012 Mark Scott and Ben Protess (2012) writing for
DealBook reported the following:

       “The cash penalties represented the largest fines to date related to the rate-rigging inquiry.
       The fine is also one of the biggest sanctions that American and British authorities have
       ever levied against a financial institution, falling just short of the $1.9 billion payout that
       HSBC made last week over money laundering accusations.

       The severity of the UBS penalties, authorities said, reflected the extent of the problems.
       The government complaints laid bare a scheme that spanned from at least 2001 to 2010,
       describing how the bank reported false rates to squeeze out extra profits and deflect
       concerns about its health during the financial crisis. The Commodity Futures Trading
       Commission, the American regulator leading the case, cited more than 2,000 instances of
       illegal acts involving dozens of UBS employees.

       “The findings we have set out in our notice today do not make for pretty reading,” Tracey
       McDermott, enforcement director for the Financial Services Authority of Britain, said in
       a statement. “The integrity of benchmarks,” she said, “are of fundamental importance to
       both U.K. and international financial markets. UBS traders and managers ignored this.”

       The UBS case reflects a pattern of abuse that authorities have uncovered as part of a


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   53                                      19 March 2014


       multi-year investigation into rate-rigging. The inquiry, which has ensnared more than a
       dozen big banks, is focused on key benchmarks like the London interbank offered rate, or
       Libor..43

       The New York Times (2013) reports: “Canadian, Swiss and Asian authorities as well as
       the Justice Department, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Britain’s
       Financial Services Authority are investigating more than a dozen banks. Along with
       UBS, the futures commission was focused on potential wrongdoing at two American
       banks, Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase, officials said. HSBC was also under scrutiny.”

       “As the Justice Department announced its case against UBS, prosecutors also took aim at
       two former UBS traders at the center of the rate-rigging scheme . . . the Justice
       Department charged Tom Hayes and Roger Darin with conspiracy to commit wire fraud.
       Mr. Hayes also faces an additional count of wire fraud and another related to price fixing.
       “By causing UBS and other financial institutions to spread false and misleading
       information,” Attorney General Eric Holder said in a statement, “these alleged
       conspirators – and others at UBS – manipulated the benchmark interest rate upon which
       many consumer financial products – including credit cards, student loans, and mortgages
       – are frequently based.44

      J.R. (2013) Writing for the Dec. 19, 2012 Economist column, “Schumpter: Business and
Management” summarizes some of what was unfolding in the manipulation of LIBOR and
EURIBOR interest rates in his column entitled “Horribly Rotten, Comically Stupid” as follows:
     “For any who doubted whether there was honour among thieves, or indeed among
     investment bankers, solace may be found in the details of a settlement between
     UBS, a Swiss bank, and regulators around the world over a vast and troubling
     conspiracy by some of its employees to rig LIBOR and EURIBOR, key market
     interest rates. Regulators in Britain and Switzerland have argued that manipulation
     of interest rates that took place over a long period of time, involved many
     employees at UBS and that, according to Britain’s Financial Service Authority, was
     so “routine and widespread” that “every LIBOR and EURIBOR submission, in
     currencies and tenors in which UBS traded during the relevant period, was at risk of
     having been improperly influenced to benefit derivatives trading positions.”

     ...

     Yet, even in the midst of this wrongdoing there was evidence of a sense of honour,
     however misplaced. One banker at UBS, in asking a broker to help manipulate
     submissions, promised ample recompense:




43     Scott and Protess (2012)
44       Dealbook (2012), http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/12/19/2-former-ubs-traders-exposed-in-rate-
rigging-case/


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   54                                      19 March 2014


     "I will . . . do one humongous deal with you ... Like a 50,000 buck deal, whatever. I
     need you to keep it as low as possible ... if you do that ... I’ll pay you, you know,
     50,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars ... whatever you want ... I’m a man of my word."

     Further hints emerge of the warped morality that was held by some UBS employees
     and their conspirators at brokers and rival banks. In one telling conversation an
     unnamed broker asks an employee at another bank to submit a false bid at the
     request of a UBS trader. Lest the good turn go unnoticed the broker reassures the
     banker that he will pass on word of the manipulation to UBS.

     Broker B: “Yeah, he will know mate. Definitely, definitely, definitely”;

     Panel Bank 1 submitter: “You know, scratch my back yeah an all”

     Broker B: “Yeah oh definitely, yeah, play the rules.”

     “Regulators found that brokers at these firms helped coordinate false submissions
     between banks, posted false rates and estimates of where rates might go on their
     own trading screens, and even posted spoof bids to mislead market participants as
     to the real rate in the market.”
        In addition, in early 2013 the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) was fined $612 million by
regulators for manipulating the Libor Rate.45 And in 2012 the attorneys general of New York and
Connecticut issued subpoenas to Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, JPMorgan Chase and HSBC and it
has yet to be seen what comes from those investigations.46
       Interestingly there are indications that the manipulation of LIBOR was going on as early
as 1991, and attempts to call attention to that manipulation were ignored by the authorities. See
Douglas (2012).

       f.    “BofA Probed by New York Over Mortgage Securities”

       “Bank of America Corp., the second- biggest U.S. bank by assets, is under investigation
by the New York Attorney General’s Office over the bundling of mortgage loans into securities.
       New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman, who sued JP Morgan Chase & Co. last
year over losses on mortgage bonds, is probing the purchase, securitization and underwriting of
home loans and mortgage securities, the bank said yesterday in a regulatory filing.47
        The bank, based in Charlotte, North Carolina, said it “continues to cooperate fully” with
the investigation. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating practices by the
bank’s Merrill Lynch unit related to collateralized debt obligations, including valuation and
marketing, according to the filing.


45     Finch, Fortado and Brush (2013)
46     Forbes (2012)
47     McLaughlin (2013)


              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   55                                      19 March 2014


Schneiderman is the co-chairman of a state and federal group established last year to investigate
misconduct in the mortgage-securities market. The group includes the U.S. Justice Department
and the SEC.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   56                                      19 March 2014



       14.    REFERENCES
Abdulali, Adil, 2006. The Bias Ratio™: Measuring the Shape of Fraud (Protégé Partners, New
   York).

Agarwal, Vikas, Daniel, Naveen D. and Naik, Narayan Y., Do Hedge Funds Manage Their
   Reported Returns? (November 15, 2010). The Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=891169

Aggarwal, Rajesh K., Laurie Krigman, and Kent L. Womack. 2002. "Strategic IP Underpricing,
   Information Momentum, and Lockup Expiration Selling." Journal of Financial Economics,
   V. 66, No. 1: pp 105-137.

Anand, “Harmed Investor? Just Wait – Brokerage Firms Pay $255 Million, but Getting It Takes
   Time,” Wall Street Journal (2006)

Argyris, Chris. 1991. Teaching Smart People How to Learn. Harvard Business Review: May-
   June

Barrett, Devlin, and Evan Perez, HSBC to Pay Record U.S. Penalty: U.K.-Based Bank Expected
   to Admit Money-Laundering Lapses as Part of $1.9 Billion Agreement, Wall Street Journal
   (2012)
   http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324478304578171650887467568.html?KE
   YWORDS=HSBC+Money+laundering (Accessed Feb 25, 2013)

Bartov, Eli, Givoly, Dan and Hayn, Carla, "The Rewards to Meeting or Beating Earnings
   Expectations" (October 2000). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=247435

Bird, Alexander, "Thomas Kuhn", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2011
   Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), 4.2 Perception, Observational Incommensurability, and
   World Change, URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2011/entries/thomas-kuhn/>

Bodnaruk, Andriy, Massa, Massimo and Simonov, Andrei, "The Dark Role of Investment Banks
   in the Market for Corporate Control" (December 2007). EFA 2007 Ljubljana Meetings
   Paper, http://www.econ.upf.edu/docs/seminars/bodnaruk.pdf

Brunnermeirer, Markus K. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008, Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, V. 23, No. 1, Winter 2009, pp. 77-100.

Bradshaw, Mark T., Scott A. Richardson, and Richard G. Sloan. 2005. "The Relation between
   Corporate Financing Activities, Analysts' Forecasts and Stock Returns". In Journal of
   Accounting and Economics Conference, 2004.

Burgstahler, D., and I. Dichev. 1997. Earnings management to avoid earnings decreases and
   losses. Journal of Accounting & Economics 24 (December): 99-126.




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  57                                      19 March 2014


Bushee, Brian. 2004. "Identifying and Attracting the "Right" Investors: Evidence on the
   Behavior of Institutional Investors." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, V. 16, No. 4:
   Fall, pp. 28-35.

Burton, Jonathan, 2003, Fund Roundup: A review of the firms implicated so far in trading
   scandal, Wall Street Journal, Market Watch (Dow Jones).

Clement, Michael B. 1999. "Analyst Forecast Accuracy: Do Ability, Resources, and Portfolio
   Complexity Matter?" Journal of Accounting and Economics, V. 27, No. 3: pp 285-303.

Cowen, Amanda, Groysberg, Boris and Healy, Paul M., "Which Types of Analyst Firms Make
  More Optimistic Forecasts?" (July 8, 2003). Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 03-46.
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=436686

Darrough, Masako, and Rangan, Srinivasan, Do Insiders Manipulate Earnings When They Sell
   Their Shares in an Initial Public Offering?, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 43 No. 1
   March 2005, pp. 1-33.

Dealbook, “Goldman Settles With S.E.C. for $550 Million”, July 15, 2010.
   http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2010/07/15/goldman-to-settle-with-s-e-c-for-550-million/
   (accessed March 3, 2013)

Dealbook, “2 Former UBS Traders Exposed in in Rate-Rigging Case”
   http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/12/19/2-former-ubs-traders-exposed-in-rate-rigging-case/
   (accessed Feb 25, 2013)

Dechow, Patricia M., Hutton, Amy P. and Sloan, Richard G., "The Relation between Analysts'
   Forecasts of Long-Term Earnings Growth and Stock Price Performance Following Equity
   Offerings" (June 1999). http://ssrn.com/abstract=168488

Dealbook, “Goldman Settles With S.E.C. for $550 Million”, July 15, 2010.
   http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2010/07/15/goldman-to-settle-with-s-e-c-for-550-million/
   (accessed March 3, 2013)

Degeorge, François, Jayendu Patel and Richard Zeckhauser. 1999. "Earnings Management to
   Exceed Thresholds." Journal of Business, V. 72, No. 1: pp. 1-33.

Douglas, Keenan, “My Thwarted Attempt To Tell of Libor Shenanigans” Financial Times, July
   27, 2012. Manipulation w http://www.informath.org/media/a72/b1.pdf and
   http://www.informath.org/media/a72/b3.htm

Dyson, Freeman. 2011. “How to Dispel Your Illusions”. Review of Thinking, Fast and Slow, by
   Daniel Kahneman. The New York Review of Books, 22 December. Accessed 6 February,
   2012. http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2011/dec/22/how-dispel-your-illusions/




             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   58                                      19 March 2014


Eaglesham, Jean, and Dan Fitzpatrick. (October 1, 2012). J.P. Morgan Sued on Mortgage
   Bonds,” Wall Street Journal,
   http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390444138104578030903731665328.html
   (accessed March 3, 2013)

Erhard, Werner and Jensen, Michael C., A Positive Theory of the Normative Virtues (December
   7, 2011). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 12-007; Barbados Group
   Working Paper No. 11-06. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1906328

Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and Granger, Kari L., Creating Leaders: An
   Ontological/Phenomenological Model (July 5, 2012). THE HANDBOOK FOR TEACHING
   LEADERSHIP, Chapter 16, Scott Snook, Nitin Nohria, Rakesh Khurana, eds., Sage
   Publications, 2011; Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper 11-037; Barbados
   Group Working Paper No. 10-10; Simon School Working Paper Series No. FR 10-30.
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1681682

Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and Barbados Group, A New Paradigm of Individual,
   Group, and Organizational Performance (November 17, 2010). Harvard Business School
   NOM Unit Working Paper No. 11-006; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 09-02.
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1437027

Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and Zaffron, Steve, Integrity: A Positive Model that
   Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics and Legality (March 23, 2009).
   Harvard Business School NOM Working Paper No. 06-11; Barbados Group Working Paper
   No. 06-03; Simon School Working Paper No. FR 08-05. Available at SSRN:
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=920625

Erhard, Werner, Jensen, Michael C. and Zaffron, Steve, Integrity: A Positive Model that
   Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics, and Legality - Abridged
   (English Language Version) (March 7, 2010). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working
   Paper No. 10-061; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 10-01; Simon School Working Paper
   No. 10-07. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1542759

Erhard, Werner and Jensen, Michael C., Putting Integrity into Finance: A Purely Positive
   Approach (January, 15 2012). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1985594

Finch, Gavin, Lindsay Fortado and Silla Brush, “RBS Fined $612 million by regulators for
   Manipulating Libor Rate”, Bloomberg, (Feb. 6, 2013)
   http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-05/rbs-said-to-face-up-to-783-million-fine-for-
   manipulating-libor.html (Accessed March 3, 2013)

Fireman, Paul: “Commencement Address to the Suffolk University Sawyer Business School”,
    May 19th, 2013, Boston, Massachusetts,
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?gl=US&hl=en&client=mv-google&v=lTw0GX4nVXs&nomobile=1
   (Accessed February 28, 2014)




              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  59                                      19 March 2014


Forbes, “7 Banks Hit With libor Subpoenas Courtesy of NY Attorney General Schneiderman”
   (Agust 15, 2012) http://www.forbes.com/sites/halahtouryalai/2012/08/15/7-banks-hit-with-
   libor-subpoenas-courtesy-of-ny-attorney-general-schneiderman/ (Accessed March 3, 2013)

Forstmoser, Peter. “Integrity in Finance” (speech given to Swiss Banking Institute, 11-15-2006)

Fuller, Joseph and Jensen, Michael C., "Just Say No To Wall Street”. Journal of Applied
    Corporate Finance, Vol. 14, No. 4 (Winter 2002) pp. 41-46. http://ssrn.com/abstract=297156

Goldstein, Noah J., Steven J. Martin, Robert B. Cialdini. 2007. Yes! 50 Secrets From The
   Science Of Persuasion. London: Profile Books.

Graham, Harvey & Rajgopal survey “Economic Implications of Corp. Fin. Reporting”
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=491627

Harsanyi, John C. 1953. “Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-
   Taking”. Journal of Political Economy 61: 434–435.

Harsanyi, John C. 1955. “Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparison
   of Utility”. Journal of Political Economy 63: 309–321.

Hayn, C. 1995. The information content of losses. Journal of Accounting & Economics 20
   (September): 125-153.

Hayward, Mathew L. A. and Warren Boeker. 1998. "Power and Conflicts of Interest in
   Professional Firms: Evidence from Investment Banking." Administrative Science Quarterly,
   V. 43, No. 1 (Mar., 1998): pp 1-22.

Healy, Paul M. 1985. "The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions." Journal of
   Accounting & Economics, V. 7, No. 1-3: pp. 85-107.

Healy, Paul M., and Krishna Palepu.”Information Asymmetry, Corporate Disclosure and the
   Capital Markets: A Review of the Empirical Disclosure Literature” (December 2000). JAE
   Rochester Conference April 2000. http://ssrn.com/abstract=258524

Healy, P. M., and J. M. Wahlen. 1999. A review of the earnings management literature and its
   implications for standard setting. Accounting Horizons 13 (December): 365-383.

Hong, Harrison and Jeffrey D. Kubik. 2003. "Analyzing the Analysts: Career Concerns and
   Biased Earnings Forecasts." The Journal of Finance, V. 58, No. 1: pp 313-351.
   http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/loi/jofi

Hutton (1999) The Relation Between Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts of Long-Term Earnings
   Growth and Stock Price Performance Following Equity Offerings
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=168488




             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  60                                      19 March 2014


Hutton, Amy, 2004. Determinants of Managerial Earnings Guidance Prior to Regulation Fair
   Disclosure and Bias in Analysts Earnings Forecasts, http://ssrn.com/abstract=567441

Hutton, Amy. 2004. "Beyond Financial Reporting — An Integrated Approach to Disclosure."
   Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, V. 16, No. 4: Fall, pp. 8-16.

Hutton, Amy, and James Weber, 2001, Progressive Insurance: Disclosure Strategy, Harvard
   Business School Case, 9-102-012, December 12.

Isberg, Steven C., Tomas Thundiyil and Rob Owen, 2012. "Integrity and Learning: Enhancing
    Workability and Student Performance Outcomes," by Steven C. Isberg, Tomas Thundiyil,
    and Rob Owen, unpublished manuscript, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2148783

Jacob, John, Thomas Z. Lys, and Margaret A. Neale. 1999. "Experience in Forecasting
   Performance of Security Analysts." Journal of Accounting and Economics, V. 28: pp 51-82.

Jensen, Michael C., "Paying People to Lie: The Truth About the Budgeting Process" (Revised
   September, 2001). Harvard NOM Research Paper No. 01-03, and HBS Working Paper No.
   01-072, European Financial Management, Vol. 9, pp. 379-406, September 2003
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=267651

Jensen, Michael C., Corporate Budgeting Is Broken, Let's Fix It. Harvard Business Review, pp.
   94-101, November 2001. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=321520

Jensen, Michael C., "Agency Costs of Overvalued Equity" (March 2005). Harvard NOM
   Working Paper No. 04-26; ECGI - Finance Working Paper No. 39/2004, Financial
   Management, V. 34, No 1, Spring 2005. http://ssrn.com/abstract=480421

Jensen, Michael C., "The Agency Cost of Overvalued Equity and the Current State of Corporate
   Finance". Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 04-29, European Financial Management, Vol.
   10, pp. 549-565, December 2004 http://ssrn.com/abstract=560961

Jensen, Michael C. and Erhard, Werner, A 'Value-Free' Approach to Values (PDF File of
   Powerpoint Slides) (April 11, 2011). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper
   No. 11-010; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 10-06; Simon School Working Paper No.
   FR10-26. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1640302

Jensen, Michael C., Murphy, Kevin J. and Wruck, Eric G., "Remuneration: Where We've Been,
   How We Got to Here, What are the Problems, and How to Fix Them" (July 12, 2004). HBS
   NOM Paper No 04-28; ECGI - Finance Working Paper No. 44/2004.
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=561305

J. R., “UBS and Libor: Horribly Rotten, Comically Stupid” Economist Column: Schumpeter:
    Business and Management, 12-19-2012
    http://www.economist.com/blogs/schumpeter/2012/12/ubs-and-libor (Accessed Feb. 27,
    2013.)



             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  61                                      19 March 2014


Jewish Virtual Library: Bernard Madoff.
   http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/biography/Bernard_Madoff.html Jewish Virtual
   Library (Accessed Feb. 25, 2013)

Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. London: Penguin.

Kahneman, Daniel. “Nobel Prize Autobiography”, accessed March 4, 2012
   http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/2002/kahneman-autobio.html

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk”.
Econometrica, 47(2), pp. 263-291, March 1979

Kothari, S. P, Elena Loutskina, and Valeri Nikolaev. 2005. "Agency Theory of Overvalued
   Equity as an Explanation for the Accrual Anomaly", (December 22, 2005).
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=871750

Kuhn, Thomas S. 1996. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.

Lauricella, Tom, 2003, “Strong Steps Down From Board But Stays On as Head of Firm,” Wall
   Street Journal (Nov. 3).

Lauricella, Tom, and Christopher Oster, 2003, “Second Strong Executive Snagged in Probe –
   Anthony D’Amato of CEO’s Office Was Involved in a Deal to Allow Canary to Rapidly
   Trade Shares,” Wall Street Journal (Nov. 19).

Lauricella, Tom, and Christopher Oster, 2004, “Strong Funds And Regulators To Settle Case –
   Agreement Would Clear the Way For Possible Sale to Wells Fargo; Considerable Challenges
   Ahead,” Wall Street Journal (June 5, 2008).

“Libor (Barclays interest Rate Manipulation Case)” New York Times, March 3, 2013,
   http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/l/london_interbank_offered_rate
   _libor/index.html (accessed March 3, 2013)

Lin, Hsiou-wei and Maureen F. McNichols. 1998. "Analyst Coverage of Initial Public
   Offerings": Stanford University. Unpublished manuscript.

Lin, Hsiou-wei and Maureen F. McNichols. 1998. "Underwriting Relationships, Analysts'
   Earnings Forecasts and Investment Recommendations." Journal of Accounting and
   Economics, V. 25, No. 1: pp 101-127.

Lin, Hsiou-wei, Maureen F. McNichols, and Patricia C. O'Brien. 2003. "Analyst Impartiality and
   Investment Banking Relationships": National Taiwan University, Stanford University, and
   University of Waterloo. Unpublished Manuscript.




             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                   62                                      19 March 2014


Ljungqvist, Alexander, Malloy, Christopher J. and Marston, Felicia C., "Rewriting History"
   (February 20, 2007). AFA 2007 Chicago Meetings Paper Available at SSRN:
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=889322

Marquardt, Carol and Wiedman, Christine I., "How are Earnings Managed? An Examination of
   Specific Accruals" (December 2002). http://ssrn.com/abstract=375660

Matsumoto, Dawn A. 2002. "Management's Incentives to Avoid Negative Earnings Surprises."
   Accounting Review, V. 77, No. 3: pp. 483-514.

McLaughlin, David, “BofA Probed by New York Over Mortgage Securities”, Bloomberg
  (March 1, 2013), http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-03-01/bofa-probed-by-new-york-
  over-mortgage-securities.html (Accessed March 3, 2013)

McNichols, M., and P. O’Brien, 1997, Self-selection and analyst coverage, Journal of
  Accounting Research 35 (Supplement), 167-199.

Michaely, R., and K. L. Womack, 1999, “Conflicts of Interest and the Credibility of Underwriter
   Analyst Recommendations,” Review of Accounting Studies, V. 12: pp. 653-686.

Murphy, Kevin J. “Executive Compensation: Where We Are, and How We Got There,” Chapter
  4 in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz (eds.), “Handbook of the
  Economics of Finance”. Elsevier Science North Holland (forthcoming 2013)

Murphy, Kevin J. and Jensen, Michael C., “CEO Bonus Plans: And How to Fix Them“
  (November 19, 2011). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper 12-022; Marshall
  School of Business Working Paper No. FBE 02-11. Available at SSRN:
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1935654

Myers, James N., Myers, Linda A. and Skinner, Douglas J., "Earnings Momentum and Earnings
  Management" (April 2005).http://ssrn.com/abstract=741244

New Oxford American Dictionary. Edited by Angus Stevenson and Christine A. Lindberg.
   Oxford University Press, 2010.

New York Times, March 3, 2013, “Libor (Barclays interest Rate Manipulation Case)”, March 3,
   2013
   http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/l/london_interbank_offered_rate
   _libor/index.html (accessed March 3, 2013)

O'Brien, Patricia C. 1990. "Forecast Accuracy of Individual Analysts in Nine Industries." Journal
   of Accounting Research, V. 28, No. 2 (Autumn 1990): pp 286-304.

O’Toole, James, and Charles Riley, “HSBC Pays $1.9 Billion To Settle US Probe”, CNNMoney
   (December 11, 2012) http://money.cnn.com/2012/12/10/news/companies/hsbc-money-
   laundering/index.html (accessed March 3, 2013)



              Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  63                                      19 March 2014




Phenomenology Online. http://www.phenomenologyonline.com/inquiry/11.html (accessed 21
   December 2010).

Pool, Veronika Krepely and Bollen, Nicolas P.B., "Do Hedge Fund Managers Misreport
   Returns? Evidence from the Pooled Distribution" (November 19, 2007). Available at SSRN:
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=1018663

Protess, Ben, and Mark Scott, 2012. “Barclays Settles Regulators’ Claims Over Manipulation of
   Key Rates”, Dealbook, June 6, 2012, http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/06/27/barclays-said-
   to-settle-regulatory-claims-over-benchmark-
   manipulation/?ref=londoninterbankofferedratelibor

Rajan, Raghuram and Henri Servaes. 1997. "Analyst Following of Initial Public Offerings."
   Journal of Finance, V. 52, No. 2: pp 507-529.

Rangan, S. 1998. Earnings management and the performance of seasoned equity offerings.
   Journal of Financial Economics 50: 101-22.

Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Rawls, John. 2001. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Richardson, Scott, Siew Hong Teoh and Peter Wysocki. 2004. "The Walk-down to Beatable
   Analyst Forecasts: The Role of Equity Issuance and Insider Trading Incentives."
   Contemporary Accounting Research, V. 21, No. 4: Winter, pp. 885-924.

Scott, Mark, and Ben Protess, “As Unit Pleads Guilty, UBS Pays $1.5 Billion Over Rate
   Rigging”, Dealbook, Dec. 19, 2012, http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/12/19/as-unit-pleads-
   guilty-ubs-pays-1-5-billion-in-fines-over-rate-rigging/ (accessed March 3, 2013)

Searle, John. 1969, Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge, UK:
   Cambridge University Press.

SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission, “Goldman Sachs to Pay Record $550 Million to
  Settle SEC Charges Related to Subprime Mortgage CDO”, July 15, 2010.
  http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2010/2010-123.htm

Skinner, Douglas J., and Richard G. Sloan, 2002, Earnings Surprises, Growth Expectations, and
   Stock Returns or Don’t Let an Earnings Torpedo Sink Your Portfolio, Review of Accounting
   Studies 7, 289-312.

Smith, Randal, and Tom Lauricella, 2006, “Moving the Market: Bear Stearns to Pay $250
   Million Fine; Net Rises 36%,” Wall Street Journal (March 17).




             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
                                                  64                                      19 March 2014


Stewart, Bennett. 2004. "Making Financial Goals and Reporting Policies Serve Corporate
   Strategy: The Case of Progressive Insurance. An Interview with Tom King, VP and
   Treasurer, Progressive Insurance." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, V. 16, No. 1: pp.
   8-19.

Teoh, S., I. Welch, and T. Wong. 1998. Earnings management and the underperformance of
   seasoned equity offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 50: 63-99.

Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth,
   and Happiness, Yale University Press, New Haven & London, 2008.

Webster’s New World Dictionary & Thesaurus, Accent Software International, Macmillan
  Publishers, Version 2.0 – 1998, Build #25.




             Copyright 2011-2014. Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. All rights reserved
