                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   LABOR MARKETS AND THE CHOICE
                       OF TECHNOLOGY IN AN
                     OPEN DEVELOPING ECONOMY




                         Joshua Aizenman




                      Working Paper No. 1998




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             August 1986




An earlier version of this paper was presented at a World Bank
Conference on Adjustment of Labor Markets in LDCs to External
Changes, organized by Gregory K. Ingram and Ruth Klinov
(Washington, June 1986). I would like to thank Yoram Ben-Porat,
Sebastian Edwards, Jacob Frenkel and Assar Lindbeck for helpful
comments; all errors, however, are mine. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    Working Paper #1998
                                                    August 1986



Labor Markets and the Choice of Technology in
                                                     an Open Developing Economy



                                        ABSTRACT


     This   paper highlights economic       determining the choice of technology and
                                        factors
 openness in an intertemporal context in the presence of Institutional constraints In
 the labor market. It considers the case in which a more aggressive- development
 strategy involves an investment in a modern technology. This technology raises the
 degree to which real wages and productivity depend on external factors while at the
 same time It also raises the expected value of real Income. In the absence of Such
 investment, production takes place in a traditional sector, using a technology that
 limitsexposure to external shocks. The analysis evaluates the dependence of the
choice of technology on the volatility of the shocks
                                                      affecting the economy, the
expected productivity gains, the Investment cost associated with the modern
technology, and the attitude towards risk. It starts with a benchmark case of a
flexible wage/employment economy. The dependence of openness, investment, and real
wages on the attltuae towards risk is derived for such an economy. The paper then
proceeds to analyze the implications of departures from the benchmark model.
Specifically, it evaluates the effects of minimum wage policy on the choice of
technology. it is demonstrated that institutional constraints in the labor market tend
to discourage adoption of new technologies. The importance
                                                               of this effect depends
on the volatility of the underlying shocks.
                                            A rise In the volatility tends to be
associated with a drop in the degree to which a given institutional structure
constrains the move to the new sector. Thus, turbulent
                                                       periods provide opportunities
for structural shifts in favor of the
                                        new sector.  The analysis assesses both the
positive   aspects of policies and the welfare costs associated with departures from
fully flexible labor markets. It also discusses the interaction between institutional
structure of the labor market and the use of protective
                                                           measures that attempt to
reduce exposure to external shocks.




                                                   Joshua Aizenman
                                                   Graduate School of Business
                                                   University of Chicago
                                                   1101 East 58th Street
                                                   Chicago, IL 60637
                                        -2-

  lintroduct ion      and summerg
      The remarkable difference in the
                                        growth pattern of Latin American and East
  Asian nations has been documented in
                                       several studies1. Understanding this difference
  is an important task, because it       should
                                          highlight key economic considerations that
  affect the design of growth policies. The purpose of this paper is to focus on the
  interplay   of several factors that Influence the choice of
                                                                  growth policies: attitudes
 towards     risk ;
                      perceptions regarding the cost/benefit of exposure to international
 trade; and   labor market policies.

      The    differential growth pattern Is reflected in the fact that the average per
 capita GOP 9rowth rate of East Asian nations
                                                      was 4.9% during 1960-77, whereas it
 was 3.1% for the Latin American nations.
                                                  During that period the export share of the
 GOP of East Asian nations rose from 22.6% to 40.2% whereas it was
                                                                     relatively
 stable for the Latin American nations, rising only from 13.8% to 14.9%2. The
 differential growth patterns of Latin American              and East Asian nations have
persisted for a long enough period           to suggest   that they   may reflect different
attitudes regarding openness and the desirability of international trade, A rough

comparison suggests that            East Asian nations
                                                          were applying outward—oriented
policies, whereas most Latin American nations
                                                    preferred inward—looking policies. The
growth     of East Asian nations has occurred
                                                   during decades when outward policies
have been Particularly well suited to the global trend of growth and less restricted

international trade.

    An important policy question is why these different policies were chosen. One

contributing factor may be a different evaluation         of the costs/benefits of outward
policies.   The experience of Latin American nations in the decade 1930—1940 induced

a frame of mind In which     external   trade was related to greater exposure to   adverse
external    shocks, whereas inward policies were viewed as successful in reducing
                                  -3
vulnerability   to foreign shocks. Inward policies were not perceived to be costly as

long as external shocks were contract ionary   and   internal shocks were negligible. Once

that situation was reversed, and external shocks became expansionary and internal

conditions   less stable, the cost of inward policies became apparent. Yet the political

system    was not flexible enough to adjust its      policies to the new economic trends,

and   policies that had been viewed as successful (or less costly) in the 1930's and
1940's penalized the growth of Latin American nations when applied in the 1960's
and 1970's. The history of the East Asian nations is different. They were less
exposed to the adverse shocks of the 1930's, and apparently they entered the 1950's
with no historic bias against international trade. Actually, the experience of some of
them in the 1930's and 1940's suggested International trade as a source of growth. In
this sense they viewed outward policies more favorably, and their policies fitted
1960's and 1970's well.
      At risk of simplification, it Is constructive to contrast the experience during
the 1930's and 1940's of two countries whose growth performances diverged during
the 1960's and 1970's -- Argentina and Korea. (The average per capita GDP growth
rate of Argentina was 2.1% during 1960—77, whereas it was 6.7% for South Korea).
While both maintained reasonable growth rates in the 1930's and 1940's, Argentina
did so by means of inward growth policies, while Korea adopted an outward
orientation (see Table - i). It is noteworthy that as a practical matter the
depression of the 1930's had no effect on the growth performance of Korea, whereas
it affected Argentina to some degree. The Korean experience was characterized by
increased trade with Japan whereas the Argentinlan experience was characterized by
 inward grOwth" which was viewed as the source of Argentina's relative success In
shielding itself from the depression.

      These observations suggest that the Latin American and East Asian nations

entered the 1950's with divergent perceptions regarding the cost/benefit of inward

growth,   resulting in a different choice of growth strategies. The purpose of this paper
                                  -4--




                                      TABLE 1

     Per Capita Commodity Product*              Per Capita Goods production in
    (rates of growth per year) in Korea        Argentina (rates of growth per year)
     1920-1925                 1.7%
     1925-1930                 2.3%        1925-1929              2.3%
     1930-1910                 3.1%        1930-1939              1.8%



     Trade Ratio in             Korea     Trade Ratio in Argentina
             (Export+ I mports)/2              (Export+ I mports)/2

            Commodity Product                          NP

     1920-1925                23.3%
     1925-1930                32.8%        1925-1929                  24%
     1931-1935                35.7%        1930—1934                  15.8%
     1938-1940                46.1%        1935-1939                  15%

    Sources The Information on Korea draws on Sang-Chul Suh (1978. pages 43, 119).
The information on Argentina draws on the U.N. Economic Survey of Latin America
(1951; pages 98. 107).
    Commodity Product is defined as the net output originating in agriculture,
forestry, fishery, mining, and manufacturing   (See Sang-awl Suh (1978)).
                                     -5-
is to provide a framework for the analytical assessment of the economic factors
determining adoption of an inward growth strategy. This Is done by modeling an
outward p01 Icy as the choice to invest in a new technology that raises the
dependence of productivity      on   foreign shocks, thereby reducing its dependence on
domestic shocks. Our choice to model external dependence as a choice of technology
is    arbitrary in the   sense that all the results can be derived for the case where
external     shocks manifest themselves as shocks to the terms of trade, and the choice

Is between growth in sectors with a different exposure to external shocks.

       The   analysis evaluates the dependence of the choice of technology on the
volatility    of the shocks affecting the economy, the expected productivity gains, the
investment cost associated with the modern technology, and the attitude towards
risk4.   Section 2 describes the model. Section 3 applies it to      a benchmark case of
a flexible wage/employment economy. The dependence of openness, investment, and

real wages on the attitude towards risk is derived for such an economy.       The analysis

demonstrates that for a significant degree of risk aversion, labor benefits from the

new technology if the gain in expected productivity compensates for the greater

volatility of foreign relative to domestic shocks.      At the same   time, capital owners
will    benefit from adoption of the new technology if the expected productivity gain

and    the volatility of foreign shocks outweigh their investment costs in the new
technology. As a result, a rise in the volatility of foreign shocks tends to work in
divergent    directions for each group (i.e., labor and capital owners).

       The analysis characterizes    situations where the interests of the groups diverge.
This   will arise If the gain in expected income attributed to the new technology does

not suffice to compensate risk averse workers for the greater exposure to foreign

shocks attributed to     the new technology, while at the same time the expected profits
suffice   to justify the investment from the perspective of the entrepreneurs. In these

circumstances, the adoption of the new technology will be influenced by the relative

strength     of the two opposed factors. Protective policies can be introduced as a
                                            -6-
 mechanism        designed to resolve the conflict      by   raising the expected Income enough to
 compensate labor for the exposure to external risk. This will be the case where
 exposure to the new technology Is accompanied by protective policies. While such
 policies can achieve their goal, they          are   dominated by   alternative   policies that deal
 directlg    with the "missing margin". The role of such policies Is to compensate for

 the    missing market for risk. This is done by facilitating the transfer of the income
 risk
         from labor to the entrepreneurs, thereby eliminating the conflict of Interest
 regarding the new technology. This can be accomplished by labor market institutions
 such as contracts that guarantee a certain level of wages and emplogment5. If such
contracts are not credible, policies that will move the economy towards the desired
 risk redistribution will be beneficial. These policies will contribute to the
elimination of the conflict between the factors of production, enhancing the chances
of    the adoption   of   the technology.

        Section 4 proceeds to analyze the implications of departures from the benchmark

model.    Specifically, it evaluates        the effects of a minimum wage policy on the choice
of    technology. It is demonstrated that Institutional constraints In the labor market
tend to discourage the adoption of the new technology. The importance of this effect
is determined by the volatility of the underlying shocks. A rise in volatility tends
to be associated with a drop in the degree that a given institutional structure
constrains the move to the new sector. Thus,            turbulent periods provide opportunities
for    structural shifts In favor of the new sector. The              analysis assesses both the
positive     aspects of the policies and the welfare costs associated with departures
from fully flexible labor markets. It is shown that because the presence of minimum
wages diminishes the chance of adopting the new technology, there is a greater
potential       role for labor market Institutions.          Section 5 closes the paper with
concluding remarks.
       Before     turning to the more formal model, it is noteworthy that            the problem   of
the choice of technology is more important for Developing countries than for
                                    -7
developed nations. In the presence of complete markets, the choice of technology
tends to be independent of preferences, and standard separation theorems apply. This
result does not hold for Developing countries, whose credit markets are not fully
developed. For these countries the choice between technologies will be determined by
preferences, and the Interests of labor and capital owners may diverge. In these
circumstances the adoption of protective policies and growth strategies will be
influenced b the relative strength of sectors and of owners of inputs.




2. THE MODEL

      In this section we outline a minimal model to describe the factors affecting the
intertemporal choice of       technology In the presence of incomplete   information and

risk—averse    workers. This is done in a   two—periods framework where in    period one
the economy has the option to invest in acquiring a new technology that will be used
in period two. The new technology Involves greater exposure to external shocks, and
we assume that it involves an irreversible change in the process of production.
2.1. The Production Side
      We consider an economy facing the choice between a traditional and a new
technology.   The traditional technology is given by:




      (1) x = exp(6)L     :




where output    (x) is produced by labor input (L). The productivity of labor is subject

to   domestic shocks (6), distrIbuted normally with mean zero and variance V6. For a

given realization of S the wage is given by


      (2)     w exp(6).
                                      -8-
  If investment I Is undertaken In period one, the economy will produce in period two
 using the following process:


       (3)      Xt1 AM'L°


 where M stands for an imported input, A is the efficiency coefficient,          and    stands
 for the output obtained using the new technology. We assume that                installing the
 second technology involves an Irreversible change In the capital stock, Implying that
 following the Investment the economy cannot apply the old production process. To
 capture the notion that openness can expose the economy to external shocks we

 assume that the external price of the Imported Input                 is Subject to Shocks,
 denoted by . Our choice to model external dependence In the form of imported Input
 Is arbitrary in the sense that all the results can be derived for the case where
external     shocks manifest themselves in     shocks to the terms of trade and the choice
of   technology Is also a choice between sectors with a different exposure to external

shocks.      The choice of the technology embodied in (1)      and (3) is motivated by the

presumption      that the new technology Involves higher   capital Intensity.   For simplicity
of exposition we take the extreme case where the traditional technology does not use
capital.
      Consider the case where the price of M is     given by


     ('1)     m =   exp   (€)   ,   N(8,VE).



     The use of labor and the Imported Input is at a level that minimizes the

production costs, yielding the following first order conditions:
                                        -9-
        (5)             = m exp (e)



        (6)             = LW



ApplyIng      (3) and (5)-(6) we obtain that



        (7) x' = AI$w/{ocexp(6))Ik°';


        (8) w exp(p -


where s'         s$/(i-)      and p      tnt




        The introduction of    the   new technology implies that the productivity of labor is

determined     by a   measure related to the efficiency of the new technology   and the price
of   the imported Input (p and c In (8)). The value of s corresponds to the drop in
labor productivity due to the supply shock induced by the rise in the cost of the
imported input. The value of p corresponds to the gain in productivity due to the
adoption of the new technology.


2.2. Preferences
                                                                                            6
      The economy is composed of risk averse workers and risk neutral entrepreneurs.
The second-period utility of a representative worker        Is given by:



     (g)      H -k exp(-eu)                     where U (2—L)c



where     C stands for the consumption and we normalize leisure endowment to 2. The
attitude towards risk is measured by e -- a higher e implies a higher aversion to
risk.
                                        - 10-

        The problem facing   the   entrepreneur in period one Is to determine If the switch

 to the new technology is desirable. Such a switch necessitates an investment i in

 period one,    and we assume the entrepreneur faces an opportunity cost of capital given

 by   r.    in the next sections we     evaluate the conditions   under which the entrepreneur
 will      undertake the Investment, and the conditions under which the adoption of the
 new technology     will raise the expected utility of the workers.




3. The Choice of Technology - the Flexible Wage Case

        We start by considering a benchmark case where the labor market is assumed to
be flexible. Note that the employment level using both technologies Is L:1. The
consumption level of a worker using the old technology is C = exp(8). Thus, the
workers expected utility using the old technology is (denoting by E the expectation
operator)


      (10)       E(H) = —kElexp(—eC)J     ; where C = exp(8).



      Applying (8) we obtain that the wage level with the new technotogtj is
exp(p -        . and the corresponding expected utility using the new technology is H

      (ii)       E( H)      -kEtexp(-eC'1)1      where cn = exp(p -




3.1 Welfare ComDarison - Labor

      We turn now to an evaluation of the welfare implications of the new technology.
This is done by calculating the expected utility of a representative worker, Obtained
by applying a second-order Taylor approximation of H1 around ' = 0 and of H
                                          — 11—


around S = 0. This procedure results in approximations whose accuracy is determined
by the variances of            and of S. Henceforth we assume these variances to be small
enough to merit the applicability of the resultant approximations. Using (ii) we get
that




       (12)     Ht -k exp{-ew0fl 1 - 8 U(0)€ — .5(8 u-(e) - (eu(e))2)(s)2J


where w0 is the real wage (8) obtained for s = 0 (w0 = exp(p)). Applying the
expectation operator to (12) we conclude that

       (13)    E( H'1)       — k exp{-ow0 )        I I - .5V. {e u"(o) - (eu(e))2)J


Direct calculation reveals that


       (14)    E( H'1)       - k exp(-0w0 ) 1 1        +
                                                           .5V()0wØ (Ow0 - 1)).


Applying a second-order Taylor approximation of H around 5 0 we                           obtain (following
steps   similar to (12)—(14))




       (15)    E(H)
                         —   k exp(—O )   (1   +
                                                   .5V(5)o(e
                                                                —
                                                                    1)1.



The new technolo9y will be adopted if                      E(H') > E(H)    .   To gain further insight into

the factors that determine the choice of technology we assume that the variances of

  and S are small , and that the value of w0 is close to one. Subject to these

assumptions,   we can conclude that with flexible labor markets the adoption of                         the

new technology is advantageous if
                                      - 12-


        (16) p > 5(0 - 1)EV(5.) - V(5)J.



 Equation 16 has a simple interpretation in terms of "mean-variance" analysis. The
 left-hand term is a measure of the expected rise in income due to the adoption of the
 new technology. The right hand—side Is a subjective measure of the rise In          volatility
 that Is associated with the adoption of the new technology, being equal to the spread
 of the variances of the foreign and domestic shocks weighted by a term related to the

 degree of risk aversion. The adoption of the new technology is expected to benefit
 labor if the gain in productivity outweighs the rise in the volatility of income by a
factor of 5(0 — 1)-i.
        To   gain further insight, we turn to Figure One in which line A1A2 plots

combinations of (V(€.); p) that leave labor indifferent to both technologies. Whenever

the degree of       risk aversion exceeds a threshold (e >     1) a rise in the   volatility of

foreign shocks must be accompanied by        a corresponding rise in the productivity gain
of the new technology in order to keep labor indifferent between the two

technologies. Notice         that   for low degrees       of    risk aversion A1A2 is

downward—sloping, This corresponds to the case where volatility is a "virtue" (in

terms of (14),(15) a rise in the volatility of productivity shocks raises expected

welfare      for 0 <IJ. This result stems from the convexity of     profits and the derived
labor    income with respect to the productivity shocks, which in turn implies that
higher volatility raises expected income7. Henceforth we will assume that the degree
of risk aversion is high enough to cause       the adverse effect of higher volatility to

dominate the beneficial effect of the rise in expected Income        (formally, that 0 > 1),
as Is assumed In Figure One. The area above               defines the region where labor
                                                   A1A2

expects      to benefit from the new technology. A rise in domestic volatility            shifts
                                                                                   (v8)
     p

                                 A2



         z                            z.




 0
                                                VEI




                            so

C3
                            S2
C'



                        N
                                           C4
                                           C2




             FIGURE 1
                                    - 13-

 A1A2 downwards, increasing that area. This corresponds to the fact that higher

 domestic volatility makes investment in openness more attractive. A rise in the
 de9ree of risk aversion rotates A1A2 counter clockwise around point K, thereby

 reducing the advantage of the new technology If foreign exceeds domestic volatility.




 3.2 Welfare ComDarIson - EntreDreneurs

      The decision to undertake investment in the new technology is determined by
 risk-neutral entrepreneurs. The residual Income corresponds to the capital share In
costs.   Applying (11) we find that the entrepreneurs Income Is



    (17)       [(1-o—$)/od   exp(p-s).


The entrepreneur will Invest in the new technology If the expected Income exceeds
the cost of capital, or if


    (18)     Ef ((1—oc—$)/oj exp(p—€')) > (1+r)i


wiere r Is the opportunity cost of capital. Applying a second-order Taylor
approximation to (18) around c' 0 we obtain that the condition for undertaking the
investment can be approximated by



    (1w)      ln((1+r)IJ < p + in [(1—oc—a)/ocj + .5
                                                       V8)


Line C1C2 (Figure One) plots combinations of (V(€.). p) where the entrepreneur is
                                          - 14-

indifferent regarding the new technology. The area above C1C2 defines the region


where the entrepreneur expects to benefit from              the new tecnnologg. It is noteworthy


that   C1C2 is downward sloping. This reflects the convexity of profits with respect

to the productivity            shocks,   which in turn implies that higher volatility raises
expected Income.




3.3 The Choice of Technology and Potential Conflicts

       We now combine the information summarized in curves A1A2 and C1C2 to assess

the dependency of the choice of technology on preferences, volatility, and costs. We
will identify circumstances where there is a conflict of interest between the inputs,
and we will address the role of policies in these circumstances. Notice that
whenever the expected productivity gain from the new technology is high enough
(relative to volatility measures) there is no conflict of interest between labor and
capital. This corresponds to points like 2. For relatively low productivity gain,
potential for conflict exists. For example, If foreign volatility is high, capital
owners     will    tend to benefit from the new technology, whereas labor will tend to lose

(see point s3). At that point the expected change in wages does not compensate for

the rise in       volatility   of income   attributable   to the new technology. This conflict of
interest       can be resolved by protective policies which can be viewed as policies

attempting to raise the returns to factors in the new industry. In terms of our

example such a policg can raise p, thereby shifting point S3 up, solving the
           8
conflict

       While a protective pollcg is capable of resolving the conflict, it will Introduce

new costs. If the purpose of the protective policy Is to allow both labor and capital
                                  - 15-

  to benefit from the new technology, alternative and more effective means are
  available. The potential for welfare-improving policies arises from the fact that our
  economy lacks a market for risk. Institutions or policies that would work directly on
 the missing margin would be superior to protective measures. In order to
 demonstrate this point let us apply Figure One. Suppose our economy Is at point S.

 The distance S1N Is a measure of the compensation needed to make labor indifferent

 between the traditional and the new technology (measured as a percentage of the

 wage, w0). Similarly, S1N is a measure of the expected rent generated by the new

 technology ( measured as percentage of the investment cost. I(1+r)). If the expected
 rent exceeds the needed compensation, a redistribution of income can resolve the
 conflict.
     More effective means are measures that will redistribute both risk and income.
 For example, consider a credible contract offered by the entrepreneur to employ labor
at the level observed in a competitive equilibrium (L       1), paying a fixed real wage.
 In order to derive the wage contract note that distance 0A1 (Figure One) is equal to

(o-1).5v(8). This is also a measure of the willingness of the worker to 'pay' in
expected income to stabilize his real Income earned with the traditional
                                                                             technology
—- labor employed with the traditional technology is indifferent between the random

income (exp(s)) and a fixed real income (given by 1- (O-1).5V(8)). Thus, point A1

defines the reservation wage (i- (o-1).5v(8)) that will make labor indifferent

between the old technology and the new in the presence of the contract. Subject to

this contract the expected rent increases by the distance

    The contract has the effect of shifting the exposure to Income risk introduced

by the new technology (as represented by V€.) from labor to the entrepreneur. Notice
                                     - 16-

that a point below A1B (like           represents a situation where the proposed contract

calls for       an income redistribution from the entrepreneurs to labor. The needed

redistribution is measured by the distance S0S2 (in wage units). This is a feasible


contract   only    if the initial rent In point S2 exceeds the needed redistribution. Using


that   observation we can define a locus C3C4        of points where the rent equals the


needed    transfer9. The proposed     contract   is feasible only     above   line C3C4. This

contract   will eliminate the conflict of interest for all the 'risk-return' combinations


that are represented by points above C3C4 and below A1A2.

        While the contract offers an efficient solution to the conflicts between the

inputs,   It   may lack credibility because it Implies   that in   'bad' states of nature labor

is paid above its marginal product. In the absence of a credible enforcement

mechanism, the contract might not be feasible.           In these circumstances, tax-cum—
subsidy state-dependent policies that will move the economy towards the desired
risk redistribution will be beneficial. These policies will contribute to the
elimination of the conflict between the factors of production, enhancin9 the chances
of adopting the technology.
       Figure One is instructive in Interpreting the dependency of the choice of
technology on perceptions regarding the relative volatility of domestic to foreign
shocks. Note that point K is determined by the domestic volatility (v8). Thus, a drop

in domestic volatility shifts A1A2 upwards, reducing the desirability of the new

technology. For a given degree of risk aversion and domestic volatility a point like Z
represents an equilibrium where there is no conflict between labor and capital, and
the new        technology is adopted. A country that     perceives foreign shocks as more

volatile will Identify the same technology with a point like Z'. At that point there

is a conflict of interest between the various factors of production, and the adoption
                                        - 17-

 of the new technology will be determined by the relative efficiency of the labor

 market and domestic policies in enhancing beneficial risk redistribution,




  '1. The Choice   of   Technology --   the Minimum Wage Case
      The purpose of this section Is to illustrate the effects of minimum
                                                                                    wage policy
on   the choice of technology.      This is done by considering    an example where a minimum
wage regulation that does not affect the equilibrium with the traditional technology
has consequences regarding the attractiveness of the new technology. This would be
the case if the new technology Involved exposure to a more volatile environment. In
these circumstances the adoption of the new technology in the presence of the
minimum wage will Imply spells of unemployment In bad states of nature which
reduce the desirability of the new technology. In order to overcome this effect, the
technology should       generate   a compensatory gain in productivity. Unlike the finding
with a      flexible labor market, a higher volatility is shown to raise           the relative
attractiveness     of the new technology for flQm           factors of production. This finding
results from the fact that, in the presence of a minimum wage, a mean preserving
rise in volatility will Increase the expected gain from the new technology because it
will Increase benef Its in good states without affecting losses in bad states when the
minimum wage dictates unemployment.
     To simplify   exposition,     let us   consider   the case where the traditional technology
is non-stochastic (V8            8). and where the distribution of the foreign shock (e)
degenerates to


                             h        probability .5
     (19)          =
                            -h        probabilIty .5
                                     - 18-


Notice that V. h2. In a flexible wage economy the interests of both factors are

represented by a special case of Figure One, where               0 implies that points K and

0 coincIde. This situation is drawn in        Figure   Two, where A1A2 and C1C2 have the

same interpretation as in Figure one. Thus, In the absence of a minimum wage

regulation     labor will    benefit from the new technology above A1A2 . whereas

entrepreneurs       will benefit above C1C2


    Consider now the case where        a minimum wage Is       set at a level   dictated   by the

traditional sector, implying that wages cannot fall below Wm = 1. WhIle this law

does not affect the traditional sector, it implies that with the new technology

unemployment can occur in        bad states of nature. Let us recall   that (8) implies that
with   the new technology the      equilibrium   wage is given in bad states of nature by

exp{p -   h)   .   Thus, whenever h exceeds p. unemployment will occur In bad states of

nature.   This will be the case if the volatility of foreign shocks (measured         by /)
exceeds the productivity gain (p). Henceforth we will assume that p < h and that in

                                                                                            '
states of unemployment the utility of labor (U)            Is given by U0 ( 0         U0        1).

corresponding to the possibility of a non-market production.

    Labor      will benefit from the new technology if the following condition is met:




    (28) .5( —k exp(—8u0) —k exp(-e exp(p+ h))J > —k exp(-e)




The right hand side of (20) is the utility in the traditional sector, where U              1. The

left hand side is the expected utility with the new technology, being an average of

the bad states where unemployment occurs (             U U9)   and the good states where
     p




                62



                     SI




                               A2

A1                              V.




Cl
                               F2




                          C2
         EURE
                                              - 19-

U      exp(p+h)). Equation (20) allows us an assessment of the potential role of
volatility. Assuming that              the   conditions   for   a binding minimum wage in bad states

hold (i.e. p < h).        it   can be shown that if 0(1- 1i0) > In 2 then the new technology is

undesirable for          any V(s.). This is because a high enough degree          of risk aversion (0)

and low enough non—market productivity ( U0) imply that with the new technology the

drop    In   utility in bad states is too             large   to be compensated for in good states. If.

however, e(i- U0) < In            2,   then for large enough p h labor            will   benefit from the

new technology.

       Higher    volatility enhances the             relative attractiveness of the new technology
because a rise in h has the effect of raising utility in good                        states,   without a
corresponding        drop in bad        states. The same result can be derived for a case of a
continuous      distribution of c.           This   result stems from the fact that the minimum wage

truncates the distribution of the effective productivity of labor in bad states. In

general, for truncated distributions a mean preserving spread of the underlying

variable (€         in   our case) puts greater weight on the tails, resulting in a higher

expected value of the effective productivity. Curve 6102 in Figure Two plots


configurations of (V(6.); p                  ) that leave        labor indifferent between      the two
               10
technologies.       The area above 0162 defines the region where labor expects to benefit

from   the new technology. The curve is downward sloping because a rise In                     volatility
raises   expected utility with the new technology, allowing a drop in the reservation
value of productivity gain, p. It can be shown that a drop in the degree of risk
aversion shifts 6162 downwards.

    The entrepreneur will benefit from the new technology if the expected income
exceeds      the cost of capital, or If
                                       - 20 -

      (21)   .51(1 -   cc -
                                 exp{p+ h}   > i(i+r)


 As   in the flexible labor   market   case, volatility enhances the relative attractiveness

 of the new technology from the entrepreneurs point of view. Curve
                                                                                 F1F2   in   Figure

Two plots configurations of combinations of (V(€.); p ) that leave the entrepreneur

 indifferent with respect to the new technology. The area above F1F2 defines the

region where entrepreneurs expect to benefit from the new technology.
      A   comparison between the flexible wage case (curves A1A2 and C1C2) and the

minimum wage case (curves 61G2 and F1F2) reveals that while higher volatility of

foreign shocks enhances the possibility of conflicts between inputs with flexible
wages, it works in the opposite direction with minimum wages. Note that because the
presence of minimum wages diminishes the chance of adopting the new technology.
there is a greater potential role for labor market institutions of the type elaborated
in section 3.3. For example, a point like S' (Figure 2) corresponds to an economy that
adopts the    new technology in a flexible wage equilibrium, but adopts the traditional

technology    in the presence of the minimum wage. Notice that a contract that will fix
wages and employment at w:1 and 1:1 will preempt the effect of the minimum wage,
enabling the attainment of an efficient equilibrium. If such contracts are not
credible, a minimum wage policy will generate a greater demand for protection. The
role of protective measures is to overcome the potential adverse consequences of the
minimum wage on the employment level associated with the new technology in bad
states.   While such   policies can achieve their   goal,   they   are dominated by alternative

policies   that deal directly with market imperfect ions.
                                   - 21 -

5. ConcludIng Remarks
       This paper describes an economy where a greater openness can result in a
conflict of interest between labor and capital. A wag to resolve the conflict Is to
accompany the exposure to greater openness with protective policies. While
protective measures can achieve that 9oat           for   a given sector, they impose new
welfare costs. Thus, protective policies are dominated by more direct             means   that
will    redistribute risk in an efficient manner, shifting tne labor income risk to

entrepreneurs,   allowing a drop in      the expected   wage needed to interest   Labor in the

new technology and raising thereby the expected income of entrepreneurs. This
accomplishes a resolution         of the conflict without Imposing the welfare cost
associated with protective policies.
       The results of this study suggest that greater attention should be given to the

interaction    between   Institutional   aspects of the labor market and the choice of
growth policies. Such an Interaction Is of special relevance for LDCs because their
lack of fully developed domestic credit markets puts a greater burden on labor market
institutions   as a means of risk redistribution.
                                   -     -

                                       Footnotes


      1, For a recent study see Sachs (1985). For studIes 01 growth and development
 see, for example, Krueger (1978), Bhagwati (1978) and Balassa (1982).
     2. See World Tables (1980; pages 372, 385).
     3. Sources: The Information on Korea draws on Sang-Chul Sun (1978; pages 43,
 119). The information on Argentina draws on the U.N. Economic Survey of Latin
 America (1951; pages 98, 107). For a more recent study of Korea see Frank, Westphal
and KIm (1975).

     4. For a study of uncertainty and stabilization with supply response see Newbery
and Stiglitz (1981). For an analysis of trade models     with   uncertainty see Pomery
(1984) and Helpman and Razin (1978). For a study of trade policies in developing

countries see Krueger (1984).

     5. For a study of labor contracts as a means of risk redistribution see Azarladis
(1975) and Baily (1974).
     6. The keg assumption is that inputs differ in their attitude towards risk and

their excess to the capital market. For exposition purposes we consider a special

case where entrepreneurs are risk neutral. The discussion can be extended for the

case where both labor and entrepreneurs are risk averse, and where inputs differ in

their effective mobility across activities. This difference plays a keg role, because

potential mobility acts like an insurance that allows grater diversification across

states.


    7. For a more general discussion of the welfare effects of volatility see Newbery

and Stiglitz (1981).

    8.    In terms of our example these policies are in the form of implicit subsidies
applied to the new technology, like using a more favorable exchange rate for the
imported Inputs. It can be shown that if the exchange rate favors imports of M at a
                                       - 23 -

rate of 5m then d p/d Sm                   /(i-) where Sm defines the percentage spread
between the exchange rate applied for the final good X and the imported input M. If
the new technology Is modeled as an Investment in a new sector, then protective
policies   can be In the form of a tariff that raises the              price of           relative to other
activities.
     9. It can be shown that C3C4 Is parallel to C1C2                       ,    and is defined by the

Condition   that      +   p = in   Ioc{1
                                           -               +   (1+ r)fl].
                                               .5(O—1)V8

     10. Formally, curve G1G2 is defined by           [Vs. , p1 that satisfy

.51 -k                                                                      <h
         exp(-eu0) -k exp(-e exp{p+ h))J          -k exp(—e) and p                (   h
                                                                                           /7 ).
                                     -24-
                                  REFERENCES

 Azarladis, C. (1975). ImplIcit Contracts and Underemplogment Equilibria, Journal of
      Political Economy, 83:1183-1202.

 Baily MN. (1974), wage and employment under uncertain demand, Review if Economic
       Studies 4J; 37-50.

 Balassa, B. (1982), Development strategies In semi-Industrial economies (Johns
      Hopkins University Press, Baltimore).
Bhagwati, J.N, (1978), Foreign trade regimes and economic development: Anatomy and

      consequences of exchange control regimes (Bailinger for the National Bureau of
      Economic Research, Lexington).

Edwards, S. (1986). Terms of Trade, Exchange Rates and Labor Markets In Developing
      Countries (presented at a World Bank Conference on Adjustment of Labor Markets

      in LDCs to External Changes, organized Dy Gregory K. Ingram and Ruth KIinov,
     Washington, June 1986).

Frank C., 1. Westphal and K.S. Kim (1975), Foreign trade regimes and economic
     development: South Korea (Columbia University Press     for   the National Bureau of
     Economic Research, New York).

Helpman E. and A. Razin (1978), A theory of international trade under uncertainty
     (Academic Press, New York).

Krueger, AO. (1978). Foreign trade regimes and economic development: Liberalization
     attempts and consequences (Ballinger for the National Bureau of Economic
     Research.   Lexington).

Krueger,   A.O. (1984), Trade Policy In Developing Countries; Chapter 11 in the
     Handbook of International Economics, Jones R,,W. and P., B, Kenen (Eds.),
     (Nor th-Hoi land, Amsterdam).

Newbery D.M.G. and J.E. Stlglitz (1981). The theory of commodity price stabilization
     (Clarendon Press, Oxford).

Pomery J. (1984), Uncertainty in Trade Models; Chapter 9 In the Handbook of
     International Economics, Jones R.,W. and P., B, Kenen (Eds.), (North-Holland.
     Amsterdam).
                                - 25-

SaChs, J. (1985). External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance In Latin America and
     East ASIa, Papers on Economic Activity. No. 2; (Brooldngs Institution.

     Washington).
Sang—Chul Sub (1978), Growth and Structural Changes in Korean Economy 1918-1940

     (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).
United Nations Economic Survey of Latin America 1949 (1951). United Nations.
     New York.

World Tables (1980). (Johns Hopkins University Press for the World Bank. Baltimore).
