                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE CAUSAL EFFECTS OF COMPETITION ON INNOVATION:
                           EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE

                                         Philippe Aghion
                                         Stefan Bechtold
                                           Lea Cassar
                                           Holger Herz

                                       Working Paper 19987
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19987


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2014




We would like to thank Daniel Chen, Ernst Fehr, Bernhard Ganglmair, David Huffman, Klaus Schmidt,
Roberto Weber, as well as the participants at the IMEBE 2013 conference, the ETH Zurich/Max Planck
Workshop on the Law & Economics of Intellectual Property and Competition Law 2013 and the CSAE
seminar at the University of Oxford for their useful comments and feedback. Financial support from
ETH Zurich is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Philippe Aghion, Stefan Bechtold, Lea Cassar, and Holger Herz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Causal Effects of Competition on Innovation: Experimental Evidence
Philippe Aghion, Stefan Bechtold, Lea Cassar, and Holger Herz
NBER Working Paper No. 19987
March 2014
JEL No. C91,L10,O31

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we design two laboratory experiments to analyze the causal effects of competition on
step-by-step innovation. Innovations result from costly R&D investments and move technology up
one step. Competition is inversely measured by the ex post rents for firms that operate at the same
technological level, i.e. for neck-and-neck firms. First, we find that increased competition leads to
a significant increase in R&D investments by neck-and-neck firms. Second, increased competition
decreases R&D investments by firms that are lagging behind, in particular if the time horizon is short.
Third, we find that increased competition affects industry composition by reducing the fraction of
sectors where firms are neck-and-neck. All these results are consistent with the predictions of step-by-step
innovation models.


Philippe Aghion                                      Lea Cassar
Department of Economics                              University of Zurich
Harvard University                                   Rämistrasse 71
1805 Cambridge St                                    8006 Zürich, Switzerland
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  lea.cassar@econ.uzh.ch
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu                              Holger Herz
                                                     University of Zurich
Stefan Bechtold                                      holger.herz@econ.uzh.ch
ETH Zurich
Rämistrasse 101
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
sbechtold@ethz.ch




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19987
1     Introduction
The relationship between competition and innovation has long been of in-
terest to economists and motivated numerous studies, both theoretical and
empirical, over the past three decades (e.g., Hart (1980); Schmidt (1997);
Aghion et al. (2001); Vives (2008); Schmutzler (2009, 2013); and Nickell
(1996); Blundell et al. (1999); Aghion et al. (2005); Aghion and Griffith
(2006)). However, the existing empirical studies on this subject face the is-
sue that the relationship between competition and innovation is endogenous
(Jaffe (2000); Hall and Harhoff (2012)).1 Moreover, clean and direct mea-
sures of innovation and competition are usually not available in field data,
which can lead to the additional problem of measurement error.
    To address these two issues head on, in this paper we employ the methods
of experimental economics to analyze the effects of competition on step-by-
step innovation. The predictions we submit to our experiments are drawn
from the step-by-step innovation models of Aghion et al. (1997, 2001) and
Aghion and Howitt (2009). These models predict that product market com-
petition should foster innovation in neck-and-neck sectors where firms oper-
ate at the same technological level: in such sectors, increased product market
competition reduces pre-innovation rents, thereby increasing the incremen-
tal profits from innovating and becoming a leader. This is known as the
“escape-competition effect”. On the other hand, these models predict a neg-
ative “Schumpeterian effect”on laggard firms in unleveled sectors: increased
competition reduces the post-innovation rents of laggard firms and thus their
incentive to catch up with the leader. However, this effect is (partly) coun-
teracted by an “anticipated escape-competition effect”once the laggard has
caught up with the current leader in the sector. The escape-competition and
Schumpeterian effects, together with the fact that the equilibrium fraction of
neck-and-neck sectors depends positively on the laggards’ innovation incen-
tives in unleveled sectors and negatively on neck-and-neck firms’ innovation
incentives in leveled sectors, imply that the equilibrium fraction of sectors
where firms are neck and neck should decrease with competition: this is the
“composition effect”of competition.
    To test these predictions, we design two laboratory experiments. In both
    1
      See Blundell et al. (1999) and Aghion et al. (2005) for a discussion of the endogeneity
issue and for attempts at addressing it. For various empirical approaches to identify causal
relationships between patenting activities and innovation, see Murray and Stern (2007);
Williams (2013); Galasso and Schankerman (2013).


                                             2
experiments, pairs of subjects are matched for a number of periods, forming a
sector. In each period, one of the two subjects can choose an R&D investment
which determines the probability of a successful innovation in that period.
Innovation is costly and has an associated cost generated via a quadratic cost
function. If innovation is successful, the technological level of the innovative
subject increases by one step. At the end of each period, rents are distributed
to each subject according to her relative technological location in her sector.
If the two subjects are in an unleveled sector, then the subject ahead (the
“leader”) receives a positive monopoly rent, whereas the other subject in
the same sector (the “laggard”) makes zero profit. If subjects in the same
sector are neck and neck, their rents are equal and depend on the degree of
competition. In the no competition treatment, these firms are able to split the
monopoly rent between them, whereas under the full competition treatment
the neck-and-neck firms’ profits are zero. In the intermediate competition
treatment, neck-and-neck subjects are able to split half the monopoly rent
between them.
    We conduct an “infinite horizon” experiment to bring out the escape-
competition and the Schumpeterian effects most clearly and a “finite hori-
zon” experiment to assess the composition effect. In the infinite horizon ex-
periment, we exogenously vary the subjects’ (or “firms”) starting positions.
That is, some pairs of subjects start as unleveled sectors while other pairs
start as neck-and-neck sectors. This design feature, together with the treat-
ment variation in the degree of competition, allows us to causally assess the
escape-competition effect and the Schumpeterian effect. After every period,
the interaction between two paired subjects ends with a positive stopping
probability: in other words, the time horizon is infinite but we exogenously
vary the expected time horizon across sessions. Pairs either faced a short time
horizon – a 80% probability of ending the game after each round – or a long
time horizon – a 10% probability of ending the game after each round. This
setup allows us to test an additional prediction from the theory: We should
expect a more negative impact of competition on laggards’ innovation inten-
sity in the short horizon treatment than in the long horizon treatment, since
the longer the time horizon, the more the anticipated escape-competition
effect may counteract the Schumpeterian effect.
    In the finite horizon experiment, all subjects faced the same finite horizon
of 50 periods. Each pair starts as a neck-and-neck sector, and the ability to
innovate alternates between the two subjects across periods. Because of the


                                       3
exogenous variation of competition across treatments, this design allows us
to cleanly identify the causal effect of competition on industry composition
and also on aggregate innovation outcomes.
    The results can be summarized as follows. First, an increase in compe-
tition leads to a significant increase in R&D investments by neck-and-neck
firms. Second, an increase in competition decreases R&D investments by
laggard firms. Moreover, this Schumpeterian effect is significantly stronger
the shorter the time horizon. Third, increased competition affects industry
composition by reducing the fraction of neck-and-neck sectors, and, overall,
competition increases aggregate innovation. All these results are consistent
with the predictions of step-by-step innovation models.
    This paper relates to several strands of literature. First, it contributes
to an extensive theoretical industrial organization literature on competition,
rent dissipation, and research and development (see Tirole (1988)), and to
the patent race literature (Harris and Vickers (1985a,b, 1987)). Second,
it relates to the endogenous growth literature and more specifically to its
Schumpeterian growth branch (see Aghion et al. (2013)).
    Third, the paper contributes to the existing empirical literature on the
relationship between competition and innovation (see Nickell (1996), Blun-
dell et al. (1999), Aghion et al. (2005); Aghion and Griffith (2006); Acemoglu
and Akcigit (2012)). Our laboratory setting and the investment game that
we study are stylized, yet competition and the time horizon both vary exoge-
nously and moreover R&D investments are directly observed. This in turn
allows us to complement the existing field evidence by shedding further light
on the causal rather than correlational relationship between competition and
innovation.
    Fourth, the paper contributes to an emerging experimental literature on
competition and innovation.2 Our experimental study differs from this lit-
   2
    Isaac and Reynolds (1988) analyze the effects of competition and appropriability in
simultaneous investment, one-period patent races. They show that per-capita investments
are decreasing with the number of contestants, whereas the aggregate level of investment
increases. Darai et al. (2010) find similar results in a two-stage game in which R&D
investment choices are followed by product market competition. Moreover, in a two-stage
game with cost-reducing investments followed by a differentiated Cournot duopoly, Sacco
and Schmutzler (2011) find a U-shape relationship between competition and innovation,
the former being defined as the degree of product differentiation. Finally, Suetens and
Potters (2007) finds that tacit collusion is higher in Bertrand competition than in Cournot
competition. However, the study does not look at the effect of competition on innovation.



                                            4
erature in particular by focusing on an environment in which innovation is
cumulative over time.3 And to our knowledge, we are the first to design a lab-
oratory experiment to examine the escape competition and Schumpeterian
effects in a dynamic investment environment with different time horizons,
and to assess the composition effect.
    The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays
out the basic step-by-step innovation model and derives its main predictions.
Section 3 describes the setup for the two experiments. Section 4 presents the
results, and Section 5 concludes.


2       Theoretical predictions
To motivate and guide our experiment, and to derive our main predictions,
we first present a simple version of the model with step-by-step innovations.
While we chose to write the simplest possible model for pedagogical purposes,
the predictions derived in this Section are robust to generalizations of the
environment (see, for example, Aghion et al. (2001)).
    In this model, a “laggard firm”, i.e. a firm that is currently behind the
technological leader in the same sector, must catch up with the leader be-
fore becoming a leader itself. This step-by-step assumption implies that, in
a positive fraction of sectors, firms will be neck and neck, i.e. at the same
technology level. By making life more difficult for neck-and-neck firms, a
higher degree of product market competition will encourage them to inno-
vate in order to acquire a significant lead over their rivals. However, higher
competition may have a discouraging effect on innovation by laggard firms
in unleveled sectors.

2.1     Basic environment
We consider a simple Schumpeterian growth model in continuous time. There
is a continuous measure L of infinitely-lived individuals each of whom supplies
    3
     Isaac and Reynolds (1992) also study innovation investments over time. However,
the authors do not distinguish between the escape-competition and the Schumpeterian
effect, nor do they test the composition effect of competition. Similarly, Zizzo (2002) and
Breitmoser et al. (2010) study innovation investments in a multi-stage patent race. These
papers, however, do not look at the effect of varying competition and therefore cannot
address the Schumpeterian, escape-competition and composition effects.


                                            5
one unit of labor per unit of time. Each individual has intertemporal utility
                                  Z 1
                             ut =     ln Ct e−ρt dt
                                       0

where                                      Z   1
                                ln Ct =            ln yjt dj,
                                           0
and where each yj is the sum of two goods produced by (infinitely-lived)
duopolists in sector j :
                            yj = yAj + yBj .
    The logarithmic structure of the utility function implies that in equilib-
rium individuals spend the same amount on each basket yj .4 We choose this
expenditure as the numeraire, so that a consumer chooses each yAj and yBj
to maximize yAj + yBj subject to the budget constraint: pAj yAj + pBj yBj = 1;
that is, she will devote the entire unit of expenditure to the least expensive
of the two goods.

2.1.1    Technology and innovation
Each firm takes the wage rate as given and produces using labor as the only
input according to the following linear production function,

                             yit = γ kit lit , i ∈ {A, B}

where ljt is the labor employed, kit denote the technology level of duopoly
firm i at date t, and γ > 1 is a parameter that measures the size of a leading-
edge innovation. Equivalently, it takes γ −ki units of labor for firm i to produce
one unit of output. Thus the unit costs of production is simply ci = wγ −ki
which is independent of the quantity produced.
  4
    To
     R see this, note that a final good producer  R  will choose the yj ’s to maximize
u = ln yj dj subject to the budget constraint pj yj dj = E, where E denotes current
expenditures. The first-order condition for this is:

                            ∂u/∂yj = 1/yj = λpj for all j

where λ is a Lagrange multiplier. Together with the budget constraint this first-order
condition implies
                              pj yj = 1/λ = E for all j.



                                           6
   An industry j is thus fully characterized by a pair of integers (kj , mj )
where kj is the leader’s technology and mj is the technological gap between
the leader and the follower.5
   For expositional simplicity, we assume that knowledge spillovers between
the two firms in any intermediate industry are such that neither firm can get
more than one technological level ahead of the other, that is:

                                          m ≤ 1.

In other words, if a firm already one step ahead innovates, the lagging firm
will automatically learn to copy the leader’s previous technology and thereby
remain only one step behind. Thus, at any point in time, there will be
two kinds of intermediate sectors in the economy: (i) level or neck-and-neck
sectors where both firms are at technological par with one another, and
(ii) unleveled sectors, where one firm (the leader) lies one step ahead of its
competitor (the laggard or follower) in the same industry.6
    To complete the description of the model, we just need to specify the
innovation technology. Here we simply assume that by spending the R&D
cost ψ(z) = z 2 /2 in units of labor, a leader firm moves one technological
step ahead, with probability z. We call z the “innovation rate” or “R&D
intensity” of the firm. We assume that a laggard firm can move one step
ahead with probability h, even if it spends nothing on R&D, by copying the
leader’s technology. In other words, it is easier to reinvent the wheel than to
invent the wheel. Thus z 2 /2 is the R&D cost (in units of labor) of a laggard
firm moving ahead with probability z +h. Let z0 denote the R&D intensity of
each firm in a neck-and-neck industry; and let z−1 denote the R&D intensity
of a follower firm in an unleveled industry; if z1 denotes the R&D intensity of
the leader in an unleveled industry, note that z1 = 0, since our assumption of
automatic catch-up means that a leader cannot gain any further advantage
by innovating.
   5
     The above logarithmic final good technology together with the linear production cost
structure for intermediate goods implies that the equilibrium profit flows of the leader and
the follower in an industry depends only on the technological gap m between the two firms
(see Aghion and Howitt (1998, 2009)).
   6
     See Aghion et al (2001) for an analysis of the more general case where there is no limit
to the technological gap between leaders and laggards in unleveled sectors.




                                             7
2.2    Equilibrium profits and competition in level and
       unleveled sectors
One can show that the equilibrium profits are as follows (see Aghion and
Howitt (2009)). First, in an unleveled sector, the leader’s profit is equal to
                                          1
                                  π1 = 1 − ,
                                          γ
whereas the laggard in the unleveled sector will be priced out of the market
and hence will earn a zero profit:

                                    π −1 = 0.

    Consider now a level (or neck-and-neck) sector. If the two firms engaged
in open price competition with no collusion, then Bertrand competition will
bring (neck-an-neck) firms’ profits down to zero. At the other extreme, if the
two firms collude so effectively as to maximize their joint profits and shared
the proceeds, then they would together act like the leader in an unleveled
sector, so that each firm will earn π 1 /2.
    Now, if we model the degree of product market competition inversely by
the degree to which the two firms in a neck-and-neck industry are able to
collude, the normalized profit of a neck-and-neck firm will be of the form:

                      π 0 = (1 − ∆) π 1 ,   1/2 ≤ ∆ ≤ 1,

where ∆ parameterizes product market competition.
   We next analyze how the equilibrium research intensities z0 and z−1 of
neck-and-neck and laggard firms, respectively, vary with our measure of com-
petition ∆.

2.3    The Schumpeterian and escape-competition effects
Let Vm (resp. V−m ) denote the normalized steady-state value of being cur-
rently a leader (resp. a laggard) in an industry with technological gap m,
and let w denote the steady-state wage rate. We have the following Bellman




                                        8
equations:7

                ρV0 = π 0 + z 0 (V−1 − V0 ) + z0 (V1 − V0 ) − wz02 /2                   (1)
                                                           2
               ρV−1 = π −1 + (z−1 + h)(V0 − V−1 ) − wz−1     /2                         (2)
                ρV1 = π 1 + (z−1 + h)(V0 − V1 )                                         (3)

where z 0 denotes the R&D intensity of the other firm in a neck-and-neck
industry (we focus on a symmetric equilibrium where z 0 = z0 ).
    In words, the growth-adjusted annuity value ρV0 of currently being neck-
and-neck is equal to the corresponding profit flow π 0 plus the expected capital
gain z0 (V1 − V0 ) of acquiring a lead over the rival plus the expected capital
loss z 0 (V−1 − V0 ) if the rival innovates and thereby becomes the leader, minus
the R&D cost wz02 /2. Similarly, the annuity value ρV1 of being a technological
leader in an unleveled industry is equal to the current profit flow π 1 plus the
expected capital loss z−1 (V0 − V1 ) if the leader is being caught up by the
laggard (recall that a leader does not invest in R&D); finally, the annuity
value ρV−1 of currently being a laggard in an unleveled industry, is equal
to the corresponding profit flow π −1 plus the expected capital gain (z−1 +
                                                                           2
h)(V0 − V−1 ) of catching up with the leader, minus the R&D cost wz−1        /2.
    Using the fact that z0 maximizes the RHS of (1) and z−1 maximizes the
RHS of (2), we have the first order conditions:

                                  wz0 = V1 − V0                                         (4)
                                 wz−1 = V0 − V−1 .                                      (5)

    In Aghion, Harris and Vickers (1997) the model is closed by a labor
market clearing equation which determines ω as a function of the aggregate
demand for R&D plus the aggregate demand for manufacturing labor. Here,
for simplicity we shall ignore that equation and take the wage rate w as given,
normalizing it at w = 1.
    Then, using (4) and (5) to eliminate the V ’s from the system of equations
(1)-(3), we obtain a system of two equations in the two unknowns z0 and z−1 :

                                z02 /2 + (ρ + h)z0 − (π 1 − π 0 ) = 0                   (6)
                2
               z−1 /2 + (ρ + z0 + h)z−1 − (π 0 − π −1 ) − z02 /2 = 0                    (7)
   7
      Note that the left-hand-side of the Bellman equations should first be written as rV0 −
V̇0 . Then, using the fact that on a balanced growth path V̇0 = gV0 , and using the Euler
equation r − g = ρ, yields the Bellman equations in the text.

                                             9
    These equations can be solved recursively for unique positive values of
z0 and z−1 , and we are mainly interested by how these are affected by an
increase in product market competition ∆. It is straightforward to see from
equation (6) and the fact that

                               π 1 − π 0 = ∆π 1

that an increase in ∆ will increase the innovation intensity z0 (∆) of a neck-
and-neck firm. This is the escape competition effect:

Prediction 1 (Escape-competition effect): Innovation by neck and neck
firms is always stimulated by higher competition.

   Because competition negatively affects pre-innovation rents, competition
induces innovation in neck-and-neck sectors since firms are particularly at-
tracted by the monopoly rent.
   One can express z0 (∆) as
                                      p
                  z0 (∆) = −(ρ + h) + (ρ + h)2 + 2∆π 1 ,

taking the derivative
                         ∂z0          π1
                             =p                  .
                         ∂∆     (ρ + h)2 + 2∆π 1

In particular, ∂z
               ∂∆
                  0
                    can be shown to decrease when the rate of time preference
ρ increases. This generates the next prediction:

Prediction 2 (Escape-competition effect by rate of time prefer-
ence) The escape-competition effect is weaker for firms with high rate of
time preference.

    In other words, patient neck-and-neck firms put more weight on the future
post-innovation rents after having become a leader, and therefore, react more
positively to an increase in competition than impatient neck-and-neck firms.
    Then, plugging z0 (∆) into (7), we can look at the effect of an increase
in competition ∆ on the innovation intensity z−1 of a laggard. This effect
is ambiguous in general. In particular, for sufficiently high ρ, the effect is
negative as then z−1 varies like

                           π 0 − π −1 = (1 − ∆)π 1 .

                                      10
In this case, the laggard is very impatient and thus looks at its short-term
net profit flow if it catches up with the leader, which in turn decreases when
competition increases. This is the Schumpeterian effect:

Prediction 3 (Schumpeterian effect): Innovation by laggard firms in
unleveled sectors is discouraged by higher competition.

    Since competition negatively affects the post-innovation rents of laggards,
competition reduces innovation of laggards. However, for low values of ρ, this
effect is counteracted by an anticipated escape-competition effect:

Prediction 4 (Anticipated escape-competition effect): The effect of
competition on laggards’ innovation is less negative for firms with low rate
of time preference.

     In other words, patient laggards take into account their potential future
reincarnation as neck-and-neck firms, and therefore react less negatively to
an increase in competition than impatient laggards. The lower the rate of
time preference, the stronger the (positive) anticipated escape-competition
effect and therefore the more it mitigates the (negative) Schumpeterian effect
of competition on laggards’ innovation incentives. For laggards with a very
low rate of time preference, the anticipated escape-competition effect could
even completely dominate the Schumpeterian effect, leading to a positive
relationship between competition and innovation for laggards.
     Thus the effect of competition on innovation depends on the situation
of a sector. In unleveled sectors, the Schumpeterian effect is at work even
if it does not always dominate. But in level (or neck-and-neck) sectors, the
escape-competition effect is the only effect at work; that is, more competition
always induces neck-and-neck firms to innovate more in order to escape from
tougher competition.

2.4    Composition effect
In steady state, the fraction of sectors µ1 that are unleveled is constant,
as is the fraction µ0 = 1 − µ1 of sectors that are leveled. The fraction of
unleveled sectors that become leveled each period will be z−1 + h, so the
sectors moving from unleveled to leveled represent the fraction (z−1 + h) µ1
of all sectors. Likewise, the fraction of all sectors moving in the opposite

                                      11
direction is 2z0 µ0 , since each of the two neck-and-neck firms innovates with
probability z0 . In steady state, the fraction of firms moving in one direction
must equal the fraction moving in the other direction:
                         (z−1 + h)µ1 = 2z0 (1 − µ1 ) ,
which can be solved for the steady state fraction of unleveled sectors:
                                       2z0
                            µ1 =                .                          (8)
                                 z−1 + h + 2z0
    This fraction is increasing in competition as measured by ∆ since a
higher ∆ increases R&D intensity 2z0 in neck-and-neck sectors (the escape-
competition effect) whereas it tends to reduce R&D intensity z−1 + h in
unleveled sectors (the Schumpeterian effect). This positive effect of compe-
tition on the steady-state equilibrium fraction of neck-and-neck sectors we
refer to as the composition effect of competition:
Prediction 5 (Composition effect): The higher the degree of compe-
tition, the smaller the equilibrium fraction of neck-and-neck sectors in the
economy.
    More competition increases innovation incentives for neck-and-neck firms
whereas it reduces innovation incentives of laggard firms in unleveled sec-
tors. Consequently this reduces the flow of sectors from unleveled to leveled
whereas it increases the flow of sectors from leveled to unleveled.
    We now proceed to confront these predictions with experimental evidence.


3    The experiments
We conduct two separate experiments, the “infinite horizon” and the “finite
horizon” experiments, that are based on the same step-by-step innovation
game. The purpose of the infinite horizon experiment is to provide causal
evidence for the escape-competition and Schumpeterian effects, both when
the time horizon is long and short. Exogenous variations in the time hori-
zon can equivalently be interpreted as exogenous variations in firms’ rate of
time preference. The purpose of the finite horizon experiment is to observe
duopolies over a long period of time in order to provide causal evidence for
the composition effect. We first present the basic features of our laboratory
step-by-step innovation game, and will then describe the specific features of
the two experiments in more detail.

                                      12
3.1     The step-by-step innovation game
At the center of our experimental design is a computerized step-by-step inno-
vation game with the following features: Two subjects i and j are randomly
matched with each other, forming a sector. Before period 1, both subjects
are exogenously assigned to technology levels τ i and τ j . In each period, one
of the two subjects can choose an R&D investment n ∈ {0, 5, 10, . . . , 80},
which determines the probability of a successful innovation in this period.8
Each subject is informed that the common quadratic R&D cost function is
given by:
                                                     2
                                              n
                                  C(n) = 600               .                             (9)
                                             100
    At the beginning of period 1, it is randomly determined which subject can
invest in innovation in that period. If innovation is successful, the innovator
moves up one step from θ to θ +1. Thus, in our experiments only one subject
could innovate at a time. This reduces the computational complexity of the
game by fixing subjects’ beliefs about their opponents’ current action and
therefore about the expected returns in that period from innovating. How-
ever, precluding simultaneous moves in our experiment does not qualitatively
affect the theoretical predictions of the model.9
    To account for technology spillovers which may occur from leaders to
laggards, laggards are automatically granted with an additional innovation
probability of h = 30. Thus, the overall innovation probability is given by
n + h, where n can be chosen from n ∈ {0, 5, 10, . . . , 50}, so that the maximal
probability of innovating is still given by n + h = 80.
    At the end of each period, payments are made to both subjects. Payments
depend on the technology levels θi and θj of subjects i and j. Payments after
    8
      We have deliberately excluded the possibility to choose an investment in R&D of 100,
i.e. to innovate with certainty. We believe that certain innovation would be an unrealistic
feature of the environment which we are studying.
    9
      Indeed, while our experiments were conducted in discrete time, the model described in
Section 2 is in continuous time. A continuous time implementation of the experiments was
technically not feasible. Since the probability of simultaneous innovation is negligible when
time is continuous, alternating moves are in fact a closer experimental implementation of
the continuous time model. Also note that Aghion and Howitt (2009) specify a step-by-
step innovation model in which time is discrete and only one firm innovates in each period.
The basic theoretical predictions remain the same.



                                             13
every period to subject i are determined by the following function:
                       
                        200 − C(n)            if θi > θj
                  πi =     (1 − ∆)200 − C(n) if θi = θj
                           0 − C(n)            if θi < θj .
                       

    Subjects are symmetric, and payments to subject j are determined in
exactly the same way. This profit function implies that the leader is always
able to earn a monopoly rent of 200 points. If subjects are neck and neck,
their payoffs depend on the degree of competition in the sector, which is
measured by ∆. If ∆ = 0.5, subjects are able to split the monopoly rent
between them, whereas if ∆ = 1, subjects face perfect competition and rents
in neck-and-neck states are 0.10 Finally, if a subject is lagging behind his
competitor in terms of technology, her profit is 0. The costs associated with
R&D are always subtracted from the rent earned.
    After each period, each subject receives information about the behavior
of the other subject in the preceding period. In particular, she sees which
investment level the other subject has chosen, what the costs of innovation
were, whether the other subject benefited from a laggard innovation bonus
of h = 30 in the preceding round, and whether she will benefit from a lag-
gard innovation bonus in the current period. In addition, each subject sees
the payment of both subjects in the preceding period as well as the current
technology level and the overall income of both subjects over the entire treat-
ment. Based on this information, subjects can decide how much to invest in
the current period.

3.2     The infinite horizon experiment
The infinite horizon experiment consisted of three different treatment vari-
ations, some of which within subjects, and others across subjects. First, all
subjects participated in a full competition (∆ = 1) and in a no competition
  10
     We chose to capture exogenous variations in the degree of competition by directly
modifying the payoffs to subjects in neck-and-neck states. In our view, this is the most
direct and cleanest exogenous manipulation of competition in a step-by-step innovation
model. An alternative approach in the experimental literature would be to vary the
number of subjects competing in the same market. For the purposes of our experiments,
however, we are less concerned by the particular channel whereby the competitive process
affects competitive outcomes, than by how the outcome of this competitive process affects
innovation incentives.

                                           14
treatment (∆ = 0.5), which were played sequentially in varying order across
sessions.
    Second, each subject made decisions conditional on being a laggard or
being neck-and-neck in the first round. Therefore, the starting position was
randomly varied within subject. In each treatment, it was randomly deter-
mined whether both subjects were assigned to technology levels of τ i = 0, or
whether one of the subjects was given a head start and assigned to a tech-
nology level of τ i = 1. If the sector was leveled at the start, it was randomly
determined which of the two firms could invest in the first round. If the
sector was unleveled, the subject that was randomly put into the laggard
position could invest in the first period. We elicited the first round invest-
ment decisions of all subjects using the strategy method. That is, we asked
the subjects how much they want to invest if they start in a neck-and-neck
sector, and how much if they start as laggards. After choices were made, the
computer would randomly select the initial state of the sector and which of
the two firms could invest. The investment choice associated with the chosen
state was then automatically implemented. The strategy method was only
used for first round investment choices. The exogenous variation in compe-
tition and starting position allows us to causally test the escape-competition
and Schumpeterian effects.
    Third, the time horizon was varied across sessions. At the end of each
period, the game would end with a fixed and known stopping probability
p. This procedure enables us to exogenously impose an infinite horizon and
exogenously vary the stopping probability p, which can be equivalently in-
terpreted as exogenous variation in the rate of time preference ρ. In some
sessions subjects faced a short time horizon – 80% probability of ending the
game after each round – while in other sessions the subjects faced a long
time horizon – 10% probability of ending the game after each round. In the
short time horizon treatment, a game lasted on average 2.2 rounds, whereas
in the long time horizon treatment, a game lasted on average 10 rounds.
This design feature allows us to test whether the escape-competition and
Schumpeterian effects vary conditional on the time horizon.
    Table 1 summarizes the four treatment variations. Remember that in
each treatment, subjects made first period decisions conditional on being
in the laggard state and being in the neck-and-neck state. Once the second
period was entered into, the game progressed as follows: If a subject is lagging



                                      15
                                                  Time horizon
                                      long (p = 0.1)          short (p = 0.8)
                      no comp.        long horizon /          short horizon /
       Competition


                      (∆ = 0.5)       no competition          no competition

                      full comp.      long horizon /           short horizon
                       (∆ = 1)       full competition         full competition


                     Table 1: Treatment variation: Infinite horizon experiment

behind, that subject is given the right to invest.11 If the sector is neck-and-
neck, it is randomly determined at the beginning of the round which subject
is able to invest. To make sure that subjects understood the experiment well,
in particular the random stopping rule, they practiced the game against a
computer opponent for a period of 3 minutes before the experiment started.12
    The infinite horizon experiment is specifically designed to address the es-
cape competition and the Schumpeterian effects. In order to obtain clean
causal evidence, exogenous assignment of subjects to neck-and-neck and lag-
gard states in different competition and time horizon treatments is absolutely
crucial. Because subjects are only truly randomly assigned to the neck-and-
neck or laggard state in the first period of the interaction, we restrict our
attention in the analysis to first period investments. To allow for some learn-
ing, we repeated each competition treatment three times. So overall, each
subject made six first-round investment decisions as a neck-and-neck firm
and six first-round investment decisions as a laggard firm, three for each
competition treatment.
    Once a game ends, subjects are re-matched with another subject with
whom they have not been matched with previously. More specifically, we
  11
     This design feature is equivalent of the automatic catch-up assumption in the theory,
that is, firms cannot be more than one technological level apart.
  12
     They were informed that the computer’s investment decisions would be determined
randomly, i.e., nothing could be learned from the computer’s strategy. If a game ended
within the 3 minutes, they were informed about the final outcomes of that game and a new
game would start. This procedure allowed them to get familiar with the computer interface
and in particular with the random stopping rule, so that they could form expectations
about the length of the game.


                                                16
designed matching groups and divided subjects within a matching group
into a group A and a group B. Each group A subject would only be matched
with group B subjects from the same matching group, but no subject would
be matched twice with the same subject. 200 points were exchanged to SFr.
1 at the end of the experiment, and subjects were endowed with 5000 points
at the beginning of the session, to ensure them against potential losses.

3.3    The finite horizon experiment
The finite horizon experiment involved three different competition treat-
ments: No Competition (∆ = 0.5), Intermediate Competition (∆ = 0.75)
and Full Competition (∆ = 1). We again employed a within subjects de-
sign, i.e., all subjects participated in all three treatments. This treatment
variation is summarized in the table below:

                  Treatment                Competition
                  No Competition           ∆ = 0.5
                  Intermediate Competition ∆ = 0.75
                  Full Competition         ∆=1

         Table 2: Treatment variation: Finite horizon experiment

    Our main interest in the finite horizon experiment is in analyzing predic-
tions that stem from the dynamics within sectors over an extended number of
periods. An infinite horizon would have yielded a large number of practical
problems in terms of conducting the experiment as well as in analyzing the
data. The finite horizon experiment consisted of 50 periods in each treat-
ment. To simulate an infinite game with expected time horizon of 50 periods,
the probability of ending the game after each period would have needed to
be only 2%. This would have implied an expected standard deviation in
treatment length of 50 periods. Consequently, the finite horizon experiment
is better suited to address the causal effect of competition on industry com-
petition and aggregate innovation.
    At the beginning of each treatment, all subjects were assigned to tech-
nology levels τ i = 0, i.e. all sectors started neck-and-neck. One subject was
then randomly determined to invest in the first period. Thereafter, subjects
alternated in their ability to invest. There was no automatic catch-up, i.e.,
subjects could theoretically move more than one technological step apart

                                     17
from each other. This is consistent with the most general version of the
model presented in Aghion et al. (2001) and generates the same predictions
as simpler versions of the model.13
    To be ensured against potential losses, each subject was endowed with
3000 points at the beginning of the first period. The exchange rate from
points to SFr was 300:1.14 Subjects within a session are initially divided into
group A and group B. In each treatment, a subject from group A is matched
with a subject from group B. Between treatments, subjects are randomly
rematched with another subject from the other group whom they have not
been matched with previously.

3.4     Experimental procedures
Between 18 and 22 subjects participated in each experimental session. In
total, four experimental sessions of the infinite horizon experiment were con-
ducted. To control for treatment order effects, each potential sequence of the
two competition treatments was used in one session both for the long and
for the short time horizon. Moreover, six experimental sessions of the finite
horizon experiment were conducted. Again, to control for treatment order
effects, sessions were designed such that each potential sequence of the three
treatments was used in one session.
    The experiments were programmed and conducted with the software z-
Tree (Fischbacher (2007)). All experimental sessions were conducted at the
experimental laboratory of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH)
in Zurich. Our subject pool consisted primarily of students at the Univer-
sity of Zurich and ETH Zurich and were recruited using the ORSEE soft-
ware (Greiner (2004)). The finite horizon experiment took place in February
2012, and the infinite horizon experiment took place in December 2013. 118
subjects participated in the finite horizon experiment, and 86 subjects par-
ticipated in the infinite horizon experiment. Payment was determined by the
sum of the final amounts of points a subject received in all treatments played
  13
     See Aghion et al. (2001) for a generalization of the model in Section 2 which allows
for more than one gap and derives similar results using calibrations. It is noteworthy,
however, that in about 80% of our experimental observations subjects are at most one
technological gap apart from each other.
  14
     Because of the expected number of periods each subject played in the finite and infinite
experiments, the exchange rate was modified in order to provide subjects with appropriate
earnings for participation in the experiments.


                                             18
during a session. In addition, each subject received a show-up fee of 10 SFr.
On average, an experimental session lasted 1.5 hours. The average payment
in the finite horizon experiment was 45 SFr ($50.00), and 40.8 SFr ($44.70)
in the infinite horizon experiment.


4       Results
In this section, we present our empirical results and compare them to the
above predictions. We will first discuss the effects of competition on R&D
investments in leveled and unleveled sectors by reporting the findings from
the infinite horizon experiment. Thereafter, we will present the effects of
competition on industry composition as well as the overall effect of competi-
tion on innovation outcomes resulting from the finite horizon experiment.

4.1     Evidence from the infinite horizon experiment
4.1.1    The escape-competition effect
Increased competition should have a positive effect on R&D investments if
firms are neck and neck. Empirically, we find in our experiment:

Result 1 (Escape-competition effect): An increase in competition leads
to a significant increase in R&D investments by neck-and-neck firms.

    Figure 1 shows the average first round investments in neck-and-neck states
in the infinite horizon experiment by competition and time horizon. It can
be seen that average first-round R&D investment in the full competition
treatment is approximately 10 percentage points (or 35.2 percent) higher
than in the no-competition treatment when the time horizon is long, and
approximately 6 percentage points (or 28 percent) higher when the time
horizon is short. To test the significance of each of these two differences,
we use a one-sided clustered version of the signed-rank test proposed by
Datta and Satten (2008), which controls for potential dependencies between
observations. Recall that the game was repeated three times (repetition)
per treatment. Thus, we elicited three first-round R&D investment decisions
per subject (conditional on being neck-and neck) per competition treatment,
in either of the two time horizons. For each individual and repetition, we
then calculated the difference between first round R&D investment in the full

                                     19
                                  Long Time Horizon                                                  Short Time Horizon
                        45




                                                                                           45
                        40




                                                                                           40
   Investments in R&D




                                                                      Investments in R&D
                        35




                                                                                           35
                        30




                                                                                           30
                        25




                                                                                           25
                        20




                                                                                           20
                        15




                                                                                           15
                             no competition   full competition                                  no competition   full competition




Figure 1: Average R&D investments in neck-and-neck industries.
Averages are calculated using the average individual first round investments
in neck-and-neck states in each treatment. The bars display one standard
deviation of the mean.

competition treatment and in the no competition treatment. This generates
three observations per subject. Clustering at the individual level, we find
that these differences are highly significant in both the short and long time
horizons (p < 0.01). Thus, consistent with the theory, we find an escape-
competition effect for both time horizons. This result confirms the causal
nature of the positive effect of competition on the R&D investments of neck-
and-neck firms.
    Furthermore, we can test if the size of the escape-competition effect varies
with the time horizon. According to the theory, the escape-competition effect
should be stronger in the long time horizon than in the short time horizon.
To test this prediction, we compare the differences in first round R&D in-
vestments across competition treatments, as defined above, between subjects
that participated in the short-horizon treatment and subjects that partici-
pated in the long-horizon treatment, using the one-sided clustered version
of the rank-sum test proposed by Datta and Satten (2005). While we do
observe a larger effect of competition on investment in the long time horizon
than in the short time horizon (10 versus 6 percentage points), clustering at
the individual level, we find that this difference is not statistically significant
(p = 0.26).

                                                                 20
Result 2 (Escape-competition effect and time horizon): We find no
significant difference in the escape-competition effect between the short time
horizon and the long time horizon.


                          Table 3: Neck-and-neck investments
                                             (1)          (2)           (3)
             full comp.                    8.139***     6.148**       6.729**
                                         (2.091)      (2.340)       (2.917)
             long horizon                  9.005***     7.060**       9.880**
                                         (2.766)      (3.443)       (3.774)
             full comp.*long horizon                    3.890         5.316
                                                      (4.117)       (4.888)
             Constant                     21.243***    22.216***     21.462***
                                         (2.500)      (2.481)       (3.027)
             Adj. R2                       0.097        0.098         0.148
             Observations                    516          516           172

First round investments in neck-and-neck states are used as observations. Standard errors
are clustered at the individual level. Regressions (1) and (2) consider all three repetitions.
Regression (3) only considers the third repetition. Treatment order fixed effects and
repetition fixed effects (only in regressions (1) and (2)) are included. Significance levels:
*** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1.

    Similar results are found by running OLS regressions, which are reported
in Table 3. It can be seen that the escape-competition effect is very ro-
bust across different regression specifications. More specifically, average
first-round investments in the full competition treatment are between 6 and
8 percentage points higher than average first-round investments in the no
competition treatment, and the difference is highly significant. This holds
whether we use all first round observations, or whether we restrict our anal-
ysis to the third repetition only, after some learning has taken place. Finally,
notice that the coefficient of the interaction term of competition and time
horizon is large and positive in all regression specifications. However, we
cannot establish significance.15
  15
    In Figure A.1 in Appendix A, we also show the R&D investments of neck-and-neck
firms in the finite horizon experiment, conditional on the competition treatment. It can
be seen that R&D investments in the full competition treatment are larger than in the in-
termediate competition treatment, and R&D investments in the intermediate competition


                                             21
4.1.2    The Schumpeterian and anticipated escape-competition ef-
         fects
Increased competition is expected to have a negative effect on R&D invest-
ments if firms are lagging behind. Empirically, we find in our experiments:

Result 3 (Schumpeterian effect): An increase in competition decreases
R&D investments of laggards.




                                           Long Time Horizon                                                  Short Time Horizon
                                 35




                                                                                                    35
            Investments in R&D




                                                                               Investments in R&D
                                 30




                                                                                                    30
                                 25




                                                                                                    25
                                 20




                                                                                                    20
                                 15




                                                                                                    15
                                 10




                                                                                                    10




                                      no competition   full competition                                  no competition   full competition




Figure 2: Average R&D investments of laggards in unleveled in-
dustries. Averages are calculated using the average individual first round
investments of laggards in unleveled states in each treatment. The bars dis-
play one standard deviation of the mean.

    Figure 2 shows the average first round investments of laggard firms in
unleveled states in the infinite horizon experiment, divided by competition
and time horizon. It can be seen that average first round R&D investments
in the full competition treatment is approximately 6 percentage points (or
20 percent) lower than in the no competition treatment when the time hori-
zon is long, and approximately 11 percentage points (or 42.3 percent) lower
treatment are larger than in the no competition treatment throughout all 50 periods. This
data pattern is also consistent with the predictions of the escape competition effect. How-
ever, since firms are not randomly assigned to neck-and-neck states as the rounds progress
in the finite horizon experiment, we restrict the causal analysis to the infinite horizon
experiment in which the variation in the time horizon, the variation in the degree of com-
petition as well as the assignment to the neck-and-neck state are all fully exogenously
varied.


                                                                          22
when the time horizon is short. To test the significance of each of these
two differences, we again use the one-sided clustered version of the signed-
rank test proposed by Datta and Satten (2008). As for the neck-and-neck
case, we collected three first round R&D investment decisions per subject
(conditional on being a laggard) per competition treatment, in either of the
two time horizons. For each individual and repetition, we then calculate the
difference between first round R&D investment in the full competition treat-
ment and in the no competition treatment. This generates three observations
per subject. Clustering at the individual level, we find that these differences
are highly significant in both the short and long time horizons (p < 0.01).
Thus, consistent with the theory, we find evidence of a Schumpeterian effect
in unleveled sectors.
    Furthermore, by comparing the effect of competition on laggards’ invest-
ment across time horizons, we find:

Result 4 (Anticipated escape-competition effect): The Schumpete-
rian effect is stronger the shorter a firm’s time horizon.

    According to the theory, the Schumpeterian effect should decrease as the
time horizon increases. To test this prediction, we compare the differences
in first round R&D investments across competition treatments, as defined
above, between subjects who participated in the short horizon treatment
and subjects who participated in the long horizon treatment, again using the
one-sided clustered version of the rank-sum test (Datta and Satten (2005)).
Clustering at the individual level, we find that this difference is statistically
significant (p = 0.02).
    Similar results are found by running OLS regressions. These are reported
in Table 4. Average first round investments in the full competition treatment
are between 10 and 13 percentage points lower than average first round in-
vestments in the no competition treatment, when the time horizon is short.
Consistent with the theory, when the time horizon is long, the Schumpeterian
effect is less pronounced by approximately 4.8 to 5.5 percentage points, as
reflected in the statistical significance of the interaction term in regressions
(2) and (3). This significance is, however, only marginal (p < 0.1).16
  16
    In Figure A.2 in Appendix A, we also show the R&D investments of laggard firms
with a lag of 1 in the finite horizon experiment, conditional on the competition treatment.
It can be seen that, in early periods, R&D investments are increasing in the degree of



                                            23
                            Table 4: Laggard investments

                                           (1)           (2)           (3)
             full comp                  –8.170***    –10.621***    –12.902***
                                       (1.474)       (1.686)       (1.909)
             long horizon                6.232***      3.838         3.067
                                       (2.122)       (2.440)       (2.779)
             full comp*long horizon                    4.788*        5.516*
                                                     (2.864)       (3.256)
             Constant                   25.414***     26.611***     26.576***
                                       (1.761)       (1.753)       (2.037)
             Adj. R2                     0.113         0.117         0.136
             Observations                  516           516           172

First round investments in laggard states are used as observations. Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level. Regressions (1) and (2) consider all repetitions. Regres-
sion (3) only considers the third repetition. Treatment order fixed effects and repetition
fixed effects (only in regressions (1) and (2)) are included. Significance levels: *** p<.01,
** p<.05, * p<.1.


4.2     Evidence from the finite horizon experiment
4.2.1    The composition effect
The exogenous variation of competition across treatments in the finite hori-
zon experiment allows us to also identify the causal effect of competition on
industry composition as well as on aggregate innovation outcomes.
   According to the theory, we should observe a larger fraction of sectors
being neck-and-neck the smaller the degree of competition. This is indeed
what we find and is summarized below.17
competition, i.e., they are largest in the full competition treatment. As time progresses
and the time horizon gets shorter, the pattern reverses. In late periods, R&D investments
are largest in the no competition treatment. This data pattern is consistent with a strong
anticipated escape-competition effect that dominates the Schumpeterian effect in early
periods, i.e. when firms face a long time horizon. On the other hand, as time progresses
and the time horizon becomes shorter, the anticipated escape-competition effect looses
strength and the Schumpeterian effect starts to dominate. However, since firms are not
randomly assigned to laggard states as the rounds progress in the finite horizon experiment,
we again restrict the causal analysis of these effects to the infinite horizon experiment.
  17
     Remember that a sector is equal to one duopoly in the experiment, formed by two
subjects.



                                             24
                             .55

                              .5
                 Frequency
                             .45

                              .4

                             .35

                              .3
                                        no               intermediate      full
                                     competition          competition   competition



Figure 3: Average frequency of neck-and-neck states. The frequency of
neck-and-neck states in a sector over 50 periods constitutes one observation.
The bars display one standard deviation of the mean.

Result 5 (Composition effect): As competition increases, sectors be-
come less likely to be neck and neck, and subjects are more likely to be tech-
nologically apart from each other.


                                   Table 5: Composition effect

                                                            (1)
                                     ∆                  –0.205 ***
                                                        (0.044)
                                     Constant            0.588 ***
                                                        (0.075)
                                     Adj. R2             0.019
                                     Observations         177

A sector in a competition treatment accounts for one observation in these regressions.
Regression (1) uses the frequency of neck-and-neck states in a sector during the 50 periods
as the outcome variable. Treatment order fixed effects are included. Standard errors are
clustered on the session level. Significance levels: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.

   Evidence for the composition effect can be seen in Figure 3, which shows
the average fraction of periods in which sectors were neck and neck, condi-

                                                   25
                     14


                     13


                     12


                     11


                     10
                               no          intermediate       full
                            competition     competition    competition



Figure 4: Average technology level reached within a sector. The
maximum level of technology reached in a sector over 50 periods constitutes
one observation. The bars display one standard deviation of the mean.

tional on the degree of competition. As the Figure demonstrates, the fre-
quency of observing leveled sectors decreases by approximately 5 percentage
points as the degree of competition in the industry increases by 0.25.
    To assess the statistical significance of these effects, we compare the fre-
quency of neck-and-neck states in a sector across the different competition
treatments using regression analysis. The dependent variable is the fraction
of observed neck-and-neck states within a sector. Individual and treatment
order fixed effects are included. Results are shown in Table 5. We find that
when our competition measure increases by 0.25, the relative frequency of
sectors being neck and neck decreases by 5.1 percentage points, and this
decrease is highly significant.18

4.2.2    The effect of competition on aggregate outcomes
Next, we can look at the effect of competition on aggregate R&D investments
in our finite horizon experiment.

  18
    Figure A.3 in Appendix A also reports the time path of the frequency in which
duopolies are neck-and-neck, across the three competition treatments. It can be seen
that throughout all time periods, the frequency of duopolies that are neck-and-neck is
higher in the full competition treatment than in the intermediate or in no competition
treatment.



                                          26
Result 6 (Aggregate innovation): Competition increases average R&D
investments and, as a result, the average level of technology that is ultimately
reached in a sector in our experiment.

    Figure 4 shows the average final technology level of the leading firm within
a sector across competition treatments. The figure shows that the average
final technology level of the leading firm increases by 0.5 points, from 11.7
to 12.2, when competition increases from no competition to intermediate
competition. The average final technology level increases by another 1.4
points to 13.5 when competition increases to full competition. Again, we can
evaluate the statistical significance of these effects using regression analysis.
The regression includes treatment order fixed effects, and standard errors are
clustered on the session level. Results are shown in Table 6.

                      Table 6: Overall technological progress

                                       (1)                    (2)
                               Max. Tech. Level     Avg. R&D Investment
                          ∆      3.597**             11.926***
                               (1.124)              (3.821)
                   Constant      9.812***            28.300***
                               (1.243)              (3.156)
                   Adj. R2       0.007                0.012
               Observations        177                 8850

A sector in a competition treatment accounts for one observation in these regressions.
Regression (1) uses the maximum final technology level in a sector as the outcome variable.
Regression (2) uses all individual R&D investment choices as observations. Treatment
order fixed effects and individual fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered
on the session level. Significance levels: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .1.

    Column (1) in Table 6 provides strong empirical support for Result 6.
As ∆ increases by 0.25 points, the final technology level of the leading firm
increases by 0.9 points, and this increase is significant. Column (2) in Ta-
ble 6 shows results from a regression of R&D investments on the degree of
competition. This regression uses all observations and includes individual
and treatment order fixed effects. Therefore, the coefficient on ∆ can be in-
terpreted as the average effect of competition on R&D investments over the
course of our 50 round experiment. It can be seen that R&D investments on
average increase by 3 percentage points (roughly 10 percent) as ∆ increases

                                            27
by 0.25 points. Hence, our setup provides evidence of a positive impact of
competition on R&D investments as well as on the maximal technology level
reached within a sector.


5      Conclusion
In this paper, we provided a first attempt at analyzing the effect of compe-
tition on step-by-step innovation in the laboratory. Using the lab instead of
field data has several advantages. First, it addresses the endogeneity issue
head on: our results do capture causal effects of competition on innovation.
Second, the lab experiment allows us to disentangle the effects of competition
on innovation in leveled and unleveled sectors. In particular, we find strong
evidence of an escape-competition effect in neck-and-neck sectors. Third,
our design allows us to study how the effect of competition on innovation
varies with the time horizon. Consistent with theory, we show that the
Schumpeterian effect is stronger in the short horizon treatment than in long
horizon treatment, suggesting that in the latter case, an anticipated escape-
competition effect is also at work. Fourth, we are able to identify the causal
effect of competition on industry composition and on aggregate outcomes.
We find that, as competition increases, sectors become less likely to be neck
and neck, and the average technology level of the leading firm increases.
     The methodology used in the paper can be used to sort out other open de-
bates in industrial organization and law & economics. For example, one could
use experiments to study the effects of patent protection or R&D subsidies,19
or the relative performance of various intellectual property legislations or the
impact of various antitrust policies,20 or the effects of various contractual or
institutional arrangements, on innovation and entry. The industrial organi-
zation and law & economics literatures often point to counteracting effects
without always spelling out the circumstances under which one particular
effect should be expected to dominate. We believe that lab experiments can
fill this gap by providing more precise predictions as to when such or such
effect should indeed dominate. This and other extensions of our analysis in
this paper are left to future research.

  19
    In Acemoglu and Akcigit (2012), this corresponds to our parameter h.
  20
    Experimental testing may be particularly useful given the homogeneity of intellectual
property regimes across countries resulting from international harmonization efforts.


                                           28
References
Acemoglu, D. and U. Akcigit (2012). Intellectual Property Rights: Policy,
  Competition and Innovation. Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion 10, 1–42.
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, and P. Howitt (2013). What Do We Learn From
  Schumpeterian Growth Theory? Working Paper 18824, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt (2005). Com-
  petition and Innovation: an Inverted-U Relationship. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 120, 701–728.
Aghion, P. and R. Griffith (2006). Competition and Growth: Reconciling
  Theory and Evidence. MIT Press.
Aghion, P., C. Harris, P. Howitt, and J. Vickers (2001). Competition, Im-
  itation and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation. Review of Economic
  Studies 68, 467–492.
Aghion, P., C. Harris, and J. Vickers (1997). Competition and Growth with
  Step-by-Step Innovation: An Example. European Economic Review 41,
  771–782.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (2009). The Economics of Growth. MIT Press.
Blundell, R., R. Griffith, and J. V. Reenen (1999). Market Share, Market
  Value and Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms. Review
  of Economic Studies 66, 529–554.
Breitmoser, Y., J. H. Tan, and D. J. Zizzo (2010). Understanding Perpetual
  R&D Races. Economic Theory 44 (3), 445–467.
Darai, D., D. Sacco, and A. Schmutzler (2010). Competition and Innovation:
 an Experimental Investigation. Experimental Economics 13, 439–460.
Datta, S. and G. Satten (2005). Rank-Sum Tests for Clustered Data. Journal
 of the American Statistical Association 471 (1), 908–915.
Datta, S. and G. Satten (2008). A Signed-rank Test for Clustered Data.
 Biometrics 64 (2), 501–507.

                                   29
Fischbacher, U. (2007). z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic
  Experiments. Experimental Economics 10, 171–178.
Galasso, A. and M. A. Schankerman (2013).                     Patents and
 Cumulative Innovation:       Causal Evidence from            the Courts.
 http://ssrn.com/abstract=2247011.
Greiner, B. (2004). The Online Recruitment System ORSEE: A Guide for the
  Organization of Experiments in Economics. Discussion Papers on Strategic
  Interaction 2003–10, Max Planck Institute of Economics, Strategic Inter-
  action Group.
Hall, B. H. and D. Harhoff (2012). Recent Research on the Economics of
  Patents. Annual Review of Economics 4, 541–565.
Harris, C. and J. Vickers (1985a). Patent Races and the Persistence of
  Monopoly. Journal of Industrial Economics 33, 461–481.
Harris, C. and J. Vickers (1985b). Perfect Equilibrium in a Model of a Race.
  Review of Economic Studies 52, 193–209.
Harris, C. and J. Vickers (1987). Racing with Uncertainty. Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 54, 1–21.
Hart, O. D. (1980). Perfect Competition and Optimal Product Differentia-
  tion. Journal of Economic Theory 22, 279–312.
Isaac, R. M. and S. S. Reynolds (1988). Appropriability and Market Structure
  in a Stochastic Invention Model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 103,
  647–671.
Isaac, R. M. and S. S. Reynolds (1992). Schumpeterian Competition in
  Experimental Markets. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 17,
  59–100.
Jaffe, A. B. (2000). The U.S. Patent System in Transition: Policy Innovation
  and the Innovation Process. Research Policy 29, 531–557.
Murray, F. and S. Stern (2007). Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights
 Hinder the Free Flow of Scientific Knowledge? An Empirical Test of the
 Anti-commons Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza-
 tion 63, 648–687.

                                    30
Nickell, S. J. (1996). Competition and Corporate Performance. Journal of
  Political Economy 104, 724–746.

Sacco, D. and A. Schmutzler (2011). Is There a U-shaped Relation Between
  Competition and Investment? International Journal of Industrial Organi-
  zation 29, 65–73.

Schmidt, K. M. (1997). Managerial Incentives and Product Market Compe-
  tition. Review of Economic Studies 64, 191–214.

Schmutzler, A. (2009). Is Competition Good for Innovation? A Simple
  Approach to an Unresolved Question. Foundations and Trends in Microe-
  conomics 5 (6), 355–428.

Schmutzler, A. (2013). Competition and Investment: A Unified Approach.
  International Journal of Industrial Organization 31 (5), 477–487.

Suetens, S. and J. Potters (2007). Bertrand Colludes More than Cournot.
  Experimental Economics 10 (1), 71–77.

Tirole, J. (1988). The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press.

Vives, X. (2008). Innovation and Competitive Pressure. Journal of Industrial
  Economics 56, 419–469.

Williams, H. (2013). Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence
 from the Human Genome. Journal of Political Economy 121, 1–27.

Zizzo, D. J. (2002). Racing with Uncertainty: a Patent Race Experiment.
  International Journal of Industrial Organization 20 (6), 877 – 902.




                                    31
Appendix A:                       R&D investments over time in
                                  the finite horizon experiment

                     50  40
                Investment
              30     20




                              0   10            20            30            40    50
                                                      Round

                                   No Competition              No Competition
                                   Int. Competition            Int. Competition
                                   Full Competition            Full Competition




Figure A.1: Neck-and-neck investments over time. 2-round averages
shown by the dots for the respective competition treatment, quadratic time
trend shown by the solid lines for each competition treatment. In total, 118
subjects participated in each treatment.




                                                      32
                      35 45
                         40
              Investment
                30       25
                         20




                                       0   10            20            30            40    50
                                                               Round

                                            No Competition              No Competition
                                            Int. Competition            Int. Competition
                                            Full Competition            Full Competition




Figure A.2: Laggard investments over time. 2-round averages shown
by the dots for the respective competition treatment, quadratic time trend
shown by the solid lines for each competition treatment. In total, 118 sub-
jects participated in each treatment. Only observations with a lag of 1 are
included.
                         .8
              Fraction Neck-and-Neck
                  .4     .2   .6




                                       0   10            20            30            40    50
                                                               Round

                                            No Competition              No Competition
                                            Int. Competition            Int. Competition
                                            Full Competition            Full Competition




Figure A.3: Composition effect over time. 2-round averages shown by the
dots for the respective competition treatment, quadratic time trend shown
by the solid lines for each competition treatment. In total, there were 59
sectors in each treatment.

                                                               33
