                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                           BUILDING STATE CAPACITY:
                 EVIDENCE FROM BIOMETRIC SMARTCARDS IN INDIA

                                       Karthik Muralidharan
                                           Paul Niehaus
                                        Sandip Sukhtankar

                                       Working Paper 19999
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19999


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014

Previously circulated as "Payments Infrastructure and the Performance of Public Programs: Evidence
from Biometric Smartcards in India". We thank Santosh Anagol, Abhijit Banerjee, Julie Cullen, Gordon
Dahl, Roger Gordon, Rema Hanna, Gordon Hanson, Erzo Luttmer, Santhosh Mathew, Simone Schaner,
Monica Singhal, Anh Tran, and seminar participants at AEA 2013 meetings, Boston University, Stanford,
IGC growth week-LSE, Harvard, UC San Diego, Duke, UConn, Dartmouth, Brown, CGD, Georgetown,
ISI-Delhi, UC Berkeley, the World Bank, MIT, BREAD, UPenn-CASI, and Yale for comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to officials of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, including Reddy
Subrahmanyam, Koppula Raju, Shamsher Singh Rawat, Raghunandan Rao, G Vijaya Laxmi, AVV
Prasad, Kuberan Selvaraj, Sanju, Kalyan Rao, and Madhavi Rani; as well as Gulzar Natarajan for
their continuous support of the Andhra Pradesh Smartcard Study. We are also grateful to officials
of the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), including Nandan Nilekani, Ram Sevak
Sharma, and R Srikar for their support. We thank Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) and Ravi Marri,
Ramanna, and Shubra Dixit for their help in providing us with administrative data. This paper would
not have been possible without the outstanding efforts and inputs of the J-PAL/IPA project team,
including Vipin Awatramani, Kshitij Batra, Prathap Kasina, Piali Mukhopadhyay, Michael Kaiser,
Raghu Kishore Nekanti, Matt Pecenco, Surili Sheth, and Pratibha Shrestha. We are deeply grateful
to the Omidyar Network – especially Jayant Sinha, CV Madhukar, Surya Mantha, Ashu Sikri, and
Dhawal Kothari – for the financial support and long-term commitment that made this study possible.
We also thank IPA, Yale University, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for additional financial
support through the Global Financial Inclusion Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Building State Capacity: Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India
Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar
NBER Working Paper No. 19999
March 2014, Revised October 2014
JEL No. D73,H53,I38,O30,O31

                                            ABSTRACT

Anti-poverty programs in developing countries are often difficult to implement; in particular, many
governments lack the capacity to deliver payments securely to targeted beneficiaries. We evaluate
the impact of biometrically-authenticated payments infrastructure ("Smartcards") on beneficiaries of
employment (NREGS) and pension (SSP) programs in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh, using a
large-scale experiment that randomized the rollout of Smartcards over 158 sub- districts and 19 million
people. We find that, while incompletely implemented, the new system delivered a faster, more
predictable, and less corrupt NREGS payments process without adversely affecting program access.
For each of these outcomes, treatment group distributions first-order stochastically dominated those
of the control group. The investment was cost-effective, as time savings to NREGS beneficiaries alone
were equal to the cost of the intervention, and there was also a significant reduction in the "leakage"
of funds between the government and beneficiaries in both NREGS and SSP programs. Beneficiaries
overwhelmingly preferred the new system for both programs. Overall, our results suggest that investing
in secure payments infrastructure can significantly enhance "state capacity" to implement welfare
programs in developing countries.


Karthik Muralidharan                               Sandip Sukhtankar
Department of Economics, 0508                      Dartmouth College
University of California, San Diego                326 Rockefeller Hall
9500 Gilman Drive                                  Hanover, NH 03755
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                            sandip.sukhtankar@dartmouth.edu
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu

Paul Niehaus
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
pniehaus@ucsd.edu
1       Introduction
Developing countries spend billions of dollars annually on anti-poverty programs, but the de-
livery of these programs is often poor and plagued by high levels of corruption (World Bank,
2003; Pritchett, 2010). Yet governments often spend considerably more resources and atten-
tion on specific programs relative to public goods such as implementation capacity (Lizzeri
and Persico, 2001). While a recent theoretical literature has highlighted the importance of
investing in state capacity for economic development (Besley and Persson, 2009, 2010), there
is limited empirical evidence on the returns to such investments.
   One key constraint in the effective implementation of anti-poverty programs is the lack of
a secure payments infrastructure to make transfers to intended beneficiaries. Often, money
meant for the poor is simply stolen by officials along the way, with case studies estimating
“leakage” of funds as high as 70 to 85 percent (Reinikka and Svensson, 2004; PEO, 2005).
Thus, building a secure payments infrastructure can be seen as an investment in state ca-
pacity that could improve the implementation of existing anti-poverty programs, and also
expand the state’s long-term policy choice set.1
   Recent technological advances have made it feasible to provide people with a biometrically-
authenticated unique ID linked to bank accounts, which can be used to directly transfer
benefits. Biometric technology is especially promising in developing country settings where
high illiteracy rates constrain financial inclusion by precluding the universal deployment of
traditional forms of authentication, such as passwords or PIN numbers.2 The potential for
such payment systems to improve the performance of public welfare programs (and also
provide financial inclusion for the poor) has generated enormous interest around the world,
with a recent survey documenting the existence of 230 programs in over 80 countries that
are deploying biometric identification and payment systems (Gelb and Clark, 2013). This
enthusiasm is exemplified by India’s ambitious Aadhaar initiative to provide biometric-linked
unique IDs (UIDs) to nearly a billion residents, and then transition social program payments
to Direct Benefit Transfers via UID-linked bank accounts. Over 600 million UIDs have been
issued to date, with the former Finance Minister of India claiming that the project would
be “a game changer for governance” (Harris, 2013).
   At the same time, there are several reasons to be skeptical about the hype around these
new payment systems. First, their implementation entails solving a complex mix of techni-
cal and logistical challenges, raising the concern that the undertaking might fail unless all
components are well-implemented (Kremer, 1993). Second, vested interests whose rents are
    1
     For instance, the ability to securely transfer income to poor households may make it more feasible for
governments to replace distortionary commodity subsidies with equivalent income transfers.
   2
     Fujiwara (2013) provides analogous evidence from Brazil on the effectiveness of electronic voting tech-
nology in circumventing literacy constraints, and on increasing enfranchisement of less educated voters.



                                                     1
threatened may subvert the intervention and limit its effectiveness (Krusell and Rios-Rull,
1996; Prescott and Parente, 2000). Third, the new system could generate exclusion errors if
genuine beneficiaries are denied payments due to technical problems. This would be particu-
larly troubling if it disproportionately hurt the most vulnerable beneficiaries (Khera, 2011).
Fourth, reducing corruption could paradoxically hurt the poor if it dampened incentives for
officials to implement anti-poverty programs in the first place (Leff, 1964). Finally, even as-
suming positive impacts, cost-effectiveness is unclear as the best available estimates depend
on a number of untested assumptions (see e.g. NIPFP (2012)). Overall, there is very limited
evidence to support either the enthusiasts or the skeptics of biometric payment systems.
   In this paper, we contribute toward filling this gap, by presenting evidence from a large-
scale experimental evaluation of the impact of rolling out biometric payments infrastructure
to make social welfare payments in India. Working with the Government of the Indian state
of Andhra Pradesh (AP),3 we randomized the order in which 158 sub-districts introduced
a new “Smartcard” program for making payments in two large welfare programs: the Na-
tional Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), and Social Security Pensions (SSP).
NREGS is the largest workfare program in the world (targeting 800 million rural residents
in India), but has well-known implementation issues including problems with the payment
process and leakage (Dutta et al., 2012; Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2013a,b). SSP programs
complement NREGS by providing income support to the rural poor who are not able to
work (Dutta et al., 2010). The new Smartcard-based payment system used a network of
locally-hired, bank-employed staff to biometrically authenticate beneficiaries and make cash
payments in villages. It thus provided beneficiaries of NREGS and SSP programs with the
same effective functionality as intended by UID-linked Direct Benefit Transfers.
   The experiment randomized the rollout of Smartcards over a universe of about 19 million
people, with randomization conducted over entire sub-districts, making it (to our knowledge)
the largest randomized controlled trial ever conducted. Evaluating an “as is” deployment of
a complex program that was implemented at scale by a government addresses one common
concern about randomized trials in developing countries: that studying NGO-led pilots may
not provide accurate forecasts of performance at scales relevant for policy-making (see for
example Banerjee et al. (2008); Acemoglu (2010); Bold et al. (2013)). The experiment thus
provides an opportunity to learn about the likely impacts of India’s massive UID initiative,
as well as scaled-up deployments of biometric payments infrastructure more generally.
   After two years of program rollout, the share of Smartcard-enabled payments across both
programs in treated sub-districts had reached around 50%. This conversion rate over two
years compares favorably to the pace of electronic benefit transfer rollout in other contexts.
   3
    The original state of AP (with a population of 85 million) was divided into two states on June 2, 2014.
Since this division took place after our study, we use the term AP to refer to the original undivided state.



                                                     2
For example, the United States took over 15 years to convert all Social Security payments
to electronic transfers. On the other hand, the inability to reach a 100% conversion rate
(despite the stated goal of senior policymakers to do so) reflects the non-trivial logistical,
administrative, and political challenges of rolling out a complex new payment system (see
section 3.3 and Mukhopadhyay et al. (2013) for details).
   We therefore focus throughout the paper on intent-to-treat analysis, which correctly es-
timates the average return to as-is implementation following the “intent” to implement the
new system. These estimates yield the relevant policy parameter of interest, because they
reflect the impacts that followed a decision by senior government officials to invest in the
new payments system and are net of all the logistical and political economy challenges that
accompany such a project in practice.
   We find that, though incompletely implemented, Smartcards delivered a faster, more pre-
dictable, and less corrupt payment process for beneficiaries, especially under the NREGS
program. NREGS workers spent 21 fewer minutes collecting each payment (19% less than
the control group), and collected their payments 10 days sooner after finishing their work
(29% faster than the control mean). The absolute deviation of payment delays also fell
by 39% relative to the control group, suggesting that payments became more predictable.
Payment collection times for SSP beneficiaries also fell, but the reduction was small and
statistically insignificant.
   Turning to payment amounts, we find that household NREGS income in treated areas
increased by 24%. However, government outlays on NREGS did not change, resulting in a
significant reduction in leakage of funds between the government and target beneficiaries.
With a few further assumptions (see section 4.2), we estimate a 10.8 percentage point re-
duction in NREGS leakage in treated areas (a 35% reduction relative to the control mean).
Household SSP income in treated areas increased by 5%, with no corresponding change in
government outlays, resulting in a significant reduction in SSP leakage of 2.9 percentage
points (a 48% reduction relative to the control mean).
   We find no evidence that poor or vulnerable segments of the population were made worse
off by the new system. For key outcomes such as the time to collect payments, payment
delays, and payments received, treatment distributions first-order stochastically dominate
control distributions. Thus, no treatment household was worse off relative to a control
household at the same percentile of the outcome distribution. Treatment effects also did
not vary significantly as a function of village-level baseline characteristics, suggesting broad-
based gains across villages from access to the new payments system.
   These gains for participants on the intensive margin of program performance were not
offset by reduced access to programs on the extensive margin. We find that the proportion
of households reporting having worked on NREGS increased by 7.4 percentage points (an


                                               3
18% increase over the control mean of 42%). We show that this result is explained by a
significant reduction in the fraction of “quasi-ghost” beneficiaries - defined as cases where
officials reported work against a beneficiary’s name and claimed payments for this work, but
where the beneficiary received neither work nor payments. These results suggest that the
introduction of biometric authentication made it more difficult for officials to over-report the
amount of work done (and siphon off the extra wages unknown to the beneficiary), and that
the optimal response for officials was to ensure that more actual work was done against the
claimed wages, with a corresponding increase in payments made to workers.
   To better understand the mechanism of impact, we conduct a non-experimental decompo-
sition of the treatment effects. We find that improvements in the timeliness of payments are
concentrated entirely in villages that switched to the new payment system, but do not vary
across recipients who had or had not received biometric Smartcards within these villages. In
contrast, increases in payments to beneficiaries and reductions in leakage are concentrated
entirely among recipients who actually received biometric Smartcards. This suggests that or-
ganizational changes associated with the new payment system (especially moving the point
of payment to the village) drove improvements in the payments process, while biometric
authentication was key to reducing fraud.
   Overall, the data suggest that Smartcards improved beneficiary experiences in collecting
payments, increased payments received by program participants, reduced corruption, broad-
ened access to program benefits, and achieved these without substantially altering fiscal
burdens on the state. Consistent with these findings, 90% of NREGS beneficiaries and 93%
of SSP recipients who experienced Smartcard-based payments reported that they prefer the
new system to the old.
   Finally, Smartcards appear to be cost-effective. In the case of NREGS, our best estimate
of the value of beneficiary time savings ($4.3 million) alone exceeds the government’s cost
of program implementation and operation ($4.1 million). Further, our estimated NREGS
leakage reduction of $32.8 million/year is eight times greater than the cost of implementing
the new Smartcard-based payment system. While gains in the SSP program are more modest,
the estimated leakage reduction of $3.3 million/year is still higher than the costs of the
program ($2.3 million). The reductions in leakage represent redistribution from corrupt
officials to beneficiaries, and are hence not Pareto improvements. However, if a social planner
places a greater weight on the gains to program beneficiaries (who are likely to be poorer)
than on the loss of illegitimate rents to corrupt officials, the welfare effects of reduced leakage
will be positive.
   The first contribution of our paper is as an empirical complement to the recent theoretical
work on state capacity (Besley and Persson, 2009, 2010). Despite the high potential social
returns to investing in public goods such as general-purpose implementation capacity, both


                                                4
theory and evidence suggest that politicians may underinvest in these relative to specific
programs that provide patronage to targeted voter and interest groups (Lizzeri and Persico,
2001; Mathew and Moore, 2011). Further, politicians may perceive the returns to such
investments as accruing in the long-run, while their own electoral time horizon may be
shorter. Our results suggest that in settings of weak governance, the returns to investing in
implementation capacity can be positive and large over as short a period as two years.4
   We also contribute to the literature on identifying effective ways to reduce corruption in
developing countries (Reinikka and Svensson, 2005; Olken, 2007). Our results highlight the
potential for technology-enabled top-down improvements in governance to reduce corruption.
They may also help to clarify the literature on technology and service delivery in developing
countries, where an emerging theme is that technology may or may not live up to its hype.
Duflo et al. (2012) find, for example, that digital cameras and monetary incentives increased
teacher attendance and test scores in Indian schools (when implemented in schools run by
an NGO). Banerjee et al. (2008) find, on the other hand, that a similar initiative to monitor
nurses in health care facilities was subverted by vested interests when a successful NGO-
initiated pilot program was transitioned to being implemented by the local government. Our
results, which describe the effects of an intervention driven from the start by the government’s
own initiative, suggest that technological solutions can significantly improve service delivery
when implemented as part of an institutionalized policy decision to do so at scale.
   Finally, our results complement a growing literature on the impact of payments and
authentication infrastructure in developing countries. Jack and Suri (2014) find that the
MPESA mobile money transfer system in Kenya improved risk-sharing; Aker et al. (2013)
find that using mobile money to deliver transfers in Niger cut costs and increased women’s
intra-household bargaining power; and Gine et al. (2012) show how biometric authentication
helped a bank in Malawi reduce default and adverse selection.
   From a policy perspective, our results contribute to the ongoing debates in India and other
developing countries regarding the costs and benefits of using biometric payments technology
for service delivery. We discuss the policy implications of our results and caveats to external
validity in the conclusion.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the context, social
programs, and the Smartcard intervention. Section 3 describes the research design, data,
and implementation details. Section 4 presents our main results. Section 5 discusses cost-
effectiveness. Section 6 concludes.
   4
    While set in a different sector, the magnitude of our estimated reduction in leakage is consistent with
recent evidence from India showing that investing in better monitoring of teachers may yield a tenfold reduc-
tion in the cost of teacher absence (Muralidharan et al., 2014). Dal Bó et al. (2013) present complementary
evidence on the impact of raising public sector salaries on the quality of public sector workers hired.




                                                     5
2     Context and Intervention
As the world’s largest democracy, India has sought to reduce poverty through ambitious
welfare schemes. Yet these schemes are often poorly implemented (Pritchett, 2010) and prone
to high levels of corruption or “leakage” as a result (PEO, 2005; Niehaus and Sukhtankar,
2013a,b). Benefits that do reach the poor arrive with long and variable lags and are time-
consuming for recipients to collect. The AP Smartcard Project aimed to address these
problems by integrating new payments infrastructure into two major social welfare programs
managed by the Department of Rural Development, which serve as a comprehensive safety
net for both those able (NREGS) and unable (SSP) to work. We next describe these programs
and how the introduction of Smartcards altered their implementation.


2.1    The National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
The NREGS is one of the two main welfare schemes in India and the largest workfare program
globally, covering 11% of the world’s population. The Government of India’s allocation to
the program for fiscal year April 2013-March 2014 was Rs. 330 billion (US $5.5 billion),
or 7.9% of its budget.5 The program guarantees every rural household 100 days of paid
employment each year. There are no eligibility requirements, as the manual nature of the
work is expected to induce self-targeting.
   Participating households obtain jobcards, which list household members and have empty
spaces for recording employment and payment. Jobcards are issued by the local Gram
Panchayat (GP, or village) or mandal (sub-district) government offices. Workers with job-
cards can apply for work at will, and officials are legally obligated to provide either work
on nearby projects or unemployment benefits (though, in practice, the latter are rarely
provided). NREGS projects vary somewhat but typically involve minor irrigation work or
improvement of marginal lands. Project worksites are managed by officials called Field Assis-
tants, who record attendance and output on “muster rolls” and send these to the sub-district
for digitization, from where the work records are sent up to the state level, which triggers
the release of funds to pay workers.
   Figure A.1a depicts the payment process in AP prior to the introduction of Smartcards.
The state government transfers money to district offices, which pass the funds to mandal of-
fices, which transfer it to beneficiary post office savings accounts. Workers withdraw funds by
traveling to branch post offices, where they establish identity using jobcards and passbooks.
In practice it is common for workers (especially illiterate ones) to give their documents to
Field Assistants who then control and operate their accounts – taking sets of passbooks to
   5
     NREGS figures: http://indiabudget.nic.in/ub2013-14/bag/bag5.pdf; total outlays: http://
indiabudget.nic.in/ub2013-14/bag/bag4.pdf


                                              6
the post office, withdrawing cash in bulk, and returning to distribute it in villages.
   By design, the volume of NREGS work and payments should be constrained only by worker
demand. In practice, supply increasingly appears to be the binding constraint, with NREGS
availability being constrained by both the level of budgetary allocations, and by limited local
administrative capacity and willingness to implement projects (Dutta et al., 2012; Witsoe,
2014). We confirm this in our data, and find that less than 4% of workers in our control
group report that they can access NREGS work whenever they want it. Further, both prior
research (Dutta et al., 2012) and data from our control group suggest that even conditional
on doing NREGS work, the payment process is slow and unreliable, limiting the extent to
which the NREGS can effectively insure the rural poor.6 In extreme cases, delayed payments
have reportedly led to worker suicides (Pai, 2013).
   The payments process is also vulnerable to leakage of two forms: over-reporting or under-
payment. Consider a worker who has earned Rs. 100, for example: the Field Assistant
might report that he is owed Rs. 150 but pay the worker only Rs. 90, pocketing Rs. 50
through over-reporting and Rs. 10 through under-payment. Two extreme forms of over-
reporting are “ghost” workers who do not exist, but against whose names work is reported
and payments are made; and “quasi-ghost” workers who do exist, but who have not received
any work or payments though work is reported against their names and payments are made.
In both cases, the payments are typically siphoned off by officials. Prior work in the same
context suggests that over-reporting is the most prevalent form of leakage - perhaps because
it involves stealing from a “distant” taxpayer, and can be done without the knowledge of
workers (Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2013a).


2.2     Social Security Pensions
Social Security Pensions are unconditional monthly payments targeted to vulnerable popu-
lations. The program covers over 6 million beneficiaries and costs the state roughly Rs. 18
billion ($360 million) annually. Eligibility is restricted to members of families classified as
Below the Poverty Line (BPL) who are residents of the district in which they receive their
pension and not covered by any other pension scheme. In addition, recipients must qualify
in one of four categories: old age (> 65), widow, disabled, or certain displaced traditional
occupations. Pension lists are proposed by village assemblies (Gram Sabhas) and sanctioned
by the mandal administration. Pensions pay Rs. 200 (˜$3) per month except for disability
pensions, which pay Rs. 500 (˜$8).
   6
    Imperfect implementation of social insurance programs may even be a deliberate choice by local elites to
preserve their power over the rural poor, as these elites are often the default providers of credit and insurance.
See Anderson et al. (2013) for discussion, and also Jayachandran (2006) who shows how uninsured rainfall
shocks benefit landlords and hurt workers (especially those who lack access to credit).



                                                        7
   Unlike the NREGS, pension payments are typically disbursed each month in the village
itself by a designated village development officer. While we are not aware of any systematic
data on payment delays or leakage from the SSP prior to our own study, press reports have
documented cases of “ghost” beneficiaries (for example, deceased beneficiaries who were not
removed from the roster) and cases of officials taking bribes to enroll beneficiaries or to
disburse payments (Mishra, 2005; Sethi, 2014).


2.3     Smartcard-enabled Payments and Potential Impacts
The Smartcard project was India’s first large-scale attempt to implement a biometric pay-
ments system.7 It modified pre-existing NREGS and SSP payment systems in two ways.
First, beneficiaries were expected to establish their identity using biometrics to collect pay-
ments. Biometric data (typically all ten fingerprints) and digital photographs were collected
during enrollment campaigns and linked to newly created bank accounts. Beneficiaries were
then issued a physical “Smartcard” that included their photograph and (typically) an em-
bedded electronic chip storing biographic, biometric, and bank account details. Beneficiaries
use these cards to collect payments as follows: (a) they insert them into a Point-of-Service
device operated by a Customer Service Provider (CSP), which reads the card and retrieves
account details; (b) the device prompts for one of ten fingers, chosen at random, to be
scanned; (c) the device compares this scan with the records on the card, and authorizes a
transaction if they match; (d) the amount of cash requested is disbursed;8 and (e) the device
prints out a receipt (and in some cases announces transaction details in the local language,
Telugu). Figure A.2 shows a sample Smartcard and a fingerprint scan in progress.9
  Second, the intervention changed the identities of the people and organizations responsible
for delivering payments. Organizationally, the government contracted with banks to manage
payments, and these banks in turn contracted with Technology Service Providers (TSPs) to
manage the last-mile logistics of delivery; the TSPs then hired and trained CSPs.10 Figure
A.1b illustrates the flow of funds from the government through banks, TSPs and CSPs to
   7
      The central (federal) government had similar goals for the Aadhaar (UID) platform. However, the initial
rollout of Aadhaar was as an enabling infrastructure, and it had not yet been integrated into any of the
major welfare schemes as of June 2014. The Smartcard intervention can therefore be seen as a functional
precursor to the integration of Aadhaar into the NREGS and SSP.
    8
      While beneficiaries could in principle leave balances on their Smartcards and thus use them as savings
accounts, NREGS guidelines required beneficiaries to be paid in full for each spell of work. As a result the
default expectation was that workers would withdraw their wages in full.
    9
      Note that a truly “smart” card was not required or always issued: one Bank chose to issue paper
cards with digital photographs and bar codes while storing biometric data in the Point-of-Service device (as
opposed to on the card). Authentication in this system was otherwise the same.
  10
      This structure reflects Reserve Bank of India (RBI) regulations requiring that accounts be created only
by licensed banks. Since the fixed cost of bank branches is typically too high to make it viable to profitably
serve rural areas, the RBI allows banks to partner with TSPs to jointly offer and operate no-frills accounts
that could be used for savings, benefits transfers, remittances, and cash withdrawals.


                                                      8
beneficiaries under this scheme. The government assigned each district to a single bank-TSP
pairing, and compensated them with a 2% commission on all payments delivered in GPs that
were migrated to the new Smartcard-based payment system (banks and TSPs negotiated
their own terms on splitting the commission). The government required a minimum of 40%
beneficiaries in a GP to be enrolled and issued Smartcards prior to converting the GP to
the new payment system; this threshold applied to each program separately. Once a GP
was “converted”, all payments - for each program in which the threshold was reached - in
that GP were routed through the Bank-TSP-CSP system (even for beneficiaries who had
not enrolled in or obtained Smartcards).
   The government also stipulated norms for CSP selection, and required that CSPs be women
resident in the villages they served, have completed secondary school, not be related to village
officials, preferably be members of historically disadvantaged castes, and be members of a
self-help group.11 While meeting all these requirements was often difficult and sometimes
impossible, the selected CSPs were typically closer socially to beneficiaries than the post-
office officials or village development officers (both government employees) who previously
disbursed payments. Moreover, because CSPs were stationed within villages they were also
geographically closer to beneficiaries.
   While the Smartcard intervention was designed to help beneficiaries, its impacts were
unclear a priori. Smartcards could speed up payments, for example, by moving transactions
from the (typically distant) post office to a point within the village. They could just as easily
slow down the process, however, if CSPs were less reliably present or if the checkout process
were slower due to technical problems.12 Similarly, on-time cash availability could either
improve or deteriorate depending on how well TSPs managed cash logistics relative to the
post office. In a worst-case scenario the intervention could cut off payments to beneficiaries
who were unable to obtain cards, lost their cards, or faced malfunctioning authentication
devices. Skeptics of biometric authentication have emphasized such concerns (Khera, 2011).13
   Impacts on fraud and corruption were also unclear. In principle, Smartcards should reduce
payments to “ghost” beneficiaries as ghosts do not have fingerprints, and also make it harder
for officials to collect payments in the name of real beneficiaries as they must be present,
provide biometric input, and receive a receipt which they can compare to the amount dis-
bursed. These arguments assume, however, that the field technology works as designed and
that CSPs are no more likely to be corrupt than local GP officials and post office workers.
Moreover, achieving significant leakage reductions might require complete implementation,
  11
     Self-help groups are groups of women organized by the government to facilitate micro-lending.
  12
     For example, case-study based evidence suggests that manual payments were faster than e-payments in
Uganda’s cash transfer program (CGAP, 2013).
  13
     The tension here between reducing fraud and excluding genuine beneficiaries is an illustration of the
general trade-off between making Type I (exclusion) and Type II (inclusion) errors in public welfare programs
(see(Dahl et al., 2013)for a discussion in the context of adjudicating claims of disability insurance) .


                                                     9
and yet the intervention was complex enough that complete implementation was unlikely.
  Finally, even if Smartcards were to reduce corruption in payments, they could have neg-
ative consequences on the extensive margin of program access. In the case of NREGS,
reducing rents may reduce local officials’ incentives to create and implement projects, which
could reduce participants’ access to work. In the case of SSP, reducing leakage could drive
up the illicit price of getting on the SSP beneficiary list in the first place.


3      Research Design
3.1     Randomization
The AP Smartcard project began in 2006, but took time to overcome initial implementation
challenges including contracting, integration with existing systems, planning the logistics
of enrollment and cash management, and developing processes for financial reporting and
reconciliation. Because the government contracted with a unique bank to implement the
project within each district, and because multiple banks participated, considerable hetero-
geneity in performance across districts emerged over time. In eight of twenty-three districts
the responsible banks had made no progress as of late 2009; in early 2010 the government
decided to restart the program in these districts, and re-allocated their contracts to banks
that had implemented Smartcards in other districts. This “fresh start” created an attractive
setting for an experimental evaluation of Smartcards for two reasons. First, the roll-out of
the intervention could be randomized in these eight districts. Second, the main implementa-
tion challenges had already been solved in other districts, yielding a “stable” implementation
model prior to the evaluation.
   Our evaluation was conducted in these eight districts (see Figure A.3), which have a com-
bined rural population of around 19 million. While not randomly selected, they look similar
to AP’s remaining 13 non-urban districts on major socioeconomic indicators, including pro-
portion rural, scheduled caste, literate, and agricultural laborers (Table A.1). They also span
the state geographically, with representation in all three historically distinct socio-cultural
regions: 2 in Coastal Andhra and 3 each in Rayalseema and Telangana.
   The study was conducted under a formal agreement between J-PAL South Asia and the
Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) to randomize the order in which mandals (sub-
districts) were converted to the Smartcard system. Mandals were assigned by lottery to one
of three rollout waves: 113 to wave 1, 195 to wave 2, and 45 to wave 3 (Figure A.3).14 Our
  14
    While statistical power would have been maximized by equalizing the number of treatment and control
mandals, the final design had considerably fewer control mandals than treatment mandals since the gov-
ernment wanted to minimize the number of mandals that were deliberately held back from the program.
A typical mandal in AP has a population of 50,000 - 75,000 (average = 62,600 in our study districts) and



                                                  10
data collection and analysis focus on comparisons between outcomes in wave 1 (treatment)
and wave 3 (control) mandals; wave 2 was created as a buffer to increase the time between
program rollout in these waves. The lag between program rollout in treatment and control
mandals was over two years. Randomization was stratified by district and by a principal
component of socio-economic characteristics.15 Table A.2 presents tests of equality between
treatment and control mandals along characteristics used for stratification, none of which
(unsurprisingly) differ significantly. Table A.3 reports balance along all of our main outcomes
as well as key socio-economic household characteristics from the baseline survey; one of
eighteen differences for NREGS and two of eleven for SSP are significant at the 10% level.
In the empirical analysis we include specifications that control for the village-level baseline
mean value of our outcomes to test for sensitivity to any chance imbalances.


3.2     Data Collection
Our data collection was designed to capture impacts broadly, including both anticipated
positive and negative effects. We first collected official records on beneficiary lists and benefits
paid, and then conducted detailed baseline and endline household surveys of representative
samples of enrolled participants. Household surveys included questions on receipts from and
participation in the NREGS and SSP as well as questions about general income, employment,
consumption, and assets. We conducted surveys in August through early October of 2010
(baseline) and 2012 (endline) in order to obtain information about NREGS participation
between late May and early July of those years, as this is the peak period of participation in
most districts (see Figure 1).16 The intervention was rolled out in treatment mandals shortly
after baseline surveys. We also conducted unannounced audits of NREGS worksites during
our endline surveys to independently verify the number of workers who were present.
  We sampled 886 GPs in which to conduct surveys using probability proportional to size
(PPS) sampling without replacement. We sampled six GPs per mandal in six districts and
four GPs per mandal in the other two, and sampled one habitation17 from each GP again by
consists of around 25-30 Gram Panchayats. There are a total of 405 mandals across the 8 districts. We
dropped 51 of these mandals (12.6%) prior to randomization, as they had already begun Smartcard en-
rollment. An additional mandal in Kurnool district was dropped because no NREGS data were available.
Of the remaining mandals, 15 were assigned to treatment and 6 to control in each of Adilabad, Anantapur,
Khammam, Kurnool, Nellore; 16 to treatment and 6 to control in Nalgonda; 10 to treatment and 5 to control
in Vizianagaram; and 12 to treatment and 4 to control in Kadapa.
  15
     Specifically: population, literacy rate, NREGS jobcards, NREGS peak employment rate, and proportion
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, SSP disability recipient, and other SSP pension recipient.
  16
     There is a tradeoff between surveying too soon after the NREGS work was done (since payments would
not have been received yet), and too long after (since recall problems might arise). We surveyed on average
10 weeks after work was done, and also facilitated recall by referring to physical copies of jobcards (on which
work dates and payments are meant to be recorded) during interviews.
  17
     A GP typically comprises of a few distinct habitations, with an average of 3 habitations per GP.



                                                      11
PPS. Within habitations we sampled six households from the frame of all NREGS jobcard
holders and four from the frame of all SSP beneficiaries. Our NREGS sample includes five
households in which at least one member had worked during May-June according to official
records and one household in which no member had worked. This sampling design trades
off power in estimating leakage (for which households reported as working matter) against
power in estimating rates of access to work (for which all households matter). For our
baseline (endline) survey we sampled 8579 (8834) households, of which we were unable to
survey or confirm existence of 1005 (300), while 103 (361) households were confirmed as
ghost households, leaving us with final sets of 7471 and 8173 households for the baseline and
endline surveys respectively.18
   The resulting dataset is a panel at the village level and a repeated cross-section at the
household level. This is by design, as the endline sample should be representative of potential
participants at that time. We also test for differential attrition by treatment status in the
sampling frames for both programs, to confirm that Smartcards did not affect the roster
of program participants itself. In control mandals, 2.4% of jobcards in the baseline frame
drop out (likely due to death, or migration), while 5.9% of jobcards in the endline frame
are new entrants (likely due to the creation of new nuclear families, migration, and new
enrollments); neither rate is significantly different in treatment mandals (Table A.4a).19
There is also no difference in the total number of jobcards across treatment and control
mandals (Table A.5). Churn rates are somewhat higher for the SSP (9.7% dropouts and
16% entrants) but again balanced across treatment and control (Table A.4b). We also verify
that new entrants are similar across control and treatment on demographics (household
size, caste, religion, education) and socioeconomics (income, consumption, poverty status)
for both NREGS and SSP programs (Table A.6). These results suggest that exposure to
the Smartcard treatment did not affect either the size or the composition of the frame of
potential program participants.
  18
      Note that the high number of surveys (1005) that we are unable to include in our baseline analysis
is mainly a result of surveyor error in adhering to extremely rigorous standards used to track sampled
households. By endline we had streamlined processes so that almost all 300 households left out were because
of genuine inability to trace them. Since we have a village-level panel as opposed to a household one, the
baseline data is only used to control for village-level means of key outcome variables, and non-completion of
individual surveys is less of a concern.
   19
      Around 65% of rural households have jobcards, likely the bulk of those who might participate (authors
calculations using National Sample Survey Round 66 (2009-2010)). Thus, it is not surprising that we find
no significant change in the composition of the sample frame between treatment and control mandals, since
most potential workers probably already had jobcards.




                                                     12
3.3     Implementation, First-Stage, and Compliance
We present a brief description of the implementation of the Smartcard project and the extent
of actual roll-out for two reasons. First, it helps us distinguish between de jure and de facto
aspects of the Smartcard initiative, and thereby helps to better interpret our results by
characterizing the program as it was implemented. Second, understanding implementation
challenges provides context that may be useful for forecasting how other deployments of
biometric payments in other settings may fare.
   As may be expected, the implementation of such a complex project faced a number of
technical, logistical, and political challenges. Even with the best of intentions and admin-
istrative attention, the enrollment of tens of millions of beneficiaries, physical delivery of
Smartcards and Point-of-Service devices, identification and training of CSPs, and putting
in place cash management protocols would have been a non-trivial task. In addition, local
officials (both appointed and elected) who benefited from the status quo system had little
incentive to cooperate with the project, and it is not surprising that there were attempts to
subvert an initiative to reduce leakage and corruption (as also described in Banerjee et al.
(2008)). In many cases, local officials tried to either capture the new system (for instance, by
attempting to influence CSP selection), or delay its implementation (for instance, by citing
difficulties to beneficiaries in accessing their payments under the new system).
   On the other hand, senior officials of GoAP were strongly committed to the project, and
devoted considerable administrative resources and attention to successful implementation.
More generally, GoAP was strongly committed to NREGS and a leader in utilization of
federal funds earmarked for the program. Overall, implementation of the Smartcard Program
was a priority for GoAP, but it faced an inevitable set of challenges. Our estimates therefore
reflect the impacts of a policy-level decision to implement the Smartcard project at scale,
and is net of all the practical complexities of doing so.
   Figure 2 plots program rollout in treatment mandals from 2010 to 2012 using admin-
istrative data. Clearly, implementation was incomplete. About 80% of treatment group
mandals were “converted” (had at least one converted GP) by the time of the endline in
2012. Conditional on being in a converted mandal, about 80% (96%) of GPs had con-
verted for NREGS (SSP) payments, where being “converted” meant that payments were
made through the new Bank-TSP-CSP system. These payments could include authenti-
cated payments, unauthenticated payments to workers with Smartcards, and payments to
workers without Smartcards.20 The government obtained data only on which payments were
made to beneficiaries with Smartcards (“carded payments” in their lexicon), which made up
about two-thirds of payments within converted GPs by the endline. All told, about 50% of
  20
    Transactions may not be authenticated for a number of reasons, including failure of the authentication
device and non-matching of fingerprints.


                                                   13
payments in treatment mandals across both programs were “carded” by May 2012.21
   Turning to compliance with the experimental design, we see that GPs in mandals that
were randomly assigned to treatment status were much more likely to have migrated to
the new payment system, with 67% (78%) of GPs in treated mandals being “carded” for
NREGS (SSP) payments, compared to 0.5% (0%) of control GPs (Table 1). The overall
rate of transactions done with carded beneficiaries was 45% (59%) in treatment areas, with
basically no carded transactions reported in control areas. We can also assess compliance
using data from our survey, which asked beneficiaries about their Smartcard use. About
38% (45%) of NREGS (SSP) beneficiaries in treated mandals said that they used their
Smartcards both generally or recently, while 1% (4%) claimed to do so in control mandals.
This latter figure likely reflects some beneficiary confusion between enrollment (the process
of capturing biometrics and issuing cards) and the onset of carded transactions themselves,
as the government did not allow the latter to begin in control areas until after the endline
survey. Note that official and survey figures are not directly comparable since the former
describe transactions while the latter describe beneficiaries.
   Overall, both official and survey records indicate that Smartcards were operational albeit
incompletely in treatment areas, with minimal contamination in control areas. We therefore
focus on intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates which can be interpreted as the average treatment
effects corresponding to an approximately half-complete implementation.22 It is important
to note, however, that the 50% rate of Smartcard coverage achieved in two years compares
favorably with the performance of arguably simpler changes in payments processes even in
high-income countries. The United States, for example, took over fifteen years to convert
Social Security transfers to electronic payments.23
   21
      There was considerable heterogeneity in the extent of Smartcard coverage across the eight study districts,
with coverage rates ranging from 31% in Adilabad to nearly 100% in Nalgonda district. Thus, we focus our
analysis on ITT effects, and all our estimates include district fixed effects. We also examine implementation
heterogeneity at the village and individual level. Villages with a higher fraction of BPL households are
significantly more likely to have converted to the new system, and have a higher intensity of coverage (Table
A.7). A similar pattern emerges at the individual level for the NREGS, with more vulnerable (lower income,
female, scheduled caste) beneficiaries more likely to have Smartcards (Table A.8). No such pattern is seen for
SSP households (perhaps because they are all vulnerable to begin with, whereas NREGS is a demand-driven
program). Overall, the results are consistent with the idea that banks prioritized enrolling in GPs with more
program beneficiaries and hence more potential commission revenue, while conditional on a village being
converted the more active welfare participants were more likely to enroll. A companion study provides a
qualitative discussion of implementation heterogeneity (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2013).
   22
      Note that given implementation heterogeneity across districts and the possibility of non-linear treatment
effects in the extent of Smartcard coverage, our results should be interpreted as the average treatment effect
across districts with different levels of implementation (averaging to around 50% coverage) and not as the
impact of a half-complete implementation in all districts.
   23
      Direct deposits started in the mid-1990s; 75% of payments were direct deposits by January 1999; and
check payments finally ceased for good on March 1, 2013. See http://www.ssa.gov/history/1990.html.




                                                      14
3.4    Estimation
We report ITT estimates, which compare average outcomes in treatment and control areas.
Outcomes are measured at the household level or in some cases (e.g. NREGS work) at the
individual level. All regressions are weighted by inverse sampling probabilities to obtain
average partial effects for the populations of NREGS jobcard holders or SSP beneficiaries.
We include district fixed effects in all regressions, and cluster standard errors at the mandal
level. We thus estimate

                         Yimd = α + βT reatedmd + δDistrictd + imd                        (3.1)

where Yimd is an outcome for household or individual i in mandal m and district d, and
T reatedmd is an indicator for a mandal in wave 1. When possible, we also report specifications
                                                                     0
that include the baseline GP-level mean of the dependent variable, Y pmd , to increase precision
and assess sensitivity to any randomization imbalances. We then estimate

                                                   0
                   Yipmd = α + βT reatedmd + γY pmd + δDistrictd + ipmd                   (3.2)

where p indexes panchayats or GPs. Note that we easily reject γ = 1 in all cases and
therefore do not report difference-in-differences estimates.


4     Effects of Smartcard-enabled Payments
4.1    Effects on Payment Logistics
Data from our control group confirm that NREGS payments are typically delayed. Recipients
in control mandals waited an average of 34 days after finishing a given spell of work to collect
payment, more than double the 14 days prescribed by law (Table 2). The collection process
is also time-consuming, with the average recipient in the control group spending almost two
hours traveling and waiting in line to collect a payment.
   Smartcards substantially improved this situation. The total time required to collect a
NREGS payment fell by 21 minutes in mandals assigned to treatment (19% of the control
mean). Time to collect payments also fell for SSP recipients, but the reduction is not
statistically significant (Table 2; columns 1-2 for NREGS, columns 3-4 for SSP). We also
find that over 80% of both NREGS and SSP beneficiaries who had received or enrolled for
Smartcards reported that Smartcards had sped up payments (Table 6).
   NREGS recipients also faced shorter delays in receiving payments after working, and
these lags became more predictable. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 report that assignment
to treatment lowered the mean number of days between working and collecting NREGS

                                              15
payments by 10 days, or 29% of the control mean (and 50% of the amount by which this
exceeds the statutory limit of 14 days). There is also suggestive evidence that uncertainty
about the timing of payments fell. While we do not directly measure beliefs, columns 7
and 8 show that the variability of payment lags – measured as the absolute deviation from
the median mandal level lag, thus corresponding to a robust version of a Levene’s test –
fell by 39% of the control mean. This reduced variability is potentially valuable for credit-
constrained households that need to match the timing of income and expenditure.24


4.2     Effects on Payment Amounts and Leakage
Recipients in treatment mandals also received more money. For NREGS recipients, columns
3 and 4 of Table 3a show that earnings per household per week during our endline study
period increased by Rs. 35, or 24% of the control group mean. For SSP beneficiaries,
earnings per beneficiary during the three months preceding our endline survey (May-July)
increased by Rs. 12, or 5% of the control mean. In contrast, we see no impacts on fiscal
outlays. For the workers sampled into our endline survey; we find no significant difference
in official NREGS disbursements between treatment and control mandals. Similarly, SSP
disbursements were also unaltered (columns 1 and 2 of Tables 3a and 3b respectively).
   The fact that recipients report receiving more while government outlays are unchanged
implies a reduction in leakage on both programs. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3a confirm
that the difference between official and survey measures of earnings per worker per week on
NREGS fell significantly by Rs. 27. Results on the SSP program mirror the NREGS results:
we find a reduction in leakage of Rs. 7.3 per pension per month. This represents a 2.9
percentage point reduction in leakage relative to fiscal outlays, which is a 48.7% reduction
relative to the control mean (Table 3b).
   While we find a significant reduction in NREGS leakage in treatment mandals, estimating
the magnitude of this reduction as a fraction of fiscal outlays requires further assumptions.
We find that NREGS households in control mandals report receiving an average of Rs. 20
more per week than the corresponding official outlays, implying a negative rate of leakage
- which should technically be impossible. Measurement of leakage levels is complicated by
the fact that we measure official outlays for the sampled jobcard while measuring amounts
received for entire households, which can be larger. This occurs because many households
hold multiple jobcards. While we can (and do) restrict our analysis to the earnings of workers
listed on our sampled jobcards, we cannot purge from our data the earnings that these
workers reported on the survey that were reported to the government on other unsampled
jobcards (and hence not included in our official payments estimates).
  24
    We did not collect analogous data on date of payment from SSP beneficiaries as payment lags had not
surfaced as a major concern for them during initial fieldwork.


                                                  16
   Given this constraint, our best estimate of average leakage levels adjusts for multiple
jobcards by estimating the number of jobcards per household using independent district-
level data from Round 68 of the National Sample Survey (July 2011-June 2012). Using these
data to estimate the number of households with jobcards in each district, and the official
jobcard database to determine the number of jobcards in each district, we estimate that the
number of jobcards exceeds the number of households with jobcards by an average factor of
1.9.25 When we then use our district-specific factors to scale up official estimates of work
done per household, we estimate an endline leakage rate of 30.8% in control areas and 20%
in treatment areas (p = 0.16; results in Table A.9).26

4.2.1    Margins of Leakage Reduction

We examine leakage reduction along the three margins discussed earlier (ghosts, over-reporting,
and under-payment), and find that reduced over-reporting appears to be the main driver of
lower NREGS leakage. Reductions in NREGS ghost beneficiaries are insignificant (Table
4a, columns 1-2), though the incidence of ghosts is a non-trivial 11%. This is not surpris-
ing given the incomplete coverage of Smartcards, and the government’s political decision to
not ban unauthenticated payments. Thus, beneficiary lists were not purged of ghosts, and
payments to these jobcards are likely to have continued. We also find limited impact on
under-payment, measured as whether a bribe had to be paid to collect payments (Table 4a,
columns 5 and 6). As we find little evidence of under-payment to begin with (control group
incidence rate of 2%), Smartcards may have limited incremental value on this margin.
  However, over-reporting in the NREGS drops substantially, with the proportion of jobcards
that had positive official payments reported but zero survey amounts (excluding ghosts – who
do not even exist) dropping significantly by 8.3 percentage points, or 32% (Table 4a, columns
3-4). Figure 3 presents the quantile treatment effect plots on official and survey payments for
  25
      Note that our estimate of jobcards per household is not based on NSS responses on self-reported mul-
tiple jobcards (which households are likely to misreport because they are not technically supposed to have
multiple jobcards). We only use NSS data to estimate the number of households with jobcards, and combine
this with administrative data on the total number of jobcards to estimate the average number of jobcards
per household. Note also that the introduction of Smartcards did not reduce the number of jobcards per
household in treated mandals. While in theory a de-duplicated Smartcard system should have eliminated
multiple jobcards in the same household, in practice the government did not invalidate jobcards that were
not linked to Smartcards, because Smartcard enrollment was far from complete. Table A.5 shows that the
total number of jobcards was the same across treated and control mandals at the time of our endline survey.
   26
      For these estimates we include survey reports of all workers within the household (and not just those
matched to sampled jobcards). Since the scaling up of the official payments by the number of jobcards is
meant to capture total payments per household, we also include all reported earnings by the household. Note
that the dependent variable is less precisely measured after this adjustment because the correct adjustment
factor will vary by household whereas we can only apply an average adjustment factor across all households.
The estimates in Table A.9 will still be unbiased (because the measurement error is in the dependent variable),
but will be less precise than those in Table 3a, which is our main test of reduced leakage. The calculation in
Table A.9 is needed only to quantify leakage as a fraction of fiscal outlays.


                                                      17
the study period, and we see (a) no change in official payments at any part of the distribution,
(b) a significant reduction in the incidence of beneficiaries reporting receiving zero payments,
and (c) no significant change in amounts received relative to control households who were
reporting positive payments. These results suggest that leakage reduction was mainly driven
by a reduction in the incidence of “quasi-ghosts” defined as real beneficiaries with jobcards,
but who did not previously get any NREGS work or payments (though officials were reporting
work on these cards and claiming payments). If some of these households were to have
enrolled for a Smartcard, it would no longer be possible for officials to siphon off payments
without their knowledge, following which their optimal response appears to have been to
provide actual work and payments to these households (see results on access below). A
similar decomposition of the reduction in SSP leakage (Table 4b, columns 1 and 2), reveals
a reduction in all three forms of leakage, suggesting that Smartcard may have improved SSP
performance on all dimensions (though none of the individual margins are significant).
   The reduction in NREGS over-reporting raises an additional question: If Smartcards
reduced officials’ rents on NREGS, why did they not increase the total amounts claimed
(perhaps by increasing the number of ghosts) to make up for lost rents? Conversations with
officials suggest that the main constraint in doing so was the use of budget caps within the
NREGS in AP that exogenously fixed the maximum spending on the NREGS for budgeting
purposes (also reported by Dutta et al. (2012)). If enforced at the local level, these caps
would limit local officials’ ability to increase claims in response to Smartcards.
   While we cannot directly test this, our result finding no significant increase in official
payments in treated areas (Table 3a) holds even when we look beyond our study period and
sampled GPs. Figure 1 shows the evolution of official disbursements in all GPs in treatment
and control mandals, and for every week in 2010 and 2012 (baseline and endline years). The
two series track each other closely, with no discernible differences at baseline, endline, or
other times in those years. Because of randomization, it is not surprising that the series
overlap each other up to and through our baseline study period. What is striking, however,
is how closely they continue to track each other after Smartcards began to roll out in the
summer of 2010, with no discernible gap emerging. This strongly suggests the existence of
constraints that limited local officials’ ability to increase the claims of work done.27
  27
    Note that budgetary allocations are likely to be the binding constraint for NREGS volumes in AP
because the state implemented NREGS well and prioritized using all federal fiscal allocations. In contrast,
states like Bihar had large amounts of unspent NREGS funds, and ethnographic evidence suggests that the
binding constraint in this setting was the lack of local project implementation capacity (Witsoe, 2014).




                                                    18
4.3    Effects on Program Access
Although Smartcards may have benefitted participants by reducing leakage, they could make
it harder for others to participate in the first place. Access could fall for both mechanical and
incentive reasons. Mechanically, beneficiaries might be unable to participate if they cannot
obtain Smartcards or successfully authenticate. Further, by reducing leakage, Smartcards
could reduce officials’ primary motive for running programs in the first place. This is partic-
ular true for the NREGS which – despite providing a de jure entitlement to employment on
demand – is de facto rationed (Dutta et al., 2012). Indeed, in our control group 20% (42%)
of households reported that someone in their household was unable to obtain NREGS work
in May (January) when private sector demand is slack (tight); and only 3.5% of households
said that anyone in their village could get work on NREGS anytime (Table 5). Thus, the
question of whether Smartcards hurt program access is a first order concern.
   We find no evidence that this was the case. If anything, households with jobcards in
treated mandals were 7.4 percentage points more likely to have done work on the NREGS
during our study period, an 18% increase relative to control (Table 5, columns 1 and 2).
Combined with the results in the previous section showing a significant reduction in the
incidence of quasi-ghost NREGS workers, these results suggest that the optimal response
of officials to their reduced ability to report work without providing any work or payments
to the corresponding worker, was to provide more actual work (this section) and payments
(previous section) to these workers. Beyond the increase in actual work during our survey
period, columns 3 through 6 show that self-reported access to work also improved at other
times of the year. The effects are insignificant in all but one case, but inconsistent with
the view that officials “stop trying” once Smartcards are introduced. Bribes paid to access
NREGS work were also (statistically insignificantly) lower (columns 7 and 8).
   Given the theoretical concerns about potential negative effects of reducing leakage on pro-
gram access, how should we interpret the lack of adverse effects in the data? One hypothesis
is that officials simply had not had time to adapt their behavior (and reduce their effort on
NREGS) by the time we conducted our endline surveys. However, the average converted
GP in our data had been converted for 14.5 months at the time of our survey, implying that
it had experienced two full peak seasons of NREGS under the new system. More generally,
we find no evidence of treatment effects emerging over time in any of the official outcomes
which we can observe weekly (e.g. Figure 1). On balance it thus appears more likely that
we are observing a steady-state outcome.
   A more plausible explanation for our results is that the main NREGS functionary (the
Field Assistant) does not manage any other government program, which may limit the
opportunities to divert rent-seeking effort. Further, despite the reduction in rent-seeking
opportunities, implementing NREGS projects may have still been the most lucrative activity

                                               19
for the Field Assistant (note that we still estimate leakage rates of 20% in the treatment
mandals). This may have mitigated potential negative extensive margin effects.28
   We similarly find no evidence of reduced access to the SSP program. Since pensions
are valuable and in fixed supply, the main concern here would be that reducing leakage in
monthly payments simply displaces this corruption to the registration phase, increasing the
likelihood that beneficiaries must pay bribes to begin receiving a pension in the first place.
While we do find a significant increase in the net amount pension recipients report collecting
per month (Table 3b, column 4), we find no evidence that this has increased the incidence
of bribes at the enrollment stage. Columns 9 and 10 of Table 5 show that the incidence of
these bribes among SSP beneficiaries who enrolled after Smartcards implementation began
is in fact 5.5 percentage points lower in treated mandals (73% of the control mean), although
this result is not statistically significant.


4.4     Beneficiary Perceptions of the Intervention
The estimated treatment effects thus far suggest that Smartcards unambiguously improved
service delivery. It is possible, however, that our outcome measures miss impacts on some
dimension of program performance that deteriorated. We therefore complement our impact
estimates with beneficiaries’ stated preferences regarding the Smartcard-based payment sys-
tem as a whole. We asked recipients in converted GPs within treatment mandals who had
been exposed to the Smartcard-based payment system to describe the pros and cons of the
new process relative to the old one and state which they preferred.
   Responses (Table 6) reflect many of our own ex ante concerns, but overall are overwhelm-
ingly positive. Many recipients report concerns about losing their Smartcards (63% NREGS,
71% SSP) or having problems with the payment reader (60% NREGS, 67% SSP). Most ben-
eficiaries do not yet trust the Smartcards system enough to deposit money in their accounts.
Yet strong majorities (over 80% in both programs) also agree that Smartcards make pay-
ment collection easier, faster, and less manipulable. Overall, 90% of NREGS beneficiaries
and 93% of SSP beneficiaries prefer Smartcards to the status quo, with only 3% in either
program disagreeing, and the rest neutral.29
   While stated preferences have well-known limitations, it is worth highlighting their value
from a policy point of view. Senior officials in government were much more likely to hear field
  28
      Of course, the reduction in the present value of the expected flow of rents from holding local office may
reduce the attractiveness of these offices and yield an extensive margin effect on the extent to which local
elections are contested. We expect to study this in future work for which we are collecting data.
   29
      These questions were asked when beneficiaries had received a Smartcard and used it to pick up wages
or had enrolled for, but not received, a physical Smartcard. We are thus missing data for those beneficiaries
who received but did not use Smartcards (10.4% of NREGS beneficiaries and 3.4% of SSP beneficiaries
who enrolled). Even if all of these beneficiaries for whom data is missing preferred the old system over
Smartcards, approval ratings would be 80% for NREGS and 90% for SSP.


                                                      20
reports about problems with Smartcards than about positive results. This bias was so severe
that GoAP nearly scrapped the entire Smartcards system in 2013, and their decision to not
do so was partly in response to reviewing these stated preference data. The episode thus
provides an excellent example of the political economy of concentrated costs (to low-level
officials who lost rents due to Smartcards, and were vocal with negative feedback) versus
diffuse benefits (to millions of beneficiaries, who were less likely to communicate positive
feedback) (Olson, 1965).30


4.5     Heterogeneity of Impacts
Even if Smartcards benefited the average program participant, it is possible that it harmed
some. For instance, vulnerable households might have a harder time obtaining a Smartcard
and end up worse off as a result. While individual-level treatment effects are by definition
not identifiable, we can test the vulnerability hypothesis in two ways.
   First, we examine quantile treatment effects for official payments, and survey outcomes
that show a significant mean impact (time to collect payment, payment delays, and payments
received). We find that the treatment distribution first-order stochastically dominates the
control distribution for each of these outcomes (Figure 3). Thus, no treatment household is
worse off relative to a control household at the same percentile in the outcome distribution.
   Second, we examine whether treatment effects vary as a function of baseline character-
istics at the village level. We begin with heterogeneity as a function of the baseline value
of the outcome variable. The first row of Table 7 suggests broad-based program impacts at
all initial values of these outcomes. Overall, the data do not identify any particular group
that appears to have suffered on these margins. In the remainder of Table 7 we examine
heterogeneity of impact along other measures of vulnerability including affluence (consump-
tion, land ownership and value) and measures of socio-economic disadvantage (fraction of
the BPL population and belonging to historically-disadvantaged scheduled castes (SC)), as
well as the importance of NREGS to the village (days worked and amounts paid). Again we
find no significant heterogeneity of program impact.


4.6     Mechanisms of Impact
Because the Smartcards intervention involved both technological changes (biometric authen-
tication) and corresponding organizational changes (payments delivered locally by CSPs
  30
    Note also that vested interests trying to subvert the program would typically not do so by admitting
that their rents were being threatened, but by making plausible arguments for why the new system would
make poor beneficiaries worse off. Our data suggest that some of these concerns are very real (over 60% of
beneficiaries report concerns about losing their Smartcards or encountering a non-functioning card reader),
and highlight both the ease with which vested interests can hide behind plausibly genuine concerns, and the
value of data from large, representative samples of beneficiaries.

                                                    21
working for TSPs), it is natural to examine their relative contributions to the overall effect.
The composite nature of the intervention does not allow us to do this experimentally. We
can, however, compare outcomes within the treatment group to get a suggestive sense. We
have variation in our data both in whether CSPs were used for payment (because not all
GPs converted) and in whether biometric IDs were used for authentication (because not all
beneficiaries in converted GPs received or used biometric IDs).
   Table 8 presents a non-experimental decomposition of the total treatment effects along
these dimensions. For each of the main outcomes that are significant in the overall ITT esti-
mates, we find significant effects only in the carded GPs, suggesting that the new Smartcard-
based payment system was indeed the mechanism for the ITT impacts we find.
   In addition, we find that uncarded beneficiaries in carded GPs benefit just as much as
carded beneficiaries in these GPs for payment process outcomes such as time to collect
payments and reduction in payment lags (columns 1-4). While these are non-experimental
decompositions, they provide suggestive evidence that converting a village to carded pay-
ments may have been the key mechanism by which there were improvements in the process of
collecting payments, and also suggest that the implementation protocol followed by GoAP
did not inconvenience uncarded beneficiaries in GPs that were converted to the new sys-
tem. The lack of negative impacts for uncarded beneficiaries may be due to GoAPs decision
to not insist on carded payments for all beneficiaries (due to the political cost of denying
payments to genuine beneficiaries). While permitting uncarded payments may have allowed
some amount of leakage to continue even under the new system, it was probably politically
prudent to do so in the early stages of the implementation.
   However, reductions in leakage appear to be concentrated on households with Smartcards,
and we see no evidence of reduced leakage for uncarded beneficiaries (column 10), suggesting
that biometric authentication was important for leakage reduction. Note that the lower
official and survey payments to uncarded beneficiaries in converted GPs could simply reflect
less active workers (who will be paid less) being less likely to have enrolled for the Smartcards,
and so our main outcome of interest is leakage.
   In short, the data suggest that shifting payments to village-based CSPs drove improve-
ments in the payments process, while biometric authentication drove leakage reductions.


4.7    Robustness
The main threat to the validity of our results is the concern that recipients’ higher self-
reported receipts in treatment mandals could reflect in part increased collusion with officials,
rather than a pure reduction in leakage. On the NREGS in particular officials might ask
workers to report more work than they have actually done to third parties – including
government auditors but also our surveyors – and offer to split the proceeds. In this case

                                               22
it is still true that more money reaches the pockets of beneficiaries, but the actual increase
may be lower than what we estimate. While directly measuring collusion is clearly infeasible,
several indirect indicators suggest that it is not driving the reported increase in receipts.
   First, we directly test for differential rates of false survey responses by asking survey re-
spondents to indicate whether they had ever been asked to lie about NREGS participation,
using the “list method” to elicit mean rates of being asked to lie without forcing any in-
dividual to reveal their answer.31 We find that at most 4.5% of control group respondents
report having been asked to lie and find no significant difference between the treatment and
control groups on this measure.
   Second, we attempted to directly address the concern of collusion by conducting inde-
pendent audits of NREGS worksites in treatment and control mandals during our endline
surveys, and counting the number of workers who were present during unannounced visits to
worksites. However, since we did not have an advance roster of workers who should have been
found at a given worksite on the date and time of our audit,32 could not make surprise visits
to all the worksites in a village, and could only visit at one point in time, these measures are
quite noisy. We do find an insignificant 35.7% increase in the number of workers found on
worksites in treatment areas during our audits (Table A.10), and cannot reject that this is
equal to the 24% increase in survey payments reported in Table 3a. Thus, the audits suggest
that the increase in survey payments reported are proportional to the increase in workers
found at the worksites during our audits. However, the audit measures are imprecise, and
the evidence is only suggestive.
   The third piece of evidence comes from the quantile plot of survey payments. As Figure
3 shows, we see a significant increase only in payments received by those who would have
otherwise received no payments (relative to the control group). Since there is no reason to
expect collusion only with this sub-group (if anything, it would arguably be easier for officials
to collude with workers with whom they were already transacting), this pattern seems harder
to reconcile with a collusion-based explanation.
   Fourth, we saw that beneficiaries overwhelmingly prefer the new payment system to the
old, which would be unlikely if officials were capturing most of the gains. Finally, we find
evidence that Smartcards increased wages in the private sector, consistent with the inter-
pretation that it made NREGS employment a more remunerative alternative, and a more
credible outside option for workers (see section 5). While each of them is only suggestive,
taken together, these five pieces of evidence strongly suggest that our results do not reflect
  31
     The list method is a standard device for eliciting sensitive information and allows the researcher to esti-
mate population average incidence rates for the sensitive question, though the answers cannot be attributed
at the respondent level (Raghavarao and Federer, 1979; Blair and Imai, 2012).
  32
     Unlike in Muralidharan et al. (2014) where teacher attendance rates can be measured precisely because
enumerators had a prior roster of teachers who were posted to each surveyed school.



                                                      23
differential rates of collusion in treatment mandals.
   A second threat to our overall results is the possibility that our leakage estimates may
be confounded by different rates of completed payments. Specifically, we may overstate
reductions in leakage if households in treatment mandals are more likely to have gotten paid
for a given spell of work before survey (note that we find a significant reduction in payment
delays in treatment mandals in Table 2). We minimize this risk by surveying households an
average of ten weeks after NREGS work was completed (while the mean payment delay is
five weeks), and verify that the rate of completed payments was identical across treatment
and control mandals (Table A.10).


5      Cost-Effectiveness
We next estimate the cost-effectiveness of Smartcards as operating at the time of our endline
survey. Some of the effects we measure are inherently redistributive, so that any valuation
of them depends on the welfare weights we attach to various stakeholders. We therefore
quantify costs and efficiency gains before discussing redistribution.
   We assume that the cost of the Smartcard system was equal to the 2% commission that the
government paid to banks on payments in converted GPs. This commission was calibrated to
cover all implementation costs of banks and TSPs (including the one-time costs of enrollment
and issuing of Smartcards), and is a conservative estimate of the incremental social cost of
the Smartcard system because it does not consider the savings accruing to the government
from decommissioning the status-quo payment system (e.g. the time of local officials who
previously issued payments).33 Using administrative data on all NREGS payments in 2012,
and scaling down this figure by one-third (since costs were only paid in carded GPs, and
only two-thirds of GPs were carded), we calculate the costs of the new payment system at
$4 million in our study districts. The corresponding figure for SSP is $2.3 million.34
   The efficiency gains we observe include reductions in time taken to collect payment, and
reductions in the variability of the lag between doing work and getting paid for it. We
cannot easily price the latter, though we note that unpredictability is generally thought to
be very costly for NREGS workers. To price the former, we estimate the value of time saved
conservatively using reported agricultural wages during June, when they are relatively low.
Using June wages of Rs. 130/day and assuming a 6.5 hour work-day (estimates of the length
  33
      Note that we do not include the time cost of senior officials in overseeing the Smartcard program because
they would have had to exercise oversight of the older system as well.
   34
      Note that our estimated impacts are ITT effects and are based on converting only two-thirds of GPs.
An alternative approach would be to use the randomization as an instrument to generate IV estimates of
the impact of being a carded GP. However, this will simply scale up both the benefit and cost estimates
linearly by a factor of 1.5. We prefer the ITT approach because it does not require satisfying an additional
exclusion restriction.


                                                      24
of the agricultural work day range from 5 to 8 hours/day), we estimate the value of time at
Rs. 20/hour. We assume that recipients collect payments once per spell of work (as they
do not keep balances on their Smartcards). Time to collect fell 21 minutes per payment
(Table 2), so we estimate the value of time saved at Rs 7 per payment. While modest, this
figure applies to a large number of transactions; scaling up by the size of the program in our
study districts, we estimate a total saving of $4.3 million for NREGS, roughly equal to the
government’s costs.
   Redistributive effects include reduced payment lags (which transfer the value of interest
“float” from banks to beneficiaries) and reduced leakage (which transfers funds from corrupt
officials to beneficiaries). To quantify the former, we assume conservatively that the value
of the float is 5% per year, the mean interest rate on savings accounts. Multiplied by our
estimated 10-day reduction in payment lag and scaled up by the volume of NREGS payments
in our study districts, this implies an annual transfer from banks to workers of $0.4 million.35
To quantify the latter, we multiply the estimated reduction in leakage of 10.8% by the annual
NREGS wage outlay in our study districts and obtain an estimated annual reduction in
leakage of $32.8 million. Similarly, the estimated reduction in SSP leakage of 2.9% implies
an annual savings of $3.3 million.36
   While valuing these redistributive effects requires subjective judgments about welfare
weights, the fact that they both transferred income from the rich to the poor suggests
that they should contribute positively to a utilitarian social planner (assuming, for example,
a symmetric utilitarian social welfare function with concave individual utility functions).
Moreover, if taxpayers or the social planner place a low weight on losses to corrupt officials
(as these are “illegitimate” earnings), then the welfare gains from reduced leakage are large.
   The estimates above are based on measuring the direct impact of the Smartcards project
on the main targeted outcomes of improving the payment process and reducing leakage. In
preliminary work we have also found evidence that the intervention led to significant increases
in rural private-sector wages, a general equilibrium effect which most likely represents the
spillover effects to private labor markets of a better implemented NREGS (Imbert and Papp,
forthcoming). Since improving the outside options of rural workers in the lean season was a
stated objective of the NREGS (Dreze, 2011), these preliminary results further suggest that
Smartcards improved the capacity of the government to implement NREGS as intended.37
  35
      Note that given the costs of credit-market intermediation, workers may value the use of capital well
above the 5% deposit rate, as is suggested by the 26% benchmark interest rate for micro-loans, which are the
most common form of credit in rural AP. In this case, the value of the reduced payment lag to beneficiaries
may exceed the cost to the banks, implying an efficiency gain.
   36
      Total NREGS wage outlays for the eight study districts in 2012 were $303 million; SSP disbursements
in these districts totalled $113 million.
   37
      Note that a better implemented NREGS could in principle also have efficiency costs, distorting the
allocation of labor to the private sector. A full examination of such effects is beyond the scope of the current
paper, which focuses on the impact of Smartcards on the quality of program implementation. We expect to


                                                      25
6     Conclusion
While a theoretical literature has emphasized the importance of investing in state capacity
for economic development (Besley and Persson, 2009, 2010), the political viability of these
investments depends on the magnitude and immediacy of their returns. Advocates argue
that improved payments infrastructure may be a high-return investment in state capacity
with the potential to significantly improve the implementation of public welfare programs
in developing countries. The arguments are appealing, and yet there are many reasons to
be skeptical. Implementations of new payments technology must overcome both logistical
complexity and the resistance of vested interests. Those that do could potentially backfire by
benefiting some while hurting the most vulnerable, or by eroding the incentives of bureaucrats
to implement programs they previously viewed as sources of rents. Finally, technologies like
biometric authentication could simply cost more than they are worth.
  This paper has examined these issues empirically in the context of one of the largest
randomized experiments yet conducted: an as-is evaluation of a new payment system built
on biometric authentication and electronic benefit transfers introduced into two major social
programs in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. We find that concerns about barriers to
implementation are well-founded, as conversion was limited to 50% of transactions by the
end of the study. Yet the poor gained significantly from the reform: beneficiaries receive
payments faster and more reliably, spend less time collecting payments, receive a higher
proportion of benefits, and pay less in bribes. These average gains do not come at the
expense of vulnerable beneficiaries, as treatment distributions stochastically dominate those
in control. Nor do they come at the expense of program access, which if anything appears
to improve slightly. Non-experimental decompositions suggest that organizational changes
drove improvements in quality of service to beneficiaries, while biometric authentication
drove reductions in fraud. Finally, beneficiaries themselves overwhelmingly report preferring
the new payment system to the old, and conservative cost-benefit calculations suggest that
Smartcards more than justified their costs.
  The fact that the theoretically-posited perverse side-effects did not materialize raises the
question of what the Smartcards initiative did to minimize them. While we cannot provide
definitive answers without further experimental variation, our extensive field experience eval-
uating the project leads us to conjecture that the government’s decision to encourage but
not mandate Smartcard-based payments may have played an important role. While this left
open a major loophole for graft – likely explaining, for example, the lack of impact on ghost
beneficiaries – it also ensured that beneficiaries could continue to access their NREGS and
SSP benefits even if they were unable to obtain Smartcards or to authenticate. This trade-
study the GE effects of a better-implemented NREGS on rural labor markets in future work.



                                                  26
off is particularly salient given the recent Supreme Court decision in India prohibiting the
government from making possession of a UID mandatory for participation in federal welfare
schemes. It also aptly illustrates the more general tradeoff between Type I and Type II errors
in the administration of social programs, and suggests that it may be prudent to proceed
with UID-linked benefit transfers by making it more attractive to beneficiaries, rather than
making it mandatory.
   A further conjecture supported by the AP Smartcard experience is that reducing leakage
incrementally as opposed to trying to eliminate it rapidly, may mitigate potential negative
effects. For instance, the fact that NREGS Field Assistants still found it lucrative to imple-
ment projects (albeit with lower rents than before) may explain the lack of adverse effects
on the extensive margin of program access. The gradual reduction of leakage may have also
reduced the risk of political vested interests subverting the entire program.38
   As usual, extrapolating this result to other settings requires care. While the overall level
of development in AP almost precisely matches all-India averages, the state is generally per-
ceived as well-administered, and devoted significant resources and senior management time
to implementing the Smartcard program well. This raises the possibility that implementation
would be more difficult in other settings. On the other hand, the problems that Smartcards
were designed to address – slow, unpredictable, and leaky payments – are probably more
severe elsewhere, implying greater potential upside. On net it is unclear whether the social
returns would be higher or lower elsewhere. Similarly, forecasting the future evolution of the
program requires care. Benefits could deteriorate if interest groups gradually find ways to
subvert or capture the Smartcards infrastructure. On the other hand, benefits could increase
if the government is able to increase coverage and plug remaining loopholes.
   More broadly, secure payments infrastructure may also facilitate future increases in the
scale and scope of private economic transactions. In the absence of such infrastructure,
payments often move through informal networks (Greif, 1993) or not at all. Thus, in addition
to improving the delivery of public programs, investments in secure payments systems can be
seen as building public infrastructure – akin to roads, railways, or the internet, which while
initially set up by governments for their own use (e.g. moving soldiers to the border quickly
or improving intra-government communication) eventually generated substantial benefits for
the private sector as well. The gains reported in this paper do not reflect potential future
benefits to other public programs or to private sector actors, and are thus likely to be a lower
bound on the total long-term returns of investing in secure payments infrastructure.


  38
    The Government of India’s pilot project on migrating in-kind subsidies for cooking gas to UID-linked cash
transfers of the equivalent subsidy provides a cautionary tale. The pilot stopped benefits to those without
UID-linked accounts, which sharply reduced official disbursements of subsidies since many beneficiaries were
fake, but triggered strong political opposition following which it was shelved.


                                                     27
References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Theory, General Equilibrium, and Political Economy in Development
 Economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (3), 17–32.
Aker, Jenny, Rachid Boumnijel, Amanda McClelland, and Niall Tierney, “How do
 Electronic Transfers Compare? Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment
 in Niger,” Technical Report, Tufts University 2013.
Anderson, Siwan, Patrick Francois, and Ashok Kotwal, “Clientilism in Indian Vil-
 lages,” Technical Report, University of British Columbia 2013.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rachel Glennerster, and Esther Duflo, “Putting a Band-Aid on
 a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System,” Journal of the
 European Economic Association, 2008, 6 (2-3), 487–500.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights,
 Taxation, and Politics,” American Economic Review, September 2009, 99 (4), 1218–44.
   and    , “State Capacity, Conflict, and Development,” Econometrica, 01 2010, 78 (1),
  1–34.
Blair, Graeme and Kosuke Imai, “Statistical Analysis of List Experiments,” Political
  Analysis, 2012, 20 (1), 47–77.
Bold, Tessa, Mwangi Kimenyi, Germano Mwabu, Alice Ng’ang’a, and Justin
 Sandefur, “Interventions and Institutions: Experimental Evidence on Scaling up Educa-
 tion Reforms in Kenya,” Technical Report, Center for Global Development 2013.
CGAP, “Electronic Payments with Limited Infrastructure: Uganda’s Search for a Viable E-
 payments Solution for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment,” Technical Report,
 World Bank 2013.
Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostol, and Magne Mogstad, “Family Welfare
 Cultures,” Working Paper 19237, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, and Martı́n Rossi, “Strengthening State Capa-
 bilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 1169–1218.
Dreze, Jean, “Employment Guarantee and the Right to Work,” in Reetika Khera, ed., The
 Battle for Employment Guarantee, Oxford University Press, 2011.
Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan, “Incentives Work: Getting Teach-
 ers to Come to School,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1241–78.
Dutta, P., S. Howes, and R. Murgai, “Small but effective: India’s targeted unconditional
 cash transfers,” Economic and Political Weekly, 2010, 45 (52), 63–70.
Dutta, Puja, Rinku Murgai, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle,
 “Does India’s Employment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment?,” Policy Research
 Working Paper Series 6003, World Bank 2012.

                                           28
Fujiwara, Thomas, “Voting Technology, Political Responsiveness, and Infant Health: Ev-
  idence from Brazil,” Technical Report, Princeton University 2013.

Gelb, Alan and Julia Clark, “Identification for Development: The Biometrics Revolu-
 tion,” Working Paper 315, Center for Global Development 2013.

Gine, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang, “Credit Market Consequences of
 Improved Personal Identification: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi,” American
 Economic Review, October 2012, 102 (6), 2923–54.

Greif, Avner, “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
 Maghribi Traders’ Coalition,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (3), pp. 525–548.

Harris, Gardiner, “India Aims to Keep Money for Poor Out of Others’ Pockets,” New
 York Times, January 5 2013.

Imbert, Clement and John Papp, “Labor Market Effects of Social Programs: Evidence
  from India’s Employment Guarantee,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  forthcoming.

Jack, William and Tavneet Suri, “Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from
  Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution,” American Economic Review, 2014, 1, 183–223.

Jayachandran, Seema, “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in
  Developing Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (3), pp. 538–575.

Khera, Reetika, “The UID Project and Welfare Schemes,” Economic and Political Weekly,
 2011, 46 (9).

Kremer, Michael, “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” The Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 551–575.

Krusell, Per and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, “Vested Interests in a Positive Theory of Stag-
 nation and Growth,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1996, 63 (2), 301–329.

Leff, Nathaniel, “Economic Development through Bureaucratic Corruption,” American
  Behavioural Scientist, 1964, 8, 8–14.

Lizzeri, Alessandro and Niccola Persico, “The Provision of Public Goods under Alter-
  native Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (1), pp. 223–239.

Mathew, Santhosh and Mick Moore, “State incapacity by design: Understanding the
 Bihar story,” IDS Working Papers, 2011, 2011 (366), 1–31.

Mishra, Neeraj, “A Scam Compounded,” India Today, June 20 2005.

Mukhopadhyay, Piali, Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip
 Sukhtankar, “Implementing a Biometric Payment System: The Andhra Pradesh Ex-
 perience,” Technical Report, University of California, San Diego 2013.




                                          29
Muralidharan, Karthik, Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal, “The Fiscal
 Cost of Weak Governance: Evidence from Teacher Absence in India,” Working Paper
 20299, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Niehaus, Paul and Sandip Sukhtankar, “Corruption Dynamics: The Golden Goose
 Effect,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5.

   and , “The Marginal Rate of Corruption in Public Programs: Evidence from India,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 104, 52 – 64.

NIPFP, “A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Aadhaar,” Technical Report, National Institute for
 Public Finance and Policy 2012.

Olken, Benjamin A., “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
 Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2007, 115 (2), 200–249.

Olson, Mancur, The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups,
 Harvard University Press, 1965.

Pai, Sandeep, “Delayed NREGA payments drive workers to suicide,” Hindustan Times,
 December 29 2013.

PEO, “Performance Evaluation of Targeted Public Distribution System,” Technical Report,
 Planning Commission, Government of India March 2005.

Prescott, Edward and Stephen Parente, Barriers to Riches, Cambridge: MIT Press,
 2000.

Pritchett, Lant, “Is India a Flailing State? Detours on the Four Lane Highway to Mod-
 ernization,” Working Paper RWP09-013, Harvard Kennedy School 2010.

Raghavarao, Damaraju and Walter T. Federer, “Block total response as an alternative
 to the randomized response method in surveys,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
 1979, 41 (1), 40–45.

Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson, “Local Capture: Evidence From a Central Gov-
 ernment Transfer Program in Uganda,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2004,
 119 (2), 678–704.

   and , “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a Newspaper Cam-
  paign in Uganda,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 04/05 2005, 3 (2-3),
  259–267.

Sethi, Chitleen, “70,000 and Still Counting: Fake Old Age Pensioners,” Indian Express,
  April 8 2014.

Witsoe, Jeffrey, “The Practice of Development: An Ethnographic Examination of the
 National Rural Employment Guarantee Act in Bihar,” Mimeo, Union College 2014.

World Bank, “World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People,”
 Technical Report, World Bank 2003.

                                           30
                               Table 1: Official and self-reported use of Smartcards
                                                         (a) NREGS

                                      Official data                                 Survey data
                              (1)               (2)                (3)                               (4)
                                           Mean fraction   Payments generally               Most recent payments
                         Carded GP
                                          carded payments carded (village mean)             carded (village mean)
     Treatment              .67∗∗∗              .45∗∗∗                   .38∗∗∗                      .38∗∗∗
                            (.045)              (.041)                   (.043)                      (.043)
     District FE              Yes                Yes                      Yes                          Yes
     Adj R-squared            .45                .49                       .37                         .36
     Control Mean            .0046              .0017                     .039                        .013
     N. of cases              886                886                       824                         824
     Level                    GP                 GP                        GP                          GP



                                                          (b) SSP

                                      Official data                                 Survey data
                              (1)                (2)                (3)                              (4)
                                            Mean fraction   Payments generally              Most recent payment
                         Carded GP
                                           carded payments carded (village mean)            carded (village mean)
     Treatment               .78∗∗∗             .59∗∗∗                   .45∗∗∗                      .45∗∗∗
                             (.042)             (.037)                   (.053)                      (.049)
     District FE              Yes                 Yes                      Yes                         Yes
     Adj R-squared            .55                 .54                      .39                         .39
     Control Mean              0                   0                      .069                        .044
     N. of cases              886                 886                      884                         884
     Level                    GP                  GP                       GP                          GP



This table analyzes usage of Smartcards for NREGS and SSP payments as of July 2012. Each observation is a gram
panchayat (“GP”: administrative village). “Carded GP” is a gram panchayat that has moved to Smartcard-based payment,
which happens once 40% of beneficiaries have been issued a card. “Mean fraction carded payments” is the proportion of
transactions done with carded beneficiaries in treatment mandals. Both these outcomes are from official data. Columns 3
and 4 report survey-based measures of average beneficiary use of Smartcards or a biometric-based payment system in the
GP. The difference in number of observations between official and survey measures for NREGS is due to missing data for
(mainly control) GPs where enrollment had not even started; assuming that there were no carded payments in these GPs
increases the magnitude of the treatment effect on implementation. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses.
Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                            31
                                             Table 2: Access to payments

                              Time to Collect (Min)                                 Payment Lag (Days)
                        (1)          (2)        (3)      (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                                     Average        Average        Deviation       Deviation
 Treatment             -21∗∗       -21∗∗        -5.6     -2.8         -7.1∗          -10∗∗∗          -2.9∗∗∗          -4.7∗∗∗
                       (9.3)       (8.7)       (5.3)    (5.6)         (3.8)           (3.6)           (1.1)            (1.5)
 Carded GP

 BL GP Mean                         .08∗                .22∗∗∗                        -.027                            .043
                                   (.041)               (.069)                        (.09)                           (.054)
 District FE            Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes
 Week Fe                No           No         No       No            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes
 Adj R-squared   .06               .08          .06       .11           .14           .31             .07             .17
 Control Mean    112               112           77        77            34           34               12              12
 N. of cases    10252             10181        3814      3591          14279         7254            14279           7254
 Level          Indiv.            Indiv.      Indiv.    Indiv.      Indiv-Week    Indiv-Week      Indiv-Week      Indiv-Week
 Survey        NREGS             NREGS         SSP       SSP          NREGS         NREGS           NREGS           NREGS



The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is the average time taken to collect a payment (in minutes), including the time spent
on unsuccessful trips to payment sites, with observations at the beneficiary level. The dependent variable in columns 5-6 is
the average lag (in days) between work done and payment received on NREGS, while columns 7-8 report results for absolute
deviations from the median mandal-level lag. Since the data for columns 5-8 are at the individual-week level, we include week
fixed effects to absorb variation over the study period. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical
significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                               32
                              Table 3: Official and survey reports of program benefits
                                                         (a) NREGS

                                                   Official             Survey          Leakage
                                                 (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)
                           Treatment             9.9      7.6        35∗∗    35∗∗     -25∗    -27∗∗
                                                (12)     (12)        (15)    (15)     (13)    (13)
                           BL GP Mean                   .12∗∗∗               .11∗∗∗           .089∗∗
                                                        (.027)               (.037)           (.038)
                           District FE          Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes
                           Adj R-squared         .03      .05         .05     .06      .03     .04
                           Control Mean          127     127         146     146       -20     -20
                           N. of cases          5179     5143        5179    5143     5179    5143



                                                           (b) SSP

                                                   Official             Survey          Leakage
                                                 (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)
                           Treatment            4.5        5         12∗∗     12∗     -7.6∗   -7.3∗
                                               (5.5)     (5.6)       (5.9)   (6.2)    (3.9)    (4)
                           BL GP Mean                    .16∗                .0081             -.019
                                                        (.093)               (.022)           (.024)
                           District FE          Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes
                           Adj R-squared         .00      .01         .01     .01      .01     .01
                           Control Mean          251      251        236      236       15      15
                           N. of cases          3354     3151        3354    3151     3354    3151



The regressions in both panels include all sampled households (NREGS)/beneficiaries (SSP) who were a) found by survey
team to match official record or b) listed in official records but confirmed as “ghosts”. “Ghosts” refer to households or
beneficiaries within households that were confirmed not to exist, or who had permanently migrated before the study period
started on May 28, 2012 (May 31, 2010 for baseline). In panel (a), each observation refers to household-level average weekly
amounts for NREGS work done during the study period (baseline in 2010 - May 31 to July 4; endline in 2012 - May 28
to July 15). “Official” refers to amounts paid as listed in official muster records. “Survey” refers to payments received as
reported by beneficiaries. “Leakage” is the difference between these two amounts. In panel (b), each observation refers to
the average SSP monthly amount for the period May, June, and July. “Official” refers to amounts paid as listed in official
disbursement records. “Survey” refers to payments received as reported by beneficiaries. “Leakage” is the difference between
these two amounts. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                                33
                                Table 4: Illustrating channels of leakage reduction
                                                             (a) NREGS

                                      Ghost households           Other overreporting     Bribe to collect
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)
                  Treatment           -.011          -.011       -.082∗∗     -.083∗∗      -.0021    -.0028
                                      (.02)         (.021)       (.033)      (.036)      (.0088)   (.0092)
                  BL GP Mean                         -.013                    .019                  .014
                                                    (.067)                   (.043)                (.018)
                  District FE         Yes             Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes
                  Adj R-squared        .02             .02            .05      .04         .01       .01
                  Control Mean         .11             .11            .26      .26        .021      .021
                  N. of cases         5314            5278           3984     3703       10437     10366
                  Level               Hhd             Hhd            Hhd      Hhd        Indiv.    Indiv.



                                                              (b) SSP

                              Ghost payments (Rs)             Other overreporting (Rs)     Underpayment (Rs)
                               (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
          Treatment            -2.7            -2.2            -2.7          -3.3           -2.2        -2.3
                              (2.6)           (2.7)           (2.9)          (3)           (1.8)       (1.9)
          BL GP Mean                           .19                          .024∗∗∗                    -.02
                                              (.16)                         (.0088)                   (.045)
          District FE         Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
          Adj R-squared        .01             .01             .01            .01           .01         .01
          Control Mean          11              11             1.6            1.6           2.4         2.4
          N. of cases         3354            3151            3354           3151          3354        3151



This table analyzes channels of reduction in leakage. Panel (a) reports the incidence of the three channels - ghosts, over-
reporting, and underpayment - for NREGS, while panel (b) decomposes actual amounts (in Rupees) into these channels in
the case of SSP. In both tables, “Ghost households” refer to households (or all beneficiaries within households) that were
confirmed not to exist, or who had permanently migrated before the study period started on May 28, 2012 (May 31, 2010
for baseline). “Other overreporting” for NREGS is the incidence of jobcards that had positive official payments reported
but zero survey amounts (not including ghosts). “Bribe to collect” refers to bribes paid in order to receive payments on
NREGS. “Other overreporting” for SSP is the difference between what officials report beneficiaries as receiving and what
beneficiaries believe they are entitled to. “Underpayment” for SSP is the monthly amount paid in order to receive their
pensions in May-July 2012. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as:
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                                34
                                                                       Table 5: Access to programs

                                   Proportion of                 Was any Hhd                    Is NREGS work              Did you have to pay        Did you have to pay
                                    Hhds doing                member unable to get               available when            anything to get this         anything to start
                                   NREGS work                  NREGS work in...                 anyone wants it              NREGS work?             receiving this pension?
                              (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)             (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)            (10)
                          Study Period      Study Period       May         January         All Months      All Months      NREGS        NREGS         SSP            SSP
      Treatment               .075∗∗            .074∗∗         -.025         -.031            .026∗            .023        -.00016      -.00038       -.046          -.055
                              (.033)            (.033)        (.027)        (.033)            (.015)          (.015)       (.0015)      (.0015)      (.031)         (.039)
      BL GP Mean                                .14∗∗∗                                                         -.023                    -.0056∗∗                     .025
                                                (.037)                                                        (.027)                    (.0027)                     (.045)




35
      District FE              Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
      Adj R-squared             .05               .06           .10           .10               .02             .02          .00           .00         .05            .05
      Control Mean              .42               .42            .2           .42              .035            .035         .0022        .0022        .075           .075
      N. of cases              4978              4944          4783          4531              4790            4750         7232          6908        587             354



     This table analyzes household level access to NREGS and SSP. Columns 1-2 report the proportion of households doing work in the 2012 endline study period (May
     28-July 15). In columns 3-4, the outcome is an indicator for whether any member of household was unable to obtain work despite wanting to work during May (slack
     labor demand) or January (peak labor demand). In columns 5-6, the outcome is an indicator for whether the respondent believes anyone in the village who wants
     NREGS work can get it at any time. In columns 7-8, the outcome is an indicator for whether the respondent had to pay a bribe in order to obtain NREGS work
     during the endline study period. In columns 9-10, the outcome is an indicator for whether the respondent had to pay a bribe to get on the SSP beneficiary list in the
     years 2011 and 2012. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                            Table 6: Beneficiary opinions of Smartcards

                                                                                     NREGS                                            SSP
                                                                                         Neutral/                                        Neutral/
                                                                      Agree    Disagree                      N     Agree     Disagree                      N
                                                                                        Don’t know                                      Don’t know
            Positives:
            Smartcards increase speed of payments (less
                                                                       .83        .04           .13        3387      .87        .07           .06        1475
            wait times)
            With a Smartcard, I make fewer trips to receive
                                                                       .78        .04           .18        3385      .84        .04           .12        1474
            my payments
            I have a better chance of getting the money I
                                                                       .83        .01           .16        3384      .86        .03           .11        1474
            am owed by using a Smartcard
            Because I use a Smartcard, no one can collect a
                                                                       .82        .02           .16        3382      .86        .03           .10        1470
            payment on my behalf
            Negatives:




36
            It was difficult to enroll to obtain a Smartcard           .19        .66           .15        3389      .29        .60           .11        1475
            I’m afraid of losing my Smartcard and being
                                                                       .63        .15           .21        3237      .71        .15           .14        1404
            denied payment
            When I go to collect a payment, I am afraid
                                                                       .60        .18           .22        3238      .67        .18           .14        1403
            that the payment reader will not work
            I would trust the Smartcard system enough to
                                                                       .30        .40           .30        3385      .30        .46           .23        1472
            deposit money in my Smartcard account
            Overall:
            Do you prefer the smartcards over the old
                                                                       .90        .03           .06        3397      .93        .03           .04        1478
            system of payments?

     This table analyzes beneficiaries’ perceptions of the Smartcard program in GPs that had switched over to the new payment system (carded GPs). These questions
     were asked when NREGS and SSP beneficiaries had received a Smartcard and used it to pick up wages; and also if they had enrolled for, but not received, a physical
     Smartcard. We are thus missing data for those beneficiaries who received but did not use Smartcards (10.4% of NREGS beneficiaries and 3.4% of SSP beneficiaries
     who enrolled).
                                 Table 7: Heterogeneity by baseline characteristics
                                                         (a) NREGS

                                               Time to Collect        Payment Lag      Official Payments   Survey Payments
                                                      (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)
   BL GP Mean                                        .024                  .16              .0049               .047
                                                     (.08)                (.25)             (.042)             (.074)
   Consumption (Rs. 1,000)                           -.087                 -.01              -.017              -.044
                                                     (.16)                (.027)              (.2)              (.26)
   GP Disbursement, NREGS (Rs. 1,000)                .015∗∗              -.00027              .012             .0065
                                                    (.0073)              (.0013)            (.0093)            (.016)
   SC Proportion                                       .61                  22                3.5                13
                                                      (48)                 (14)              (49)               (51)
   BPL Proportion                                     -65                   -29              -72                 -164
                                                     (130)                 (24)             (113)               (112)
   District FE                                        Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes
   Week FE                                            No                   Yes                No                  No
   Control Mean                                       112                   34                127                146
   Level                                             Indiv.             Indiv-Week           Hhd                Hhd
   N. of cases                                       10204                 12390             5030               5030

                                                              (b) SSP

                                                     Time to Collect        Official Payments   Survey Payments
                                                              (1)                    (2)               (3)
              BL GP Mean                                      .22∗∗                 -.015              .029
                                                               (.1)                (.086)             (.094)
              Consumption (Rs. 1,000)                        -.25∗∗                 -.012             -.099
                                                             (.11)                 (.099)             (.23)
              GP Disbursement, SSP (Rs. 1000)                 -.089                 .056               .11
                                                             (.095)                (.074)             (.12)
              SC Proportion                                    18                   -29                -24
                                                              (17)                 (23)               (37)
              BPL Proportion                                  -64∗                 128∗∗              100
                                                              (35)                 (53)               (84)
              District FE                                     Yes                    Yes               Yes
              Control Mean                                     77                    257                298
              Level                                          Indiv.                Indiv.             Indiv.
              N. of cases                                     3590                  2997               2997



This table shows heterogeneous effects on major endline outcomes from GP-level baseline characteristics. Each cell shows the
coefficient on the baseline characteristic interacted with the treatment indicator in separate regressions. “BL GP Mean” is the
baseline GP-level mean for the outcome variable. “Consumption (Rs. 1,000)” is annualized consumption. “GP Disbursement
(Rs. 1000)” is total NREGS/SSP payment amounts for the period Jan 1, 2010 to July 22, 2010. “SC Proportion” is the
proportion of NREGS workspells performed by schedule caste workers/SSP beneficiaries in the period from Jan 1, 2010 to
July 22, 2010. “BPL Proportion” is the proportion of households with a BPL card in the baseline survey. Standard errors
clustered at the mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                                37
                                         Table 8: Non-experimental decomposition of treatment effects by carded status

                                                       Time to collect               Payment lag                     Official                Survey               Leakage
                                                          (1)        (2)          (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)
       Carded GP                                        -33∗∗∗                   -6.7∗∗                          8                     39∗∗                   -31∗∗
                                                         (8.2)                   (3.2)                         (13)                    (15)                   (13)
       Have SCard, Carded GP                                        -33∗∗∗                        -6.4∗                   90∗∗∗                 167∗∗∗                 -77∗∗∗
                                                                     (8.5)                        (3.3)                   (17)                   (23)                   (22)
       No SCard, Carded GP                                          -32∗∗∗                       -7.5∗∗                    -18                    -11                   -7.6
                                                                     (8.5)                       (3.4)                    (14)                   (17)                   (14)
       No Info SCard, Carded GP                                        1                           -5.9                  -109∗∗∗                -127∗∗∗                  18
                                                                     (20)                         (3.6)                    (12)                   (15)                  (13)
       Not Carded GP                                      5            5          -7.9             -7.9         7.4        5.7          22        19           -15       -14
                                                         (13)        (13)        (5.4)            (5.4)        (16)       (16)         (22)      (22)         (19)      (19)
       District FE                                        Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
       Week FE                                            No         No           Yes              Yes         No         No           No        No           No        No




38
       BL GP Mean                                         Yes        Yes          No               No          Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
       p-value: carded GP = not carded GP              <.001∗∗∗                   .73                          .97                     .35                    .36
                                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗
       p-value: Have SC = No SC                                      .86                           .55                  <.001                  <.001                  <.001∗∗∗
       Adj R-squared                                      .1          .1         .14              .14    .044             .093         .057       .13         .037     .048
       Control Mean                                      112         112          34               34     127             127           146      146           -20      -20
       N. of cases                                      10181       10181       14279            14279   5143             5143         5143      5143         5143     5143
       Level                                            Indiv.      Indiv.   Indiv-Week       Indiv-Week Hhd              Hhd          Hhd       Hhd          Hhd      Hhd

     This table shows the main ITT effects decomposed by levels of program implementation. “Carded GP” is a gram panchayat that has moved to Smartcard based
     payments, which happens once 40% of beneficiaries have been issued a card (5117 individuals, 2577 households). “Have SCard, Carded GP” (2673 individuals, 1429
     households) and “No SCard, Carded GP” (2426 individuals, 958 households) are based on whether the beneficiary or household lives in a carded GP and self-reported
     receiving a Smartcard (at least one Smartcard in the household for household-level variables). “No Info SCard, Carded GP” whose Smartcard ownership status is
     unknown, either because they did not participate in the program and hence were not asked questions about Smartcards, or because they are ghost households (18
     individuals, 190 households). “Not Carded GP” is a gram panchayat in a treatment mandal that has not yet moved to Smartcard-based payments (2261 individuals,
     1131 households). For each outcome, we report the p-values from a test of equality of the coefficients on “Carded GP” and “Not Carded GP” (odd columns), and
     “Have SCard” and “No Scard” (even columns). A specification with the baseline mean is not reported for the payment lag outcome due to a large number of missing
     baseline observations, which makes decomposition difficult. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10,
     ∗∗
        p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                                                   Control                                                                                       Control
                                                                                   Treatment                                                                                     Treatment
     Average Amount Disbursed




                                                                                                    Average Amount Disbursed
                                15                                                                                             15




                                10                                                                                             10




                                 5                                                                                              5




                                 0                                                                                              0
                  Jan−2010           Mar−2010   May−2010   Jul−2010   Sep−2010   Nov−2010                                           Mar−2012   May−2012   Jul−2012   Sep−2012   Nov−2012
                                                           Month                                                                                          Month

                                                       (a) 2010                                                                                       (b) 2012

                                                               Figure 1: Official disbursement trends in NREGS
This figure shows official NREGS payments for all workers averaged at the GP-week level for treatment and control areas.
The grey shaded bands denote the study periods on which our survey questions focus (baseline in 2010 - May 31 to July 4;
endline in 2012 - May 28 to July 15).

                                                             NREGA                                                                                        SSP


                                75
 Conversion %




                                50



                                25



                                 0
                                       Aug−2011 Nov−2011 Feb−2012 May−2012                                                          Aug−2011 Nov−2011 Feb−2012 May−2012
                                                                                               Month
                                                                      % Mandals                % GPs                                 % Carded Payments

                                                   Figure 2: Rollout of Smartcard integration with welfare programs
This figure shows program rollout in aggregate and at different conversion levels. Each unit converts to the Smartcard-enabled
system based on beneficiary enrollment in the program. “% Mandals” is the percentage of mandals converted in a district.
A mandal converts when at least one GP in the mandal converts. “% GPs” is the percentage of converted GPs across all
districts. “% Carded Payments” is obtained by multiplying % Mandals by % converted GPs in converted mandals and %
payments to carded beneficiaries in converted GPs.




                                                                                               39
                        400




                                                                                                                                            100
                        200
      Time to Collect




                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                              Payment Lag
                        0




                                                                                                                                            0
                        −200




                                                                                                                                            −50
                                           0        .2                .4          .6           .8         1                                           0        .2                .4           .6          .8       1
                                                              Percentile of Endline Time                                                                                 Percentile of Endline Lag
                                                         Control                Treatment                                                                           Control              Treatment
                                                         Difference             95% Confidence Band                                                                 Difference           95% Confidence Band


                                                   (a) Time to collect: NREGS                                                                             (b) Payment Lag: NREGS




                                                                                                                                   1500
                                    1000




                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                   Survey Amount
                  Official Amount
                                    500




                                                                                                                                   500
                                                                                                                                   0
                                    0




                                                                                                                                   −500




                                               0    .2                .4          .6          .8      1                                           0       .2                .4           .6          .8        1
                                                             Percentile of Endline Official                                                                           Percentile of Endline Survey

                                                         Control                Treatment                                                                      Control                 Treatment
                                                         Difference             95% Confidence Band                                                            Difference              95% Confidence Band


                                                          (c) Official: NREGS                                                                                   (d) Survey: NREGS
                                    600




                                                                                                                                   800
                                                                                                                                   600
                                    400




                                                                                                                   Survey Amount
                  Official Amount




                                                                                                                                   400
                                    200




                                                                                                                                   200
                                    0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                    −200




                                               0    .2                .4          .6          .8      1                                           0       .2                .4           .6          .8        1
                                                             Percentile of Endline Official                                                                           Percentile of Endline Survey

                                                         Control                Treatment                                                                      Control                 Treatment
                                                         Difference             95% Confidence Band                                                            Difference              95% Confidence Band


                                                             (e) Official: SSP                                                                                        (f) Survey: SSP

                                                                  Figure 3: Quantile Treatment Effects on Key Outcomes
Panels (a)-(f) show nonparametric treatment effects. “Time to collect: NREGS” is the average time taken to collect a
payment, including the time spent on unsuccessful trips to payment sites. “Payment Lag: NREGS” is the average lag
(in days) between work done and payment received under NREGS. The official payment amounts, “Official: NREGS” and
“Official: SSP”, refer to payment amounts paid as listed in official muster/disbursement records. The survey payment
amounts, “Survey: NREGS” and “Survey: SSP” refer to payments received as reported by beneficiaries. The NREGS data
is taken from the study period (endline was 2012 - May 28 to July 15), while SSP official data is an average of June, July
and August disbursements. All lines are fit by a kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing function with Epanechnikov
kernel and probability weights, with bootstrapped standard errors.

                                                                                                              40
                                   FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY



                        Table A.1: Comparison of study districts and other AP districts
                                                     Study Districts        Other AP       Difference   p-value
                                                             (1)               (2)            (3)         (4)
           Population                                     3169066            3845245       -676179∗      0.056
           Proportion Rural                                 .74                .73           .0053       0.89
           Proportion SC and ST                             .27                .24            .038        0.21
           Literacy rate                                    .64                .66           -.023       0.31
           Proportion Agricultural Laborers                  .2                .19             .01        0.60

This table compares characteristics of our 8 study districts and the remaining 13 non-urban (since NREGS is restricted to
rural areas) districts in erstwhile Andhra Pradesh, using data from the 2011 census. Column 3 reports the difference in
means, while column 4 reports the p-value on a study district indicator, both from simple regressions of the outcome with
no controls. “SC” (“ST”) refers to Scheduled Castes (Tribes), historically discriminated-against sections of the population
now accorded special status and affirmative action benefits under the Indian Constitution. Statistical significance is denoted
as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                         Table A.2: Balance on baseline characteristics: Official records

                                                  Treatment        Control     Difference     p-value
                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)
                     Population                    43,733.82       43,578.49     155.332         .94
                     Pensions per capita               .12             .12         .0013         .79
                     Jobcards per capita               .55             .55        -.0063         .84
                     Literacy rate                     .45             .45         .0039         .74
                     % SC                              .19             .19         .0030         .81
                     % ST                              .10             .12         -.016         .53
                     % population working              .53             .52         .0047         .63
                     % male                            .51             .51        .00018         .88
                     % old age pensions                .48             .49        -.0095         .83
                     % weaver pensions                .009            .011        -.0015         .71
                     % disabled pensions               .10             .10         .0021         .83
                     % widow pensions                  .21             .20          .014         .48

This table compares official data on baseline characteristics across treated and control mandals. Column 3 reports the
difference in treatment and control means, while column 4 reports the p-value from a simple two-sided difference in means
test. A “jobcard” is a household level official enrollment document for the NREGS program. “SC” (“ST”) refers to Scheduled
Castes (Tribes), historically discriminated-against sections of the population now accorded special status and affirmative
action benefits under the Indian Constitution. Standard errors are clustered at the mandal level. Statistical significance is
denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                             41
                        Table A.3: Balance on baseline characteristics: Household survey

                                                 NREGS                                              SSP
                               Treatment     Control   Difference   p-value   Treatment    Control    Difference   p-value
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)
   Hhd members                      4.8        4.8          .02       .90         4.1          4.2          -.15     .40
   BPL                              .98        .98       .0042        .73         .98          .97         .0039     .65
   Scheduled caste                  .22        .25        -.027       .34         .19          .23        -.036∗    .092
   Scheduled tribe                  .12        .11       .0061        .83        .096          .12         -.023     .45
   Literacy                         .42        .42       .0015        .93         .38          .39         -.013     .40
   Annual income                  41,447     42,791      -1,387       .49       33,554      35,279        -2,186     .31
   Annual consumption            104,607     95,281      8,543        .40       74,602      77,148        -3,445     .55
   Pay to work/enroll               .01      .0095       .0009        .83        .054          .07         -.016     .24
   Pay to collect                  .058       .036         .023       .14        .059         .072         -.008     .81
   Ghost Hhd                       .031       .017         .014       .12        .012        .0096         .0018     .76
   Time to collect                 157        169          -7.3       .63         94          112          -18∗∗    .027
   Average Payment Delay             29        23           .22       .93
   Payment delay deviation           11        8.8         -.42       .77
   Official amount                  167        159           12       .51
   Survey amount                    171        185          -12       .56
   Leakage                         -4.4        -26           25       .15
   NREGS availability               .47        .56        -.1∗∗       .02
   Hhd doing NREGS work             .41        .41       .0021        .95

This table presents outcome means from the household survey. Columns 3 and 6 report the difference in treatment and control
means, while columns 4 and 8 report the p-value on the treatment indicator, all from simple regressions of the outcome with
district fixed effects as the only controls. “BPL” is an indicator for households below the poverty line. “Pay to work/enroll”
refers to bribes paid in order to obtain NREGS work or to start receiving SSP pension. “Pay to Collect” refers to bribes
paid in order to receive payments. “Ghost HHD” is a household with a beneficiary who does not exist (confirmed by three
neighbors) but is listed as receiving payment on official records. “Time to Collect” is the time taken on average to collect a
benefit payment, including the time spent on unsuccessful trips to payment sites, in minutes. Standard errors are clustered
at the mandal level. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                             42
                             Table A.4: Attrition from and entry into sample frames
                                                        (a) NREGS

                                                   Treatment        Control       Difference   p-value
                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)
                     Attriters from Baseline           .013          .024           -.011        .22
                     Entrants in Endline               .061          .059           .0014        .79

                                                          (b) SSP

                                                    Treatment       Control       Difference   p-value
                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)
                      Attriters from Baseline          .097          .097           .00038       .95
                      Entrants in Endline               .17           .16            .0059       .36

These tables compare the entire NREGS sample frame – i.e., all jobcard holders – and the entire SSP beneficiary frame across
treatment (column 1) and control (column 2) mandals. Column 3 reports the difference in treatment and control means,
while column 4 reports the p-value on the treatment indicator, both from simple regressions of the outcome with district
fixed effects as the only controls. Row 1 presents the proportion of NREGS jobcards and SSP beneficiaries that dropped out
of the sample frame between baseline and endline. Row 2 presents the proportion that entered the sample frame between
baseline and endline. Standard errors are clustered at the mandal level. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                      Table A.5: Endline number of jobcards

                                                         Endline # of Jobcards
                                                          (1)               (2)
                                     Treatment            7.9             5
                                                         (7.7)          (7.4)
                                     District FE          Yes               Yes
                                     Baseline Level      Yes                Yes
                                     Adj R-squared        .97               .97
                                     Control Mean        664                675
                                     N. of cases         2924               880
                                     Level                GP                GP


This table examines whether treatment led to any changes in the number of NREGS jobcards at the GP-level between
baseline (2010) and endline (2012). It uses data from the full jobcard data frame in treatment and control mandals. Column
1 includes all GPs within study mandals. Column 2 shows only GPs sampled for our household survey. Standard errors
clustered at mandal level in parentheses.




                                                              43
                                                        Table A.6: Compositional changes in sample at endline
                                                                                   (a) NREGS

                                               (1)       (2)        (3)            (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)       (8)
                                             Hhd Size   Hindu       SC      Any Hhd Mem Reads       BPL      Total Consump Total Income Own Land
                       Treatment               .045       -.026    .023            -.031           -.0017          395            7010∗           .06∗∗
                                               (.11)     (.018)   (.022)          (.027)           (.022)        (4676)           (3772)         (.024)
                       El Entrants              -.16      .011     .029            .064             .067         -10734            -3259          -.054
                                               (.25)     (.047)   (.077)          (.049)           (.043)        (6852)           (10397)         (.12)
                       Treat*El Entrants        .14       -.029    -.077           -.089            -.05          4506             17303           .06
                                               (.34)     (.058)   (.089)          (.071)           (.058)        (9068)           (14190)         (.14)
                       District FE             Yes        Yes       Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes
                       Adj R-squared            .02       .07       .02             .01              .01           .01              .04            .01
                       Control Mean             4.3       .93       .19             .85              .89         90317             69708           .59
                       N. of cases             4944      4944      4944            4904             4922          4937             4910           4920
                       Level                   Hhd       Hhd       Hhd             Hhd              Hhd           Hhd               Hhd           Hhd

                                                                                    (b) SSP

                                              (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)       (8)
                                            Hhd Size    Hindu      SC       Any Hhd Mem Reads       BPL      Total Consump Total Income Own Land




44
                      Treatment               -.016      .019      -.025          -.048∗            .0014         -1600             4436          .0046
                                              (.12)     (.021)    (.021)          (.027)            (.018)       (3999)            (4002)         (.032)
                      El Entrants             -.034     .0076     -.079∗∗          -.017           .078∗∗∗        -1575             -1419         .099∗
                                              (.27)     (.042)    (.034)          (.044)            (.026)       (4029)            (4577)         (.056)
                      Treat*El Entrants       -.079      -.001     .049            .067              -.053        7474              5918           -.053
                                               (.3)     (.046)     (.04)          (.054)            (.033)       (5553)            (5668)         (.067)
                      District FE              Yes       Yes       Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
                      Adj R-squared            .05       .04        .02             .02              .01           .02              .07             .02
                      Control Mean             3.5       .89        .21             .64              .87          63792            52763            .52
                      N. of cases             3176      3176       3176            3136             3155          3174             3161            3166
                      Level                   Hhd       Hhd        Hhd             Hhd              Hhd            Hhd              Hhd            Hhd

     These tables show that new entrants to the NREGS and SSP samples are no different across treatment and control groups. “El Entrants” is an indicator for a
     household that entered the sample for the endline survey but was not in the baseline sample frame. “Treat*El Entrants” is the interaction between the treatment
     indicator and the endline entrant indicator, and the coefficient of interest in these regressions. “N. of Members” is the number of household members. “Hindu” is an
     indicator for the household belonging to the hindu religion. “SC” is an indicator for the household belonging to a “Scheduled Caste” (historically discriminated-against
     caste). “Any Hhd Mem Reads” is a proxy for literacy. “BPL” is an indicator for the household being below the poverty line. “Total Consump” is total consumption.
     “Own land” is an indicator for whether the household owns any land. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as:
     ∗
       p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                     Table A.7: Baseline covariates and program implementation

                                                                            NREGS                                               SSP
                                                              Carded GP                Intensity              Carded GP                  Intensity
                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                          Binary     Multiple     Binary     Multiple     Binary     Multiple     Binary      Multiple
                        Time to Collect (1 hr)              -.018       -.021     -.00042      -.003       -.024        -.026       -.018       -.019
                                                           (.014)      (.014)       (.01)     (.0098)      (.03)       (.029)      (.024)      (.024)
                        Official Amount (Rs. 100)          -.0082      -.0017      .0059       .0075       .052∗       .085∗∗       .031       .051∗
                                                           (.014)      (.018)      (.009)      (.011)      (.03)       (.035)      (.023)      (.027)
                        Survey Amount (Rs. 100)             -.011       -.011      .0037       -.0037      -.0066       -.018      -.0035      -.011
                                                           (.014)      (.017)      (.01)       (.013)      (.012)      (.012)     (.0086)     (.0083)
                        SC Proportion                       -.067       -.038       -.061       -.041       -.089       -.076       -.049       -.042
                                                           (.078)      (.078)      (.054)      (.054)      (.057)      (.057)      (.045)      (.047)




45
                        BPL Proportion                     .79∗∗       .88∗         .49         .53        .36∗∗       .39∗∗          .24∗∗    .26∗∗
                                                           (.37)       (.44)        (.3)       (.33)       (.17)       (.17)          (.11)    (.11)
                        District FE                         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes
                        Adj R-squared                                   .26                     .46                     .32                     .41
                        N. of cases                         633         631         633         631         590         588           590       588


     This tables analyzes the effects of baseline covariate variability on endline program implementation in treatment areas. Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 show coefficients from
     binary regressions, with each covariate regressed separately. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 run one single regression with all covariates. “Carded GP” is a gram panchayat that
     has converted to Smartcard based payment, which happens once 40% of beneficiaries have been issued a card. “Treatment intensity” is the proportion of transactions
     done with carded beneficiaries in carded GPs. All regressors are at GP-level averages. “Time to collect (1 hr)” is the average time taken to collect a payment (in
     hours), including the time spent on unsuccessful trips to payment sites. “Official amount (Rs. 100)” refers to amounts paid as listed in official records. “Survey
     amount (Rs. 100)” refers to payments received as reported by beneficiaries. “SC proportion” is GP proportion of Scheduled Caste households. “BPL proportion”
     is GP proportion of households below the poverty line. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10,
     ∗∗
        p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                   Table A.8: Correlates of owning a Smartcard

                                                             NREGS                       SSP
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                       Binary      Multiple     Binary     Multiple
                     Income (Rs. 10,000)               -.0029∗∗    -.0028∗∗     .00047     -.000023
                                                       (.0014)     (.0013)      (.0017)     (.0017)
                     Consumption (Rs. 10,000)           -.0014       -.001       .0014      .0014
                                                       (.0012)      (.0012)     (.0021)    (.0022)
                     Official amount (Rs. 100)          .004∗∗∗    .0042∗∗∗      .0003        0
                                                       (.00082)    (.00081)     (.0028)    (.0028)
                     SC                                 .071∗       .079∗∗       .019        .021
                                                        (.037)      (.035)      (.028)      (.029)
                     Female                             .039∗∗      .042∗∗       -.018       -.017
                                                        (.017)      (.017)      (.023)      (.023)
                     District FE                         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
                     Adj R-squared                                    .27                     .21
                     Dep Var Mean                         .47         .47         .73         .73
                     N. of cases                         5269        5259        1900        1898
                     Level                              Indiv.      Indiv.      Indiv.      Indiv.


This tables analyzes how endline covariates predict which individuals have or use a Smartcard within gram panchayats that
have moved to Smartcard based payments (“Carded GPs”). Columns 1 and 3 show coefficients from binary regressions, with
each covariate regressed separately. Columns 2 and 4 run one single regression with all covariates. “Income (Rs. 10,000)” is
household income with units as 1 = Rs. 10,000. “Consumption (Rs. 10,000)” is household consumption. “Land value (Rs.
10,000)” is household land value. “NREGS amount (Rs. 1,000)” is household NREGS income during the study period. “SC”
is a dummy for whether household is Scheduled Caste. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical
significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                            46
                           Table A.9: Scaled NREGS earnings and leakage regressions

                                                 Official            Survey          Leakage
                                               (1)      (2)        (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)
                          Treatment            9.7      2.6         33     32       -23     -28
                                              (25)     (24)        (21)   (20)     (21)    (20)
                          BL GP Mean                  .16∗∗∗               .1∗∗∗          .13∗∗∗
                                                      (.025)              (.037)          (.033)
                          District FE         Yes      Yes         Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes
                          Adj R-squared        .03      .05         .06    .07      .06    .07
                          Control Mean         260     260         180    180        80     80
                          N. of cases         5179     5143        5179   5143     5179   5143


The regressions include all sampled beneficiaries who were a) found by survey team to match official record or b) listed
in official records but confirmed as “ghost” beneficiary as described in Table 3. Each observation refers to household-level
average weekly amounts for NREGS work done during the study period (baseline in 2010 - May 31 to July 4; endline in 2012
- May 28 to July 15). “Official” refers to amounts paid as listed in official muster records, scaled by the average number of
jobcards per household in the district. “Survey” refers to payments received as reported by beneficiaries. “Leakage” is the
difference between these two amounts. Standard errors clustered at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is
denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                              47
                                   Table A.10: Other leakage robustness results

                                                # of workers
                                               found in audit                     Paid yet for a given period
                                                (1)      (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
 Treatment                                      12        10           .027            .031
                                               (12)      (10)         (.034)          (.037)
 Treatment X First 4 weeks                                                                             .038             .042
                                                                                                      (.035)           (.037)
 Treatment X Last 3 weeks                                                                              -.035            -.034
                                                                                                       (.06)           (.064)
 District FE                                   Yes       Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 Week FE                                       No        Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 BL GP Mean                                    No        No            No              Yes              No              Yes
 p-value: first 4 weeks = last 3 weeks                                                                  .20             .22
 Adj R-squared                                 .087      .13           .083            .083            .084            .085
 Control Mean                                   28        28            .92             .92             .92             .92
 N. of cases                                   513       513          21369           20113           21369           20113
 Level                                          GP       GP        Indiv-Week      Indiv-Week      Indiv-Week      Indiv-Week



In columns 1 and 2, units represent estimated number of NREGS workers on a given day, found in an independent audit
of NREGS worksites in GPs. In columns 3-6, the outcome is an indicator for whether an NREGS respondent had received
payment for a given week’s work at the time of the survey, weighted by the official payment amount. Standard errors clustered
at mandal level in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted as: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                             48
              (a) Status Quo                                            (b) Smartcard-enabled




                     State                                             State                            3b
                                           3a
    2               District                          2               District                       Bank


                   Mandal                                             Mandal                          TSP
                                                                                                                          4b
    1                                      4a         1
              Gram Panchayat                                    Gram Panchayat                        CSP


                    Worker                                            Worker

                       Figure A.1: Comparison of treatment and control payment systems
“TSP” is a Technology Service Provider, a firm contracted by the bank to handle details of electronic transfers. “CSP” is a
Customer Service Provider, from whom beneficiaries receive cash payments after authentication. In both systems, (1) paper
muster rolls are maintained by the GP and sent to the mandal computer center, and (2) the digitized muster roll data is
sent to the state financial system. In the status quo model, (3a) the money is transferred electronically from state to district
to mandal, and (4a) the paper money is delivered to the GP (typically via post office) and then to the workers. In the
Smartcard-enabled system, (3b) the money is transferred electronically from the state to the bank, to the TSP, and finally
to the CSP, and (4b) the CSP delivers the cash and receipts to authenticated recipients.




                                                              49
    (a) Sample Smartcard




   (b) Point-of-Service device

Figure A.2: The technology




             50
                                                         Andhra Pradesh Smartcard Study Districts



                                                                                                     Study Mandals
                                                                                                     Wave
                                                                                                            Non-Study
                                                                                                            Control
                                                                                                            Treatment




                        Figure A.3: Study districts with treatment and control mandals
This map shows the 8 study districts - Adilabad, Anantapur, Kadapa, Khammam, Kurnool, Nalgonda, Nellore, and Viziana-
garam - and the assignment of mandals (sub-districts) to treatment and control groups. Mandals were randomly assigned
to one of three waves: 113 to wave 1 (treatment), 195 to wave 2, and 45 to wave 3 (control). Wave 2 was created as a
buffer to maximize the time between program rollout in treatment and control waves; our study does not use data from these
mandals. The “non-study” category above consists of wave 2 mandals as well as those mandals dropped from our study prior
to randomization because the Smartcards initiative had already started in those mandals (51 out of 405). Randomization
was stratified by district and by a principal component of mandal characteristics including population, literacy, Scheduled
Caste and Tribe proportion, NREGS jobcards, NREGS peak employment rate, proportion of SSP disability recipients, and
proportion of other SSP pension recipients.




                                                            51
