                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       FISCAL FEDERALISM AND LEGISLATIVE MALAPPORTIONMENT:
CAUSAL EVIDENCE FROM INDEPENDENT BUT RELATED NATURAL EXPERIMENTS

                                           Sebastian Galiani
                                              Iván Torre
                                           Gustavo Torrens

                                         Working Paper 19995
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19995


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




We would specially like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Michael Alexeev, Marcela Eslava, John Wallis
and seminar participants in various places for insightful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Sebastian Galiani, Iván Torre, and Gustavo Torrens. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Federalism and Legislative Malapportionment: Causal Evidence from Independent
but Related Natural Experiments
Sebastian Galiani, Iván Torre, and Gustavo Torrens
NBER Working Paper No. 19995
March 2014, Revised June 20
JEL No. D72,D78,H3

                                            ABSTRACT

We exploit three natural experiments in Argentina in order to study the role of legislative
malapportionment on the biased federal tax sharing scheme prevalent in the country. We do not
find support to attribute it to legislative malapportionment during periods when democratic
governments were in place; nor did we find any evidence that the tax sharing distribution pattern
became less biased under centralized military governments. We argue that these results are
attributable to two of Argentina’s institutional characteristics: first, the predominance of the
executive branch over the legislature; and, second, the lack of any significant difference in the
pattern of geographic representation in the executive branch under democratic and autocratic
governments. Thus, the observed biases in the distribution of tax revenues among the Argentine
provinces are not caused by legislative malapportionment, but are instead the result of a more
structural political equilibrium that transcends the geographic distribution of legislative
representation and even the nature of the political regime. Our findings also illustrate the importance
of informal institutions and the interactions between formal and informal institutions. Legislative
malapportionment could have an innocuous influence in countries with a strong executive branch
but could become a key factor in countries with an empowered Congress.


Sebastian Galiani                                  Gustavo Torrens
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
University of Maryland                             Indiana University
3105 Tydings Hall                                  Wylie Hall, 100 S Woodland Ave
College Park, MD 20742                             Bloomington, IN 47405-7104
and NBER                                           gtorrens@indiana.edu
galiani@econ.umd.edu

Iván Torre
Sciences Po
28 rue des Saints Pères
75007 Paris
France
ivan.torre@sciencespo.fr
1. Introduction

Many legislatures are not well apportioned, with some constituencies having a larger or smaller share of
seats than would be dictated by the relative sizes of their populations. According to the mainstream
literature on legislative bargaining, malapportionment should lead to the formulation of biased policies
that mirror the overrepresentation or underrepresentation of different constituencies. However, these
same biases could also be generated by other economic and institutional factors. This paper explores the
question as to whether certain policy biases are actually caused by legislative malapportionment or are
the outcome of a more structural type of political equilibrium. In particular, we exploit three natural
experiments that occurred in Argentina in order to estimate the extent of the effects of legislative
malapportionment on the Argentine federal tax sharing scheme.


Baron and Ferenjohn (1989), in their seminal model of legislative bargaining, show that political
outcomes in a legislature are determined by the distribution of bargaining power among different
legislators. Consequently, any shift in the balance of bargaining power in favor of (or against) a particular
legislator will result in a change in the equilibrium point toward (or against) her constituency’s bliss
point. If we apply this model to a federal State or, indeed, to any polity made up of several political
entities (states, provinces, local governments), the inevitable conclusion is that overrepresented political
entities can be expected to receive favorable treatment5. This is the malapportionment hypothesis.


Many empirical studies on the malapportionment hypothesis have been conducted. Gibson, Calvo and
Falleti (2004) show that malapportionment is associated with distortions in the allocation of funds
within countries with federal systems of government. Turgeon and Cavalcante (2012), using a database
for all the Brazilian states for 1997-2010, find a positive and significant relationship between degrees of
overrepresentation and the amount of federal tax transfers received. In another study on Argentina,
Gordin (2010) explores the allocation of resources provided by the Electricity Development Fund (Fondo
de Desarrollo Eléctrico del Interior (FEDEI)) in 1995. His cross-section analysis shows that
overrepresentation in the Argentine Senate correlates positively with an increased share of financing
from the Fund. Porto and Sanguinetti (2001) study the determinants of intergovernmental transfers
(coparticipación) in Argentina. Using a dataset drawn from four different years -1960, 1970, 1980 and

5 In bicameral legislatures where one chamber is malapportioned and the other is not this result will depend on which
chamber initiates the legislative process (Ansolabehere, Snyder and Ting, (2003) ).

                                                                                                                   2
1990- they find that malapportionment in both chambers of Congress is correlated with the amount of
transfers each province receives, with overrepresented provinces receiving a higher per capita transfer
than underrepresented ones. These studies findings regarding the association between legislative
malapportionment and the distortions in the allocation of public funds are very interesting, but they do
not necessarily identify a causal relationship.


A few papers exploit plausible exogenous variation in legislative representation to test the
malapportionment hypothesis. Horiuchi and Saito (2003) find empirical support for the hypothesis that
malapportionment leads to policy outcomes that favor overrepresented districts. Using municipal-level
data from Japan, they show that municipalities in overrepresented districts received higher subsidies per
capita than those located in underrepresented ones. They exploit the fact than in 1994 an electoral
reform bill significantly altered the geographical allocation of seats in the national legislature, which
provided a source of exogenous variation in the degree of representation of each district. This gave them
an opportunity to isolate the effect of malapportionment on the distribution of public funds.
Ansolabehere, Gerber and Snyder (2002) provide similar evidence for legislative districts in the United
States using court-ordered redistricting in the 1960s as a source of an exogenous variation in the
distribution of geographic representation. Dragu and Rodden (2011) focus on resource allocation at the
state level in countries with federal governments and find that overrepresentation has a positive effect on
the size of fund transfers. In order to overcome potential endogeneity problems, they exploit the fact that
new states were added to many federations over time. The idea is that, unlike the states that were
originally a part of a federal system, these new states did not participate in the formulation of the
representation rule that was put in place and, therefore, their funding allocations can be expected to
correspond more to the rule itself rather than to what the authors refer to as the “original bargaining”
terms arranged upon by founding states.6


Our study introduces three distinguishing features in order to control for potential endogeneity
problems. First, we exploit the fact that, in Argentina, on three occasions (1960, 1973 and 1983) changes
were made in the minimum number of legislators per district. These changes increased the number of

6
 On a different perspective, Bruhn, Gallego and Onorato (2010) argue that legislative malapportionment may be the result of a
strategy devised by pre-democratic elites to retain political influence in democracy, and using data from Latin America they
show that overrepresented districts usually vote for the elites’ parties, exhibit low political competition and receive higher per
capita transfers from the central government.

                                                                                                                                3
seats in the smaller districts and modified the total number of seats, thereby altering the legislative
representation of each district. We describe these changes in section 3. Second, as in Dragu and Rodden
(2011), we exploit the fact in 1953, 1955, 1958 and 1991 new provinces were added to the Argentine
federation by focusing on the effect that these additions had on the legislative representation of the
original 15 provinces7. This is also described in section 3. Using this strategy, we obtain exogenous
variations for the legislative representation of those 15 provinces. Third, we exploit the country’s
exceptional degree of institutional volatility, which induces a radical exogenous variation in the level of
legislative representation. Specifically, during the time covered by our dataset, there were numerous
military coups (five in total: 1943, 1955, 1962, 1966 and 1976 – the first coup in Argentina in 1930 is out
of our sample) that gave rise to several autocracies. In each of these periods, Congress was shut down
and the president, who was appointed by the military, also centralized legislative power. Thus, under
military governments, legislative malapportionment was eliminated completely. Moreover, the civil
governors of the provinces were mostly replaced by members of the armed forces, acting formally as
“federal interventors” which means they were delegates of the central government and many of which
were not originally from those provinces8.


We have built up a database that covers the changes that have occurred in the Argentine tax sharing
scheme since its inception in 1935 up to 2011. We have also collected data on the legislative
representation of the Argentine provinces from 1935 to 2011. Thus, we have a panel dataset that
encompasses both trends in the transfers received by each province through the tax sharing scheme and
trends in the representation of each province. We use our dataset to estimate the effect of changes in
legislative representation on the transfers received by the provinces. We find that there is no statistical
evidence to support the idea that legislative malapportionment has a causal effect on the federal tax
sharing scheme in the country studied. We also find that there is no evidence to support the thesis that,
under centralized military governments, the distribution of revenues under the tax sharing scheme
reverted to a more proportional pattern in the absence of malapportionment.


7 Actually they were 14 provinces and the City of Buenos Aires, which is not a province but has a large degree of autonomy,
especially after the Constitutional Reform of 1994. Throughout this paper we will refer to them, for the sake of simplicity, as
15 provinces.
8 There is little literature on the nature of the institutional relationship between the executive power and the provinces during

military regimes in Argentina, but the evidence indicates that many federal interventors –which were mostly military, both
retired and in service- had little relationship with the provinces which they were sent to govern.

                                                                                                                               4
We then also explore potential explanations for our results. First, we develop a very simple politico-
economic model based on two socioeconomic groups (the rich and the poor), three political jurisdictions
(the federal government and two local government), and one national and two local public goods whose
production is financed by a proportional income tax. We consider two political regimes (democracy and
autocracy) and, following Acemoglu and Robinson (2006), we assume that, under democracy (autocracy),
the poor (rich) are better represented. We show that although democracies and autocracies differ in
terms of the level of taxation and provision of public goods (bigger governments under democracy), they
may not differ to any significant degree in terms of the distribution of resources among districts. In
particular, we show that the share of public revenues received by each local government is the same
under a democracy dominated by the executive branch and under an autocracy, while overrepresented
districts receive more resources under a democracy in which a malapportioned Congress wields power
than under an autocracy.


Second, we argue that the executive branch has much more power than the legislative branch in
Argentina and, hence, malapportionment does not have as great an impact as we would otherwise expect
when democratic governments are in place. However, the predominance of the executive branch cannot
by itself account for the persistence of these biases or explain why military governments did not revert to
a more proportional pattern of distribution, unless the bargaining process that determines the
distribution of tax revenues among the provinces does not differ very much from one political regime to
the next. In order to further explore this vein, we build an index of geographic representation in the
executive branch under democracy and under military governments. We find that there is no significant
difference between democratic and autocratic government in the ratings, but there is a significant
difference between the degree of geographic representativeness of the executive and legislative
branches. This leads us to conjecture that the biases evident in the Argentine tax sharing system are not a
function of legislative malapportionment, but are instead the outcome of a deeper equilibrium which is
robust to the geographic distribution of legislative representation and the political regime. Nevertheless,
further research will be needed to shed light on this issue.


The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we summarize historical trends in the
Argentine federal tax sharing scheme. In Section 3, we describe the malapportionment of the Argentine
Congress. In Section 4, we explain the estimation strategy, and in Section 5, we present and interpret the
                                                                                                         5
main results. In Section 6, we develop a very simple politico-economic model of fiscal policy in a
federation. In Section 7, we explore the question as to why legislative malapportionment does not have
an effect on the federal tax sharing scheme and why the presence of military governments does not
significantly change the scheme. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


2. The Argentine Federal Tax Sharing Scheme
In this section we first briefly summarize the institutional development of fiscal federalism in Argentina,
focusing on the federal tax sharing scheme that was launched in 1935. We then describe the ways in
which the scheme has changed over time.


Following Porto (1990), we can divide the history of fiscal federalism in Argentina into three distinct
periods: (i) the division of tax sources; (ii) competitive federalism; and (iii) the federal tax sharing scheme.
The first period goes from 1853 –when the modern Argentine Constitution was promulgated- to 1890.
During this period, there was a constitutional mandate for a division of tax revenue sources between the
national government and the provinces. The national government collected taxes only on foreign trade,
while the provinces collected domestic taxes on consumption and production. Between 1890 and 1934,
there was a period of “competitive federalism” in which both the national government and the provinces
collected taxes on consumption and production. Until that time, intergovernmental transfers had been
very limited in scale and were confined to what are nowadays called “national treasury contributions”
(aportes del tesoro nacional), which are discretionary transfers from the national government to the
provinces. The last period, from 1935 until the present day, started with the creation of the federal tax
sharing scheme (coparticipación federal de impuestos). Under this scheme, specified types of taxes have
been centralized and are thus collected by the national government, which then redistributes the
revenues among the provinces.


The scheme created in 1935 was originally governed by three different laws. Act No. 12.139 consolidated
all the various domestic taxes on consumption and production that the provinces and the national
government had been levying separately until then. It also centralized tax collections in a national tax
agency, which would then have to distribute the revenues among the provinces. Act No. 12.143 and Act
No. 12.147 set out the arrangement for sharing the revenues from the sales tax and income tax, both of


                                                                                                              6
which had recently been created and were being collected by the national government.9 The share of
revenue to which the provinces were entitled was 17.5%, with the national government receiving 82.5%;
these numbers reflect what is called the “primary distribution” of tax revenues. The “secondary
distribution”, i.e., the distribution within provinces, was based on several criteria: 30% of the revenues
were distributed according to the size of the population of each province, 30% according to the
expenditures of each district for the year 1934, 30% according to the local revenues of each province in
the preceding year, and 10% according to the amount of the tax collected in each district. All 14 provinces
and the Municipality of the City of Buenos Aires participated in the tax sharing scheme.


In 1943, a military government capped the income tax revenues to be distributed among the provinces at
an amount equal to the amount transferred during that year. As a consequence, all the excess revenue
was withheld by the national government, tilting the primary distribution even more sharply against the
provinces. In 1947, under a democratic government, Congress passed Act No. 12.956, which increased
the share of the provinces in the primary distribution to 21%, as well as incorporated new taxes into the
scheme. Minor changes were made in the secondary distribution. In 1951, Act No. 14.060 added the
newly created inheritance tax to the scheme, albeit with different distribution criteria: each district
received exactly the amount that had been collected within that district.


The 1950s brought changes in the federal organization of Argentina: new provinces were created out of
what had been known as the “national territories”, areas originally inhabited by indigenous populations
which were colonized in the late 19th century. The first new provinces were Chaco, in the northeast, and
La Pampa, in the center of the country, both created in 1951. Subsequently Misiones, also in the
northeast, was created in 1953 and Chubut, Formosa, Neuquén, Río Negro and Santa Cruz were created in
1955. All these new provinces were gradually incorporated into the tax sharing scheme. Act No. 14.390 of
1954 –which replaced Act No. 12.139- established a new criterion for the primary distribution of
domestic tax revenues which was based on the size of the populations of the provinces. Ultimately, when
all the remaining national territories, except Tierra del Fuego, were provincialized the following year, the


9The  collapse of world trade after the 1929 stock market crash practically wiped out the main revenue sources of the central
government: tariffs and export taxes. Alternative tax sources had to be found. This was what led to the creation of the income
tax in 1933 and to the conversion of the “transaction tax” created in 1891 into a sales tax. The Argentine Constitution
establishes that direct taxes can be collected only by the provinces, so in order for the central government to continue
collecting these taxes, a sharing scheme had to be arranged.

                                                                                                                            7
share of the provinces went up to 46% and that of the national government was reduced to 54%. In terms
of the secondary distribution, 98% of the revenues were distributed according to the population of each
district; this proportion fell to 84% in 1955, 82% in 1956 and 80% in 1957, while the proportions based
on the geographical location of the production of the taxed goods rose from 16% in 1955, to 18% in 1956
and to 20% in 1957. The remaining was distributed in inverse proportion to the size of the population.


With the advent of a new democratic government, Act No. 14.788 was passed in 1959, which gradually
increased the share of the provinces in the primary distribution to 40% (46% including the Municipality
of the City of Buenos Aires), up from 21%. The secondary distribution was as follows: 25% was
distributed according to the population, 25% according to the expenditures of each district, and 25% on
the basis of local revenues, while the other 25% was distributed equally among all the provinces. This
regime remained largely in place for more than a decade, although some changes were made in the
primary distribution during the military dictatorship of 1966-1973 that reduced the provinces’ share to
35%.


A major overhaul of the entire tax sharing scheme came in 1973 with the enactment of Act No. 20.221 by
a military government just days before the inauguration of a civilian government. This law created a
single scheme which covered all the taxes that had previously been administered separately. Under this
new scheme, the revenues from all the different taxes covered by the scheme were pooled into a single
fund that was then distributed, firstly, between the national government and the provinces and, secondly,
among the provinces. In terms of the primary distribution, the provinces and the national government
each received 48.5% of the revenues, while the remaining 3% was transferred to a regional development
fund created to finance infrastructure projects. The secondary distribution was based on three
parameters: population (65% of the revenues), development gap (25%) and population density (10%).
The development gap was defined as the average of the differences between indicators of housing
quality, the level of education and the number of motor vehicles relative to the size of the population in
each district and those of the Province of Buenos Aires and the City of Buenos Aires (taken together). This
arrangement clearly redistributed resources from the Buenos Aires region to the rest of the country. The
population density parameter (which measured the difference between each district’s population density
and the national average) was valid only for those districts whose density level was below the national
average, and six provinces (Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Entre Ríos, Misiones, Santa Fe and Tucumán) were
                                                                                                         8
therefore excluded. Thus, scarcely populated provinces received a larger share than densely populated
ones.


Act No. 20.221 was originally supposed to expire in 1980, but later in the same year that it was enacted
(1973), the democratically elected Congress voted to extend it to 1983. The scheme did not undergo any
major changes in the following years other than the inclusion of the value added tax, which was
introduced in 1975. However, in 1980, a military government decided to reform the system and reduced
the share of the provinces in the primary distribution to 32.6% (down from 48.5%) while, at the same
time, it incorporated social security contributions into the scheme. This led to changes in the secondary
distribution as well. The City of Buenos Aires was excluded from the sharing scheme in 1981 but was
later included again in 1983. Acts Nos. 22.923 and 22.924 incorporated these changes into the system,
whose expiry date was moved up to December 31st 1984.


In December 1983, a new democratic administration was elected. During 1984, the national government
and the provinces -now with elected governors- failed to reach an agreement on the design of a new tax
sharing scheme. On the first day of 1985, the scheme legally ceased to exist and the national government
had to resort to the use of national treasury contributions to transfer revenues to each province. Both the
primary and secondary distributions of tax revenues underwent significant changes. The Province of
Buenos Aires, for instance, received 17.1% of the share transferred to the provinces in 1985, while, in
1984, the figure was 27.1%. A new law (Act No. 23.548) was not approved by the Congress until early
1988, and the scheme that was enacted by that law was intended to be temporary. In fact, it was
supposed to expire at the end of 1989. In terms of the primary distribution, 43% of the revenues went to
the national government, while 57% went to the provinces.


The scheme created by Act No. 23.548 was automatically extended every year after 1989 and is still in
force. However, during the 1990s, several laws were passed that modified the scheme. There were also
sweeping changes in the relationship between the national government and the provinces, namely, the
complete decentralization of educational and health services together with a major reform in the social
security system. Thus, the parameters established in Act No. 23.548 provide no more than a very poor




                                                                                                         9
indication of the actual shares received by each province in later years.10 During the 2000s, a further set
of regulations introduced more changes into the system. In December 2011, for instance, the revenues
covered by Act No. 23.548 represented 78% of the total transfers received by the provinces; the
remaining 22% was transferred under the terms of another nine supplementary laws.


2.1. Historical Trends in the Argentine Federal Tax Sharing Scheme
We have built a database that covers trends in the tax sharing scheme since its inception in 1935 up until
2011, which is the last year for which annual data are available. This includes all 24 subnational districts
of the country. In particular, our database registers the amount of money each district has received every
year under the tax sharing scheme and the associated laws. Discretionary transfers have not been taken
into account.11 All the information comes from official sources: the annual reports of the Treasury
Ministry (Memorias del Ministerio de Hacienda) from 1935 to 1958, the statistical yearbooks of the
General Tax Administration (Boletines Estadísticos de la Dirección General Impositiva) from 1958 to 1979,
annual reports of the Treasury Department (Memorias de la Secretaría de Hacienda) between 1980 and
1984, and various publications of the National Department for Provincial Fiscal Coordination (Dirección
Nacional de Coordinación Fiscal con las Provincias) for 1985 -2011. In Appendix A, we provide an
overview of all the sources of information that were used.


A convenient and systematic way of summarizing the aggregate biases in the tax sharing scheme is to

compute the Gini coefficient associated with the distribution of the transfers per capita. Let                             be

the transfers per capita received by province in year and suppose that we order provinces according
to this ratio, where           indicates the province with the lowest transfers per capita and                      the one

with the highest. Let                  be the proportion of the total population that lives in province . Then,

the Gini coefficient of the transfers per capita can be computed as follows:




10 Cetrangolo and Jiménez (2004) provide a list of all the laws and decrees that modified the scheme originally set out in Act

No. 23.548.
11 Strictly speaking, the transfers received by the provinces in the period between 1985 and 1987 –when no tax sharing

scheme existed- were discretionary, but we have included them in our database for the sake of consistency.

                                                                                                                           10
                                             ∑   (            )(         )



                                                                                                          (1.)
                   where        ∑    (           )(                ) , and    .



           is a measure of the degree of inequality of the distribution of tax revenues among the
provinces under the federal tax sharing system. Note that if each province receives the same transfer per
capita, then                 , while, at the other extreme, if only one province concentrates all the

transfers, then                . Figure 1.a shows the trends in                   for all the provinces, while

Figure 1.b shows             for the original 15 provinces.


                            Figure 1: Gini Coefficient for Per Capita Transfers




As Figure 1 shows, inequality in per capita transfers decreased during the early years of the federal tax
sharing scheme, falling to its lowest point in the early 1950s, and then started to rise again. The same
pattern is observed if we restrict the analysis to the original 15 provinces in the scheme.


                                                                                                           11
The trend in                    points to major changes in the transfers per capita received by each province
relative to the average transfer per capita (some provinces won and others lost as the tax sharing system
became more or less unequal). In fact, there has been a great deal of variability in the figures for different
provinces. For instance, take the case of Catamarca: from a share of 0.5% of total transfers in 1935, its
share rose to 1.1% in 1946, 1.7% in 1959, 1.9% in 1973, 2.5% in 1988 and 2.7% in 2011. Similarly, the
share of La Rioja gradually grew from 0.5% in 1935 to 2.1% in 2011. An opposite trend was seen in the
case of Mendoza, which had had the largest share of the tax revenues of any province in 1935 (about
20.6%). In 1946, its share dropped to 9.6% and then to 4.9% in 1959; as of 2011, it stood at 4.2%. Santa
Fe’s share, on the other hand, after falling from 12.5% in 1935 to 9.2% in 1959, has remained stable since
then. Meanwhile, Córdoba’s share has not changed to any notable degree in the 76 years of the scheme’s
existence. The share of Buenos Aires (the largest province in the country), after increasing from 20.3% in
1935 to 29.5% in 1946, has decreased almost without interruption since then, reaching 19.6% in 1988
(increasing marginally to 19.8% in 2011). The federal capital’s share increased steadily from 3.7% in
1935 to 12.7% in 1959, but then plummeted to 3.7% again in 1973. The question then arises as to
whether these changes in the level of transfers per capita have been at least partially caused by
modifications in the legislative representation of different districts.


3. Malapportionment in the Argentine Congress
In this section we briefly describe the historical trends in malapportionment in the Argentine Congress.
As most federal countries, Argentina has a bicameral legislature. The upper house -Senate- is the
chamber where the provinces are represented, while the lower house –the Chamber of Deputies- is the
chamber where the people are represented. It is clear that, by design, the Senate is prone to
malapportionment, since the allocation of seats is not linked to the actual distribution of the population
within the country but, rather, to the existence of the subnational entities that compose the federation.
Furthermore, in the case of Argentina, all the provinces have been allocated the same number of seats in
the Senate: two between 1853 and 1995,12 and three after 1995. Given the highly unequal geographic




12   Between 1973 and 1976, three seats were allocated to each province. This change was later rolled back.

                                                                                                              12
distribution of the population,13 the equal-seat allocation has made the Argentine Senate the most
malapportioned legislature in the world, as has been documented by Stepan (1999), Samuels and Snyder
(2001) and Gordin (2010).


What is more surprising than the malapportionment seen in the Senate -which, to a certain point, is only
to be expected given the characteristics of representation in that chamber- is the high level of
malapportionment seen in the Chamber of Deputies. The Argentine Constitution is one of the factors that
is at the root of this problem. In fact, although it states that the lower house represents the people of the
country, it also establishes that deputies should be allocated by province, which means that all the
provinces should have at least one seat. This would not be particularly noteworthy were it not for the fact
that, given the distribution of the population and the total number of seats in the chamber, some
provinces would not even qualify for one seat under a fully proportional apportionment system.14
Moreover, under existing laws, the minimum number of seats per province is five. Samuels and Snyder
(2001), using data from the late 1990s, show that Argentina’s lower house is the 14th most
malapportioned chamber in their sample of 78 countries. In Latin America, only Chile, Ecuador and
Bolivia exhibit a higher degree of malapportionment in their lower houses.


The extent of malapportionment in the Argentine Chamber of Deputies has also changed over time, partly
as a result of population growth and partly as a result of changes in the number of seats assigned to each
province. The first Chamber of Deputies of Argentina, which was established following the promulgation
of the Constitution of 1853 and whose scope was extended to include the whole of the country in 1862,15
had only 50 seats. The number was raised to 86 in 1873 following the results of the country’s first census
in 1869. In 1898, the number was raised to 120 and, in 1920, to 158, in both cases with some delay,
following the censuses of 1895 and 1914, respectively. In 1953, the number was temporarily reduced to
155 and two new provinces –Chaco and La Pampa- were incorporated into the Congress at the expense of
seats from the City of Buenos Aires, Corrientes, Entre Ríos, San Luis, Santa Fe and Tucumán. In 1955, two
additional seats were introduced for the newly created province of Misiones. In 1958, the total number of

13 According to the 2010 census, 38.9% of the country’s population lives in the Province of Buenos Aires. The four most

populous districts (Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Santa Fe and the City of Buenos Aires) account for 62.3% of the population. Note
that there are, in total, 24 districts in the country (23 provinces and the City of Buenos Aires).
14 In 2010, there were 40.2 million inhabitants in Argentina and 257 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, for an average of

156,097 inhabitants per seat. The Province of Tierra del Fuego, for instance, has a population of 127,205.
15 The Province of Buenos Aires was virtually independent between 1854 and 1861.


                                                                                                                        13
seats was raised to 187, and a single seat for each of the new provinces of Chubut, Formosa, Neuquén and
Santa Cruz was included. The recently established Province of Río Negro was incorporated into the
Chamber with two seats. In 1960, the minimum number of seats per province was raised to two, and the
total number of seats in the lower house therefore went up to 192. In 1973, the Chamber saw one of its
largest expansions ever, with 51 more seats being added when the minimum number of seats for each
constituency was raised to four (except for Tierra del Fuego, which was still a “national territory” and had
two seats). The number of seats allocated to the City of Buenos Aires was sharply reduced at the same
time (down to 25 from 35). The return of democracy in 1983 brought with it an increase of 11 seats as
the minimum number of deputies per province was raised to five. The last change occurred in 1991,
when three additional seats were added after Tierra del Fuego became a province in 1990.


3.1. Historical Trends in Malapportionment in the Argentine Congress
We have collected information on the legislative representation of the provinces from 1935 to 2011. In
Appendix A, we list all the sources of information used. A convenient and systematic way of summarizing
the trends in the malapportionment of Argentina’s Chamber of Deputies is to compute the Gini coefficient
associated with the distribution of seats per number of inhabitants. Let                        be the seats per

inhabitants for province    in year   and suppose that we order provinces according to this ratio, with
      indicating the province with the lowest ratio and              the one with the highest. Then the Gini
coefficient for the seats per number of inhabitants is given by:


                                               ∑   (          )(            )
                                                                                ,
                                                                                                              (2.)
                   where        ∑     (            )(              ) and            .



                is a measure of the degree of inequality of legislative representation in Argentina’s

Chamber of Deputies. Figure 2.a shows the trend in                         for all the provinces, while Figure 2.b
shows                 for the original 15 provinces.




                                                                                                               14
                Figure 2: Gini Coefficient for Seats per Inhabitants in the Chamber of Deputies




As Figures 2.a and 2.b show, inequality in representation in the Chamber of Deputies has generally been
increasing throughout the period under study, with the exception of two episodes, in 1953 and 1973,
during which the seat allocation system was reformed.


The trends in                  point up major changes in the representation of different provinces relative
to the average level of representation in the Chamber (some provinces gained in representation and
others lost as the overall level of representation in the Chamber became more or less unequal). Were
these modifications in the legislative representation of different districts the cause of the changes made
in the tax sharing system?


4. Empirical Strategy
In this section, we present our identification strategy. One approach to studying the effects of legislative
malapportionment on tax sharing is to rely on a cross-section analysis, i.e., run a regression between an
index of the legislative representation of a given district and an outcome variable related to the transfers


                                                                                                         15
received by that district. There are, however, two main issues with this approach. First and foremost, the
existence of unobservable variables that may have an impact on the distribution of tax revenues results
in a potential omitted-variable bias. These variables could be, for example, qualitative characteristics of
the relationship between some provinces and the national government that could make some districts
more or less likely to be overrepresented in the legislature and to receive larger or smaller federal
transfers. Party affiliation –a regressor usually included in the cross-section regressions- is just one of the
possible qualitative dimensions involved. Other aspects of political affinity may not be quantifiable at all.
In addition, even if it were possible to include proxy regressors for all the relevant unobservable
variables, the existence of a finite number of observations –in a cross-section analysis of Argentina at
province level there cannot be more than 24- clearly limits the statistical feasibility of such an analysis.


A possible solution for the problems posed by cross-section studies would be to extend the analysis over
time by creating a panel database in which each province is followed over several years. An example of
this approach can be found in the work done by Pitlik, Schneider and Strotman (2006) on Germany’s
intergovernmental transfer system. To the extent that the omitted variables are time-invariant, a fixed-
effect analysis using panel data solves the endogeneity problem. However, this is not always the case:
whenever an unobservable variable changes over time, the endogeneity problem persists. For instance, if
the relationship between political elites in a province and the national government –a variable which is
very difficult to quantify- changes over time, this could independently affect both apportionment in
Congress and the share of resources channeled to that province. To control for this, an instrumental
variable approach needs to be adopted. The potentially endogenous regressor –in our case, the index of
legislative representation- has to be instrumented by an exogenous variable.


We use the last approach and exploit exogenous variations in our index of legislative representation.
First, during the period under study, there were several changes in the minimum number of seats per
district, which produced exogenous variations in the legislative representation of the provinces. Second,
new provinces were established, were given seats in the Chamber of Deputies and were incorporated into
the tax sharing system, and this induced exogenous variations in the legislative representation of the
original provinces.




                                                                                                               16
In line with Porto and Sanguinetti (2001), our dependent variable is the per capita transfers received by
each district, expressed as a ratio with respect to the total country value, i.e., the total amount of tax
distributed to the provinces divided by the population of the country. The formula is (“ ” indicates the
district, “ ” is total number of provinces and is the year):



                                                       ∑
                                                                                                              (3.)
                               ∑
                               ∑                       ∑


For an index of the legislative representation of district , we use the seats per number of inhabitants in
the Chamber of Deputies in district over the seats per number of inhabitants for the whole country. The
formula is:



                                                            ∑
                                                                                                              (4.)
                                   ∑
                               ∑                       ∑


In non-democratic regimes, we calculate        using the seat distribution in the last session of Congress.


The instrument we use for      is simple. We recalculate ∑           , tracking the initial values in 1935, and

change them only when there is a change in the minimum numbers of seats per district or when the

Chamber expands due to the entry of new provinces. Similarly, we recalculate         ∑
                                                                                                     , tracking

the initial values in 1935, and change them only when the Chamber expands due to the entry of new
provinces. We use the 1935 population levels so as to exclude the distortion created by population
growth between the first year of the scheme and the year when the new provinces are created. Finally,

we divide the two recalculated versions of ∑               and ∑             to obtain our instrument of         ,

which we denote by      .




                                                                                                               17
A change in the minimum number of seats per district has three significant properties. First and
foremost, it is exogenous to our analysis since in none of the cases where it happened was it actually
related to the tax sharing scheme. The first change, approved by a democratic Congress in 1960,
consisted in the reinstatement of a minimum which had been established by the repealed 1949
Constitution based on the historical tradition that no province should have fewer than two seats
(Reynoso, 2012).16 The changes on the seat minimum in 1973 and 1983 were decided by military
governments before democratic elections took place and were understood to have been carried out to
undermine the Peronism’s representation, erroneously thought to be based in the urban areas of large
provinces.17 Second, it affects the legislative representation of every district, increasing the
representation of districts with a number of seats below the newly established minimum and reducing
the representation of the others. Third, the magnitudes of the changes in representation within each
group of districts (winners and losers) are generally different. Thus, a change in the minimum number of
seats generates exogenous variations of diverse magnitudes in the legislative representation of different
districts.


The entry of a new province also has similar properties. First, since we are restricting our analysis to the
15 original provinces, it is an exogenous change. In fact, the new provinces were created out of territories
until then directly controlled by the executive power and the “provincialization” laws (a Constitutional
requirement) were proposed to the Congress by the executive power and approved by unanimity. The
only lengthy process was that of the province of Tierra del Fuego, which took four years from the
moment the executive power presented the project until it was approved. However, the debate was about
whether the Malvinas/Falkland Islands, a territory controlled by the United Kingdom but claimed by
Argentina, should be part of the province or not. Second, the entry of new provinces affects the legislative
representation of every district. In particular, if the new province obtains a number of seats relative to its
population that is higher (lower) than the national pre-entry ratio, the legislative representation of all the
older provinces decreases (increases). Third, although the direction of the change is the same for every
older province, the magnitude of the changes are generally different. Thus, the entry of a new province


16
   The 1949 Constitution was approved during Peron’s first government and later repealed in 1957. In 1949 the minimum of
two seats had no actual effect on the representation in the Chamber of Deputies since no province at that time had fewer seats
than that figure.
17 This interpretation has been suggested by Martin Alessandro


                                                                                                                           18
also generates exogenous variations of varying magnitudes in the levels of legislative representation of
the different districts.18


Finally, in our analysis we also exploit the political volatility of the country throughout the years covered
in our database; between 1935 and 2011, there were five separate military regimes that lasted from two
to seven years. Given the complete absence of an independent legislative power –the locus of
malapportionment- during military governments, each change in the political regime (from democracy to
military dictatorship or vice versa) produced a radical variation in the extent of legislative
representation. As Potash (1969) (1980) (1996) points out in his detailed work on the Argentine army, in
none of the coups was legislative malapportionment or the tax sharing system an issue and, thus, we can
regard these variations as exogenous for the purpose of our analysis. We use the changes in the political
regime to estimate whether military governments tend to increase (decrease) their transfers to
previously underrepresented (overrepresented) districts, at least partially reverting the biases in the tax
revenue transfers. The 1943 coup -the first one in our sample- was triggered by the efforts of the civil
government to exploit the military for partisan purposes and foreign policy considerations relating to the
ongoing world war. The 1955, 1962 and 1966 coups were all related to Peronism. The Peronist
movement significantly altered the political equilibrium in favor of the working class and against the
interests of the land owner aristocracy which had clear sympathies with the armed forces. Peronism had
broad support across the country, both in the interior and in the province of Buenos Aires, so this was
predominantly a class conflict rather than a geographical one. Lastly, the 1976 coup came in the middle of
a deep socio political crisis triggered, on the one hand, by the failure of the import substitution
industrialization Argentina had been carrying on since the 1930s and, on the other hand, by the internal
conflict between left wing and right wing Peronists.


Table 1 presents the first-stage regressions. In Column (1), we present the first-stage regression of                        ,
interacted with            (a dummy variable that indicates whether the political regime in year                      was a
democracy) with respect to           , interacted with          . Similarly, Column (2) of Table 1 presents the first-


18An example of an endogenous change in legislative representation is a change in the number of seats that is associated with
the publication of census results, which, of course, are clearly a reflection of changes in the size of the population of each
district.


                                                                                                                           19
stage regression of            , interacted with              (a dummy variable that indicates whether the political
regime in year was a dictatorship) with respect to                     , interacted with           .


In order to be conservative, we use two alternative methods to conduct statistical inference throughout
the paper. We first report robust standard errors clustered at the province level, which allow for
arbitrary within-country correlation. There are 15 provinces in our sample. Standard asymptotic tests
might over-reject the null hypothesis under the presence of few clusters. Thus, as a robustness check, we
also report p-values of the null hypothesis of no effect using the wild bootstrap-t procedure in Cameron
et al. (2008). This method produces with approximately the desired size even in the presence of a very
small number of clusters. Reassuringly, in our case, either approach yields very similar statistical
inferences.




                                                Table 1: First-Stage Regression

                                                                  Dependent Variable
                                                                                                Excluding the
                                              All Provinces
                                                                                             City of Buenos Aires

                                     (1)                        (2)                         (3)               (4)
                                   0.986***                    -0.003                  0.972***              -0.037
                                   (0.121)                    (0.094)                  (0.121)              (0.090)
                                   [0.008]                    [0.928]                  [0.008]              [0.644]

                                   0.140***                   1.003***                 0.107**              0.978***
                                   (0.050)                    (0.098)                  (0.049)              (0.097)
                                   [0.008]                    [0.000]                  [0.036]              [0.000]

F-Test                              66.83                      97.79                       64.02             96.43

Observations                   1155                    1155                    1078                    1078
Note: All regressions include year effects, province effects and province linear trends. These regressors are
partialled out in the estimation.19 Province-clustered standard errors in parentheses; Wild clustered bootstrap p-
values for t-statistics computed as proposed by Cameron et al. (2008) in italics. * significantly different from zero
at 10%, ** at 5%, *** at 1%.




19   See Baum, Schaffer and S. Stillman (2007).

                                                                                                                       20
Note that the coefficients corresponding to the instruments in Table 1 are all statistically significant at the
1 percent level. The fact that the coefficient of    is very close to one indicates that the variability of the
instrumented variable will practically mimic that of the instrument, thus reassuring us that we are only
relying on exogenous variability in our causal analysis. It is clear that only the variability in             is
exogenous and that this exogenous variability is not correlated with other variability in legislative
malapportionment such as that induced by population change. Therefore, our instrumental variable
approach is fundamental to obtain consistent estimates of the effects of legislative malapportionment on
federal tax transfers.


4.1. Regression Model
We estimate the following model:


                                                                                                            (5.)


where         (      ) is a dummy variable that indicates whether the political regime in year           was a
democracy (dictatorship) or not,     and     are province and year effects, respectively, and               is a
province-specific linear trend.


Several remarks about this specification apply. First, we estimate this model for the 15 original districts
in the scheme. Second, the standard malapportionment theory would predict a positive sign for             . The
higher the     of the district, the more represented the district is relative to other districts and, hence, the
more transfers per inhabitant relative to the average transfer per inhabitant it can be expected to receive.
Under non-democratic regimes, we calculate             using the seat distribution in the latest session of
Congress. Therefore, the standard malapportionment theory would suggest a negative sign for             . Given
the absence of legislative malapportionment in military governments, we would expect that they try to
shift the tax sharing scheme toward a less biased distribution. Thus, the higher the          of a district in a
non-democratic period, the better represented the district would have been in the previous democratic
period and the more funds it can be expected to receive now.




                                                                                                             21
5. Main Results
Table 2 presents the main results. Note that the coefficients associated with                   and
are statistically significant when they are not instrumented by                   and               (column 1).
However, once                  and                 are instrumented by                   and                  , the
coefficients drop steeply toward zero and are not statistically significant (column 3). Indeed, the 2SLS
point estimates are very small and also economically insignificant.


                                            Table 2: Main Results

                                                                        Instrumental Variable Regressions
                                             Excluding the                                   Excluding the
                                                City of                                         City of
                       All Provinces         Buenos Aires                All Provinces       Buenos Aires
                            (1)                   (2)                         (3)                 (4)
                          0.498***               0.491***                    0.166                  0.113
                          (0.141)                (0.159)                    (0.188)                (0.201)
                          [0.064]                [0.088]                    [0.464]                [0.612]

                          0.513***               0.495***                    0.102                  0.031
                          (0.135)                (0.152)                    (0.208)                (0.220)
                          [0.044]                [0.056]                    [0.608]                [0.848]

F-Test
(Kleinberg-
Paap)                                                                         42.88                   45.12

Observations                 1155                   1078                      1155                   1078
Note: All regressions include year effects, province effects and province linear trends. These regressors are
partialled out in the IV estimation. Province-clustered standard errors are shown in parentheses; * significantly
different from zero at 10%, ** at 5%, *** at 1%. Wild clustered bootstrap p-values for t-statistics computed as
proposed by Cameron et al. (2008) in italics.


In line with the standard malapportionment hypothesis, Table 2 column (1) shows a positive correlation
between the legislative representation of a district and the per capita transfers received by the district
(both expressed as a ratio with respect to the total country value) in democratic periods. Contrary to the
standard malapportionment hypothesis, Table 2 column (1) shows that this positive correlation persists
under centralized military governments. Table 2 column (3) brings to the forefront the problems of
interpreting these correlations as causal relationships. Indeed, once we instrument                            and



                                                                                                                22
             with                and          , respectively, the coefficients drop toward zero and they are
not statistically significant.


Although we have shown that there is no robust statistical evidence that legislative malapportionment
has a causal effect on the distribution of federal tax revenues, the positive correlation in Table (2) column
(1) is intriguing. One potential explanation is that this correlation captures the endogenous relationship
between legislative representation and the distribution of tax revenues that emerge from the country’s
deep-seated political equilibrium. For example, as the power of a province in the informal bargaining
process over fiscal revenues increases, the legislative representation and the funds received by the
province might also increase. The subtle point is that the increase in legislative representation is not
valuable because it enhances the power of the district in the legislature, thus increasing the likelihood of
future transfers. On the contrary, legislative representation has a value in itself as a rent for local
politicians. This may also explain the positive correlation between legislative representation in the last
democratic Congress and transfers received under centralized military governments. The districts that
were increasing their political power or becoming easier to please by the president before the coup, were
receiving more transfers and more political representation. The same districts continued receiving more
transfers after the coup because the autocrat must also take into account in his political calculus that it is
easier to grant the support of these districts.


One issue of concern in relation to the results in column (3) of Table 2 may be the potentially spurious
effect created by outliers such as the City of Buenos Aires, which is a district that has been
overrepresented since the late 1980s and, at the same time, receives a very small portion of tax revenues.
This negative effect of overrepresentation may potentially balance out a positive effect seen in other
provinces and, therefore, lead to a non-significant overall effect such as the one that is shown in our
results. We re-estimate our main regressions after excluding the City of Buenos Aires from our sample. As
columns (2) and (4) in Table 2 show, the results do not change.


Another potential concern is that when the federal tax sharing scheme was put in place in 1935, some
provinces depended heavily on domestic tax receipts; Mendoza and San Juan, for instance, relied on the
revenue of taxes on alcohol, since they were (and still are) the main wine-producing regions in the


                                                                                                           23
country, while Tucumán Province relied on the receipts from taxes on sugar production. To accommodate
this situation and to avoid disrupting these provinces’ budgets, the law provided for a transitional period
in which these provinces would have a special status and receive a considerable share of total revenues.
In order to factor out any bias that might be generated by this transitional period, we re-estimated our
regressions while excluding the observations for the first years of the tax sharing scheme (1935-1940).
The results did not change.20


To sum up, overall there is no robust statistical evidence to back up the argument that legislative
malapportionment has a causal effect on the distribution of federal tax revenues. Moreover, there is no
evidence to support the thesis that, under centralized military governments, the tax sharing arrangement
reverted to a less biased distribution because of the absence of malapportionment.


6. A Simple Model
In this section we develop a very simple politico-economic model of a tax sharing system. We show that a
democracy with a dominant executive branch and an autocracy can generate the same shares for each
district, while a democracy with a powerful, malapportioned Congress induces a bias toward
overrepresented districts. The model provides some theoretical foundations for our empirical results.
The model also illustrates the importance of considering the interactions among different institutions.
Legislative malapportionment could thus act as a key political factor in shaping fiscal relationships
among different jurisdictions when power is shared by Congress and the Executive, while it may be an
almost negligible consideration in countries with strong executive branches.


6.1 The Economy
Consider an economy that is made up of two districts indexed by                            . Each district is home to two
socioeconomic groups, the poor and the rich, which are indexed by                          . The population in district is
     , and we normalize                   . The proportion of poor agents in each district is             . Denote by       the
income of a member of socioeconomic group in district and assume that rich (poor) people in district 1
are wealthier than rich (poor) people in district 2. Specifically, assume                             (       )     and

20The coefficients of          and              are 0.373 and 0.497, respectively. The first one is statistically significant at
5%, while the second is statistically significant at 1%. However, once               and                are instrumented by
          and          , the coefficients are not statistically significant.

                                                                                                                             24
(       )   , where                                   .           and          assures that district 1 is richer than district 2;

        implies that the level of inequality is lower in district 1 than in district 2; and                              implies

that rich agents in district 2 are richer than poor agents in district 1.


We assume that there are four goods: a private good ( ), one national public good ( ), and two local
public goods (          and       ). Public goods are financed by a proportional income tax ( ). As a consequence,
the individual budget constraint is simply:


                                                                  (       )                                                  (6.)


and the government budget constraint is given by:


                                                                                                                             (7.)


where          (              )        (          )(                  )   is the aggregate income.


Agents value the private good, the national public good, and the local public goods in their district.
Specifically, for                     and                     and, after introducing the individual and government budget
constraints, we have:



                                  (           )           (                    )        (     )                              (8.)



where (          ) is strictly quasi-concave and satisfies the Inada conditions. For example,


                                        ( )                           (   )
                                                          (       )
                    (         )    {                                                                                         (9.)
                                      ( ) (       )




                                                                                                                              25
6.2 The Polity
We consider two possible political regimes: democracy and autocracy. Following Acemoglu and Robinson
(2006), we assume that, under democracy, the government represents the poor people, i.e., it maximizes
a social welfare function that only gives weight to the welfare of the two poor groups.21 More formally:


                                              { ( )              [    ( )        (       ( ))   ]}                              (10.)
                              (               )




where       ( )                                   and            . For a democracy in which the executive branch predominates

over the legislature or where there is no malapportionment in the legislature, the government assigns
weights to each poor group solely on the basis of its size, i.e.,                                    . For a democracy in which the
legislature wields power and there is malapportionment, then                                    if district 1 is overrepresented and
        if district 1 is underrepresented.


Under an autocracy, the government represents the rich groups, i.e., it maximizes a social welfare
function that assigns weights only to the welfare of the two rich groups.22 More formally,


                                          { ( )             (        )[    ( )       (     ( ))       ]}                        (11.)
                      (                   )



where       ( )                   .


6.3 Fiscal Policy under Different Political Regimes
Denote by ( (             )           (           )     (       )) the allocation of public goods under political regime
        {     }, where                is a democracy and                  is an autocracy. Denote by         (    ) the share of each
district of the resources that finance local public goods and by                                  (        ) the share of the federal
government. Then:




21  It is possible to build a detailed electoral model that leads to this welfare function. For example, we can employ a
probabilistic voting model (Grossman and Helpman 2001).
22 The welfare function can be the outcome of a bargaining process between the two rich groups.


                                                                                                                                  26
                                      (       )                                                                 (         )
           (     )                                                  (           )                                                                                    (12.)
                           (          )       (             )                            (      )                   (         )            (   )


The following proposition characterizes fiscal policy under different political regimes.


Proposition 1: Suppose that               (              )              (            ) for some                         and every                      . Then, the revenue
share of each local district under a democracy with a dominant executive branch or in which there is no
legislative malapportionment will be the same as under an autocracy. Moreover, the overrepresented
district under a democracy not dominated by the Executive will obtain a larger share of the revenues than it
will under an autocracy. Formally:


                     ( )(                 )             ( )(                )           ( )         ( )(                          )                                  (13.)


Proof: See Appendix B.


Formally, Propositions 1 give a conditions for preferences under which the distribution of tax revenues
among the districts does not vary with the political regime. Conceptually, Proposition 1 shows that
military coups may not affect the distribution of tax revenues among districts in countries with a strong
executive branch during periods when a democratic system of government is in power. In other words,
changes in the political regime can modify the distribution between the poor and the rich without
affecting the relative position of different districts.


                                                  ( )                           (   )                                                                      (     )
Example: Assume            (          )                         (           )                with           ,             (           ). Let                          and

     [    (    ) (    )]
                               . Then, under democracy we have:



                                                                                                            (                     )
                                  ( )         [         (           ) ] ,           ( ) ( )             [                              ]


                                      (                         )            (           )                       (                )(           )
                     ( )          [                                 ]       [                       ]           [                                  ]


                                                                                                                                                                       27
while under autocracy we have:

                                   ( )   [      (      ) ] , ( )        ( )        ( )


                                                 (       )          (         )(         )
                             ( )     (   )      [            ]     [                         ]



Note that when           , the shares of each jurisdiction under democracy and autocracy are the same, but
the share of the federal government, taxes and the level of public goods might differ. It is also immediate
that the share of district 1 is increasing in       . As a consequence, we have:                 ( )(   )     ( )(
 )     ( )       ( )(        ). In Appendix B we also prove that if                                     , then taxes and,

hence, the level of public goods, under democracy will be higher than under autocracy, i.e., ( )                  ( ).


Proof: See Appendix B.


So far, we have implicitly assumed that an autocracy assigns the same weight to a rich person regardless
of his or her location. Analogously, a democracy dominated by the executive branch assigns the same
weight to every poor citizen. Of course, this is not necessarily the case. For example, in some districts,
patronage could be more likely to occur. The key point is, however, that the districts whose support is
easier for a strong president in a democratic system to buy are probably also the same districts that will
be more willing to sell their support to military governments. The supposition that democracies
represent a coalition of poor citizens and autocracies represent a coalition of rich people does not imply
that democracies and autocracies produce a different geographic pattern of representation. As a
consequence, changes in the political regime can be associated with changeovers in policy that may have
a significant effect on the relative well-being of poor and rich people without producing any major change
in the shares of resources obtained by each jurisdiction. Thus, biases in the geographic distribution of
resources can persist in the absence of a strong Congress because an autocrat that represents the rich
must deal with more or less the same political constraints between districts as a dominant Executive that




                                                                                                                      28
                                                                                                         (       )
represents the poor23. Formally, we can rework Proposition 1 with                          ( )                       and
                                                                                                     (       )

     ( )             , where          is a measure of the overrepresentation (when                           ) or sub-

representation (when             ) of district 1 that is unrelated to legislative malapportionment. It is easy to
show that analogous results will be obtained.


7. Why Is Legislative Malapportionment Immaterial in Argentina?
As we have shown in Section 5, we cannot attribute the biases in the tax sharing system to
malapportionment during democratic periods. Why have changes in legislative malapportionment had no
effect on the shares of the different provinces? The model we have developed in Section 6 suggests that,
in democracies dominated by the executive branch, legislative malapportionment is not very relevant. In
Section 5, we have also shown that military governments did not reverse the distribution of federal tax
revenues among the provinces. Since military governments closed the Congress and concentrated
legislative power in their own hands, this result also deserves a more detailed explanation. Why did
biased distributions persist under non-democratic regimes? The model we have developed in Section 6
suggests that geographic representation may not be very sensitive to the type of political regime that is in
place. In this section we further explore these questions.


7.1. The Argentine Federal Budget
Although the tax sharing system is the main mechanism for the geographical distribution of revenues
among the Argentine provinces, it is not the only one. The federal government can also use its budget to
channel resources to certain districts (through infrastructure projects, for example). Thus, we cannot
theoretically exclude the possibility that legislative malapportionment affects the federal budget rather
than the shares of the provinces in the tax sharing system. However, the available evidence suggests that
this is unlikely.


As Figure 3 shows, the proportion of revenues that the tax sharing system channels to the provinces
(primary distribution) has invariably increased except on two occasions: 1967-1968 and 1981. Military


23As we mentioned in section 2, a military government once excluded a district from the sharing scheme –the city of Buenos
Aires in 1981- but reversed its decision two years later, which is consistent with the hypothesis that the sharing scheme
distribution is highly resilient.

                                                                                                                       29
governments were in power at both of these times. The proportion of revenues going to the provinces has
never decreased under a democratic government. Moreover, as Figure 3 shows, democratic periods in
which there were high levels of malapportionment (a higher Gini coefficient for inhabitants per seat) are
associated with periods in which a larger proportion of revenues went to the provinces. Thus, it seems
that the evidence does not support the hypothesis that higher levels of legislative malapportionment lead
to stronger biases in the allocation of revenues among provinces via the federal budget for the reason
that higher levels of legislative malapportionment are not associated with a larger share of revenues
staying with the federal government. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper, we conjecture that a
more detailed study of the geographical impact of the federal budget will also reveal the absence of a
causal relationship between legislative malapportionment and any bias in the geographic allocation of
revenues.


 Figure 3: Percentage of Federal Revenues in the Tax Sharing System Going to the Provinces (blue line,
              right axis); Gini Index for Seats per Number of Inhabitants (red line, left axis)




             Note: Shaded areas represent military governments.



7.2. Legislator Behavior, Party Discipline and Parliamentary Coalitions


                                                                                                      30
A necessary condition in order for changes in malapportionment to have an effect on policy outcomes is
the existence of a correlation between legislator behavior and the preferences of the constituents whom
they represent at the district level. If party discipline is strong, then the geographic origin of legislators
may not be relevant, since their party affiliation is what will matter the most.


The evidence, however, shows that legislators respond to subnational interests, although in very different
ways. Members of the U.S. Congress exhibit a great deal of autonomy in choosing whether or not to follow
the party line on many issues, as Snyder and Groseclose (2000) show. Only on national issues such as the
debt ceiling, tax policy and budget resolutions is the vote mostly partisan. On issues which usually have a
clear geographic dimension, such as transportation, public works or agriculture, the party whip wields
much less power. The main reason for such behavior may be that U.S. legislators are very responsive to
electoral incentives at the constituency level because of the uninominal nature of congressional districts.
Concerning the case of Japan, Kato (1998) analyzes the split of the Liberal Democratic Party in 1993 and
shows that legislators with local support bases tended to be part of the “rebel” group that separated from
the party at that time. The internal tensions that preceded the rupture of the other long-standing
Japanese party –the Social Democratic Party– in 1996 also had to do with legislators’ responsiveness to
local interests: as the breakup of the party was particularly unpopular among its rank and file, Diet
members who were elected by single-seat constituencies tended to side against the “rebel” group during
party debates in 1994.


Jones et al. (2002) analyze the situation in Argentina and show that the link between subnational
interests and legislators’ behavior is mediated by the fact that deputies are generally beholden to
provincial governors. Unlike the situation in the U.S., a seat in Congress is seen as a temporary stage in a
person’s political career. Indeed, most of the Argentine legislators remain in office for only one term: the
reelection rate in the Chamber of Deputies is around 20%. The careers of Argentine politicians are mostly
province-based and, as a result, legislators in Congress will tend to cater to the regional interests
espoused by local party bosses – especially governors. As Levitsky’s work (2003) has shown, this
“territorialization” of political incentives is clearly discernible in the most important party in Argentina –
the Peronist (or “Justicialista”) Party, which has governed Argentina during most of its periods of
democracy since 1945.


                                                                                                           31
A more subtle condition that is required in order for changes in malapportionment to have a significant
effect on the pattern of policy biases is that the changes must be large enough to destabilize the majority
coalition in Congress. For example, we could attribute the key biases of the Argentine tax sharing system
to the existence of a majority congressional coalition composed of poor provinces that have won out over
the richer Buenos Aires Province and capital district. Although the changes in the degree of legislative
malapportionment that have occurred during the existence of the tax sharing system have probably not
been dramatic enough to pose a challenge to this majority coalition, it is more difficult to argue
convincingly that the observed changes in legislative malapportionment have not been large enough to at
least modify the distribution of revenues among the members of that coalition. And yet, our results show
that legislative malapportionment has had no causal impact on the shares received by the various
provinces.


7.3. The Predominance of the Executive Branch
A more compelling hypothesis to explain why legislative malapportionment does not matter is that, in
Argentina, key political decisions are the outcome of a bargaining process among executive authorities --
more specifically, between the president and the governors. In fact, Braun and Tommasi (2002)
document the fact that legislative representation of subnational entities in Argentina is relatively poor
and that the relationship between the central government and the provinces is scarcely institutionalized
at all and instead consists mainly in a direct dialogue between the national executive authority (the
president) and the provincial executives (the governors). In other words, Congress is not the locus of
bargaining and, by the time a bill reaches Congress, it has already been discussed with the governors. As a
consequence, there is no need to form a coalition to give expression to provincial interests in Congress
because the preferences of the provinces have already been taken into account.


The predominance of the Argentine executive branch can be traced back to a variety of factors. For
example, on several occasions, the Argentine Congress has delegated part of its legislative authority to
the executive branch. National legislators frequently leave their seats in order to become part of the
executive branch or to run for office at a local level, implicitly revealing their assessment of the relative
importance of a seat in Congress vis-à-vis a position in a ministry or the possibility of running for mayor.
Even in the case where a president has resigned, political power rests with the governors of the
provinces rather than with Congress. In point of fact, in 2001, during a profound economic and political
                                                                                                          32
crisis, the president of Argentina did resign. Although, nominally, Congress was in charge of designating a
new president, the actual bargaining involved in that appointment was carried out among the governors.
As it happened, Congress temporarily selected the governor of San Luis as the president, but, in less than
a week, he fell out of favor with the other governors and was replaced by the governor of Buenos Aires.


7.4. Geographic Representativeness of the Executive Branch
The predominance of the executive branch is potentially a convincing explanation for why legislative
malapportionment does not affect the tax sharing system under democracies in Argentina. The
predominance of the executive branch cannot by itself explain why military governments have not
significantly altered the allocation of revenues among provinces, however. After all, we would tend to
expect that the powers of the executive branch under autocracies and democracies would differ in many
ways. Yet, in Argentina, the geographic representativeness of the federal executive branch does not
appear to change significantly from one political regime to the other.


In order to measure the geographic representativeness of the executive branch, we have created a
database with information on the province of birth of the main members of all the governments between
1935 and 2011.24 For democratic governments, we have gathered information referring to the president,
vice-president, minister of economic affairs and minister of the interior. For military governments, the
information corresponds to the military junta25 (the chiefs of the army, the navy and the air force), the
minister of economic affairs and the minister of the interior.


We have used this information to develop an index that quantifies the degree of geographic
representativeness of each government (i.e., how much of the population is actually “represented” in the
executive branch). To this end, we add up the proportions of the population corresponding to the
districts of origin of the above-mentioned government authorities.


Figure 4 shows our index of geographic representation. As can be seen from the graph, there have been
periods when the government has not been very representative in geographical terms. Take, for instance,


24All the data refer to the members of the government as of June 30th of each year.
25 Some military governments used formal procedures to choose a president and vice-president. In those cases, the above
information corresponds to those two positions.

                                                                                                                    33
1992, when the President and the (acting) Vice-President were both from tiny La Rioja, the Minister of
Economic Affairs was from Córdoba and the Minister of the Interior was from Mendoza. The populations
of those three districts added up to only 13.5% of the population of Argentina. In contrast, in 1979,
during the last military government, the Chief of Staff of the Army was from Buenos Aires Province, the
Chief of Staff of the Navy was from the City of Buenos Aires, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force was from
Santa Fe, the Minister of Economic Affairs was from Salta and the Minister of the Interior was from
Córdoba. The populations of those districts added up to 69.3% of the total national population.




                                                                                                       34
                                  Figure 4: Geographic Representation Index




             Note: Shaded areas represent military governments.


Using our index of geographic representation, we can construct a test to see whether military
governments are more representative in geographical terms than democratic ones. In Table 3 we present
the results of an equal means test for democratic and military governments. As can be seen from the
table, there is no statistically significant difference between the mean values on our index for the two
types of political regimes.


                Table 3: Equal Means Test Based on the Geographic Representation Index
                                        Democracy            Military Government             Difference
                      GRI                  0.429                     0.474                      0.045
                                          (0.115)                   (0.149)                    (0.032)
                 T-test p-value                                                                 0.160
                 Observations               55                         22
              Note: Standard Deviations in parenthesis for Democracy and Military Government and Standard Error for the Mean
              Difference.




                                                                                                                         35
To sum up, it appears that a non-institutionalized bargaining process determines the distribution of tax
revenues among the provinces, which is why that distribution does not differ to any appreciable extent
under different political regimes. This is why changes in the extent of malapportionment do not affect the
distribution pattern associated with the tax sharing scheme under democracy; it also explains why
military governments did not reverse the distribution pattern. The persistence of these biases in the tax
sharing scheme suggests that there is a deep-seated political equilibrium which ultimately accounts for
the differing levels of bargaining power of each district in the informal negotiations and, hence, the
observed pattern of geographical redistribution.


8. Conclusions
In this paper we have explored the question as to whether legislative malapportionment in the Argentine
Congress is the cause of the observed biases in the country’s federal tax sharing scheme. Using three
quasi-natural experiments, we have shown that legislative malapportionment has had no significant
effect on the federal tax sharing scheme under democratic governments and that there is no evidence
that centralized military governments reduced the bias of the distribution pattern associated with the tax
sharing scheme. We have also developed a simple model of how fiscal policy is determined in a federal
system of government. The model suggests that the share of public revenues received by each local
government is not altered by changes in the political regime when democratic governments are in place
that are dominated by the executive branch but that, conversely, districts that are overrepresented in the
legislature obtain a larger share of revenues under a democracy than under an autocracy when Congress
is not dominated by the executive branch. Finally, we have also argued that the executive branch of the
Argentine government predominates over the legislature and have shown that the extent of the
geographic representativeness of the executive branch of military and democratic governments does not
differ to any significant extent.


These six findings, when taken together, point toward the existence of a more structural type of
equilibrium that determines the distribution of tax revenues among Argentina’s provinces. This
equilibrium is not destabilized by changes in the distribution of the legislative representation of the
provinces or by the nature of the political regime. Our findings also point up some methodological issues.
First, for developing countries, consideration needs to be given to the fact that formal institutions (those
that hold de jure political power) might not be the key determinants of political outcomes and that
                                                                                                         36
informal institutions (those holding de facto political power) could be more influential. Indeed, as
Acemoglu and Robinson (2008) show, it may be that the distribution of political power will remain the
same after a major change in the formal institutional framework because those changes can be easily
neutralized by existing informal institutions. In the same vein, our findings suggest that the way in which
the different institutions interact may be a very important factor. Legislative malapportionment could be
an innocuous factor while there is a strong executive branch but could become a key factor (as well as a
source of social conflict) if Congress is empowered.


Second, why do the districts that are net losers accept the biases in the system? In other words, if
legislative malapportionment is the main cause of a biased distribution of resources, why do the losers
agree or allow themselves to be underrepresented? If other institutions (e.g., informal bargaining
between the president and the governors) are generating the biases, why are these informal institutions
allowed to continue to exist? All this suggests that, ultimately, there must be some more deep-seated type
of equilibrium that determines the distribution of tax revenues among subnational entities. We
conjecture that, in developed countries, this equilibrium is reflected in a country’s formal institutions,
(e.g., the number of representatives that each district has in the legislature), while, in developing
countries, this equilibrium is reflected in the bargaining power of each district in the informal
negotiations that determine the geographic distribution of resources.




                                                                                                        37
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New York: Cambridge
      University Press.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2008. "Persistence of Power, Elites and Institutions." American Economic
      Review 98:1, 267–293.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Alan Gerber, and James M. Snyder. 2002. "Equal Votes, Equal Money: Court-Ordered
       Redistricting and the Distribution of Public Expenditures in the American State." American Political Science
       Review 96(4):767-77.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, James M. Snyder, and Michael Ting. 2003. "Bargaining in Bicameral Legislatures: When and Why
       does malapportionment matter." American Political Science Review 97(3): 471-481.

Baron, David, and John Ferejohn. 1989. "Bargaining in Legislatures." American Political Science Review 83(4):1186-1206.

Baum, Christopher F., Schaffer, Mark E., Stillman, Steven. 2007. "Enhanced Routines for Instrumental
       Variables/Generalized Method of Moments Estimation and Testing." The Stata Journal 465:506.

Braun, Miguel, and Mariano Tommasi. 2002. "Fiscal Rules for Subnational Governments: Some Organizing Principles and
       Latin American Experiences." In Rules and Practice in Inter-governmental Fiscal Relations, by G. Kopits (comp.).
       Washington D.C.: IMF and World Bank, Washington.

Bruhn, Miriam, Francisco Gallego and Massimiliano Onorato. 2010. "Legislative Malapportionment and Institutional
       Persistence." Policy Research Working Paper 5467, World Bank, Washington D.C.

Calvo, Ernesto, and M. Victoria Murillo. 2004. "Who Delivers? Partisan Clients in the Argentine Electoral Market."
        American Journal of Political Science 48(4):742-757.

Cetrángolo, Oscar, and Juan Pablo Jiménez. 2004. "Las relaciones entre niveles de gobierno en Argentina." Revista de la
       Cepal 84:117-134.

Dragu, Tiberiu, and Jonathan Rodden. 2011. "Representation and Redistribution in Federations." Proceedings of the
        National Academy of Science of the United States of America 108(21):8601–8604.

Eaton, Kent. 2001. "Decentralisation, Democratisation and Liberalisation: The History of Revenue Sharing in Argentina,
        1934-1999." Journal of Latin American Studies 33(1):1-28.

Gervasoni, Carlos. 2010. "A Rentier Theory of Subnational Regimes: Fiscal Federalism, Democracy, and Authoritarianism
       in the Argentine Provinces." World Politics 62(2):302-340.

Gibson, Edward, Ernesto Calvo, and Tulia Falleti. 2004. "Reallocative Federalism: Legislative Overrepresentation and
        Public Spending in the Western Hemisphere." In Federalism and Democracy in Latin America, by E. Gibson
        (comp.). The Johns Hopkins University.




                                                                                                                         38
Gordin, Jorge P. 2010. "Patronage-Preserving Federalism? Legislative Malapportionment and Subnational Fiscal Policies."
        In Exploring New Avenues in Comparative Federalism, by Erk Jan and Wilfried (comp.) Swenden. London:
        Routledge.

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 2001. Special Interest Politics. Cambridge Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Horiuchi, Yusaku, and Saito Jun. 2003. "Reapportionment and Redistribution: Consequences of Electoral Reform in
       Japan." American Journal of Political Science 47(4):669-682.

Jones, Mark, Sebastián Saiegh, Pablo Spiller, and Mariano Tommasi. 2002. "Amateur Legislators – Professional
        Politicians: The Consequences of Party-Centered Electoral Rules in a Federal System." American Journal of
        Political Science 46(3): 656-669.

Kato, Junko. 1998. "When the Party Breaks Up: Exit and Voice among Japanese Legislators." American Political Science
        Review 92(4):857-870.

Levitsky, Steven. 2003. Transforming Labor-Based Parties in Latin America: Argentine Peronism in Comparative
        Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Llach, Lucas. 2007. The Wealth of the Provinces: The Rise and Fall of the Interior in the Political Economy of Argentina,
         1880-1910. Ph.D. Thesis Dissertation, Department of History, Harvard University.

Molinelli, Guillermo, M. Valeria Palanza, and Gisela Sin. 1999. "Congreso, Presidencia y Justicia en Argentina: Materiales
        para su Estudio." CEDI – Fundación Gobierno y Sociedad, Buenos Aires.

Pande, Rohini. 2003. "Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for Disadvantaged Minorities?
       Theory and Evidence from India." American Economic Review 1132-1151.

Pitlik, Hans, Friedrich Schneider, and Harald Strotmann. 2006. "Legislative Malapportionment and the Politicization of
         Germany’s Intergovernmental Transfer System." Public Finance Review 34(6): 637-662.

Porto, Alberto. 2003. Etapas de la Coparticipación Federal de Impuestos. Documento de Federalismo Fiscal n° 2, La Plata:
        Department of Economics, National University of La Plata.

—. 1990. Federalismo Fiscal. El caso Argentino. Buenos Aires: Editorial Tesis.

Porto, Alberto, and Pablo Sanguinetti. 2001. "Political Determinants of Intergovernmental Grants: Evidence from
        Argentina." Economics & Politics 13(3):237-256.

Potash, Robert A. 1969. The Army and Politics in Argentina (vol. 1). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

—. 1980. The Army and Politics in Argentina (vol. 2). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

—. 1996. The Army and Politics in Argentina (vol. 3). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Reynoso, Diego. 2012. "El reparto de la representación. Antecedentes y distorsiones de la asignación de diputados a las
       provincias". Postdata 17(1), online publication.


                                                                                                                            39
Rodden, Jonathan. 2001. "And the Last Shall be First: Federalism and Fiscal Outcomes in Germany." Department of
      Political Science, MIT, mimeo.

Rodden, Jonathan. 2002. "The Dilemma of Fiscal Federalism: Grants and Fiscal Performance around the World."
      American Journal of Political Science 46(3): 670-687.

Samuels, David, and Richard Snyder. 2001. "The Value of a Vote: Malapportionment in Comparative Perspective." British
       Journal of Political Science 31 (4), 651–671.

Singh, Raju, and Alexander Plekhanov. 2005. "How should Subnational Government Borrowing be Regulated? Some
        Cross-country Empirical Evidence." IMF Working Paper WP/05/54.

Snyder, James M., and Tim Groseclose. 2000. "Estimating Party Influence in Congressional Roll-Call Voting." American
        Journal of Political Science 44(2):193-211.

Tcach, Cesar. 1994. "Partidos y Pactos Políticos en la Córdoba Libertadora." Estudios Issue 3.

Turgeon, Mathieu, and Pedro Cavalcante. 2012. "I am Over-Represented, Therefore I Get More: Malapportionment and
       Federal Transfers." 62nd Political Studies Association Conference Proceedings. Belfast, Northern Ireland, United
       Kingdom.




                                                                                                                       40
Appendix A

In this appendix we provide an overview of the sources of information on the relevant fiscal, political and
demographic variables that were used for this study.


For the fiscal variables, the sources were the annual reports of the Treasury Ministry (“Memorias del
Ministerio de Hacienda”) from 1935 to 1958, the statistical yearbooks of the General Tax Directorate
(“Boletines Estadísticos de la Dirección General Impositiva”) from 1958 to 1979, the annual reports of the
Treasury Department (“Memorias de la Secretaría de Hacienda”) from 1980 to 1984, and various
publications of the National Directorate for Provincial Fiscal Coordination (“Dirección Nacional de
Coordinación Fiscal con las Provincias”) from 1985 to 2011.


For every year, we computed the total amount of transfers received by each province under the terms of
the relevant legislation (see Table A.1) – that is, we excluded those transfers that corresponded to what
are known as “national treasury contributions” (aportes del tesoro nacional (ATN)), which are
discretionary. An exception was made for 1985-1987 when, because no tax sharing law was in force, all
the revenues were formally shared via national treasury contributions.


In the years between 1935 and 1940, the so-called “definitive” amounts of transfers were used. In that
period, the central government transferred a “provisional” amount of revenues during each year and, on
two occasions (1936 and 1942), later readjusted those amounts. These corrections were not significant in
most of the cases, however. In the 1990s, the amount of revenue transfers made under laws other than
Revenue Sharing Act No. 23.548 began to increase so significantly that, by the late 2000s, about 20% of
the tax revenue shared with the provinces were accounted for by those supplementary laws. We included
all these transfers in our computations since they are part of the overall tax sharing scheme.




                                                                                                        41
                                  Table A.1: Laws Included in the Tax Sharing Scheme

       Law Number                          Year                              Tax Revenues Shared
         12139                             1934                                 Domestic Taxes
         12143                             1934                                    Income Tax
         12147                             1934                                     Sales Tax
         12956                             1946                   Incidental and Extraordinary Profits Taxes
         14060                             1951                                 Inheritance Tax
         14390                             1954                                 Domestic Taxes
                                                            Incidental and Extraordinary Profits Taxes, Inheritance
           14788                           1959
                                                                          Tax, Income Tax, Sales Tax
           20221                           1973                                All national taxes*
           20633                           1973                                Value Added Tax
           22293                           1980                                All national taxes*
           22294                           1980                                All national taxes*
           23548                           1988                                All national taxes*
           23906                           1991                                     Asset Tax
           23966                           1992                                Value Added Tax
           24049                           1992                                All national taxes*
           24065                           1992                             Wholesale Energy Tax
           24073                           1992                                    Income Tax
           24130                           1992                                All national taxes*
           24464                           1995                                      Fuel Tax
           24699                           1996                                All national taxes*
           24977                           1998                           Self-employed Income Tax
           25235                           1999                                All national taxes*
           25400                           2000                                All national taxes*
           25570                           2002                                All national taxes*
           26075                           2006                                All national taxes*
*Except taxes on foreign trade.

For the political and demographic variables, the sources used were:
                                    Table A.2: Political and Demographic Variables

Variable                                                  Source
Dictatorship: dummy equal to 1 if, on June 30th of the
corresponding year, the government was a military
dictatorship.
Democracy: dummy equal to 1 if, on June 30th of the
corresponding year, the government was a democracy.
                                                          Yearly estimates by INDEC (National Institute of
Population, by province
                                                          Statistics and Censuses).
Seats in the Chamber of Deputies, by province             Molinelli et al. (1999).
Province of origin of members of government               Molinelli et al. (1999).

                                                                                                                 42
Appendix B
In this appendix we prove Proposition 1. We first prove two lemmas that characterize the solution of the
government’s problem under democracy and autocracy, respectively. Proposition 1 is a simple corollary
of these lemmas.


Lemma 1: Consider the public finance problem under democracy. Suppose that                                           (     )
     (    ) for some        and every                   . Then,       ( ) is given by:




                                                        ( )       [           (         ) ]                               (14.)



Proof: Under democracy, the government’s problem is:


                                                 { ( )                [       ( )           (          ( ))   ]}
                                  (             )




where     ( )                    . The first-order conditions for welfare maximization are:



                                                                                  ( ( )         ( ))


                                                              (           )       ( ( )         ( ))


                                                        ( ( )         ( ))          (           )   ( ( )     ( ))



                    [   (    ) (           )]
where           (       )    (        )(            )
                                                        . Since               is strictly quasi-concave and satisfies the Inada

conditions, the first-order conditions are sufficient for a unique global maximum. After simple algebra we
obtain:


                                                ( ( )         ( ))            (         )     ( ( )      ( ))

                                                                                                                               43
                                                ( ( )     ( ))                 (       )     ( ( )    ( ))
Since      (       )        (           ), from the first equality, we have:


                                    (    ( ))      ( ( ) )                 (          )(     ( ))     ( ( ) )


Therefore,       ( ) is given by:




                                                    ( )           [        (           ) ]



This completes the proof of Lemma 1.


Lemma 2: Consider the public finance problem under an autocracy. Suppose that                                               (     )
       (       ) for some   and every              . Then,            ( ) depends only on (                  ), but   ( ) might depend

on (              ) as well. Moreover,          ( ) is given by:




                                                  ( )     [            (              ) ]                                        (15.)



Proof: Under autocracy, the government’s problem is:


                                                        { ( )              (           )[               ]}
                                            (        )



The first-order conditions for this problem are:

                                                                                   ( ( )     ( ))


                                                              (                )     ( ( )     ( ))



                                                                                                                                      44
                                                                      ( ( )             ( ))       (            )       ( ( )       ( ))

                               (           )
where              (       )       (           )(              )
                                                                   . Therefore:



             ( ( )         ( ))            (              )        ( ( )       ( ))                    ( ( )            ( ))    (          )   ( ( )       ( ))


Since    (             )               (            ), from the first equality, we have:


                                               (    ( ))            ( ( ) )              (          )(    ( ))            ( ( ) )


Therefore,      ( ) is given by:


                                                                              ( )       [      (            ) ]



This completes the proof of Lemma 2.


In order to prove Proposition 1, note that if                                           , then expressions (14) and (15) are exactly the same,

while    ( )           [    (          ) ] is increasing in                         .



                                                         ( )                        (    )
Example: Assume (                          )                          (         )               , with              ,      (    ). Note that           (          )

(       )(     )           ( ) (                    )(        )       ( )           (          ). Hence, we can apply Proposition 1. Under
democracy, we have:



                                                                                    (          )(        ( ))


                                                                          (         )(          )(        ( ))



                                                                                                                                                                      45
                                                                            (                                ) ( ( ))



                    [       (       ) (            )]                                                                             (               )                                   (   )(   )
where           (           )       (         )(                )
                                                                        . Therefore,                     ( )                  [                                ],           ( )   [                ] , and

            (           )
 ( )    [                   ] and, hence:



                                                                                                                                          (                         )
                                        ( )         [               (           ) ] ,               ( ) ( )                           [                                 ]

                                                            (                       )               (        )                                (           )(        )
                                        ( )             [                               ]       [                         ]               [                             ].


Under autocracy we have:



                                                                                                (                )(           ( ))


                                                                                    (               )(                )(              ( ))


                                                                                                        ( ( ))



                                (         )                                                                                           (               )                               (   )(   )
where                                                                   .   Therefore,                           ( )              [                           ] ,        ( )      [            ] ,    and
                (           )       (         )(                )


 ( )    ( ) and, hence:


                                                   ( )              [           (           ) ] , ( )                         ( )                     ( )

                                                                                            (       )                     (           )(                  )
                                                   ( )                  ( )             [                ]            [                                   ] .




                                                                                                                                                                                                        46
Suppose                   . Then,                                      . The proof of the first two inequalities is

immediate given that         . The last inequality requires some extra work; in particular, we need to use

the assumption            . From                                      , we obtain:



                                       (          )               (         )
                             ( )      [                   ]   [                       ]              ( )


                                  (         )(        )           (         )(             )
                          ( )    [                        ]   [                                ]         ( )


                                            (                 )
                                ( )        [                      ]         (    )             ( )

                    ( )         ( )         ( )       ( )             ( )         ( )              ( )     ( )


Suppose that                     . Then,                                         . The proof of the first two inequalities is

immediate given that         . The last inequality requires some extra work; in particular, we need to use

the assumption            . From                                      , we obtain:



                                       (          )               (         )
                             ( )      [                   ]   [                       ]              ( )


                                  (         )(        )           (         )(             )
                          ( )    [                        ]   [                                ]         ( )


                                            (                 )
                                ( )        [                      ]         (    )             ( )

                    ( )         ( )             ( )   ( )             ( )            ( )           ( )     ( )


This completes our example of Proposition 1.




                                                                                                                          47
