                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           OPTIMAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES WITH FINANCIAL FRICTIONS

                                             Oleg Itskhoki
                                             Benjamin Moll

                                         Working Paper 19994
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19994


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2014




We are particularly grateful to Mike Golosov for many stimulating discussions. We also thank Ivan
Werning and Joe Kaboski for insightful discussions, and Mark Aguiar, Marco Bassetto, Paco Buera,
Steve Davis, Emmanuel Farhi, Gene Grossman, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Guido Lorenzoni, Rob Shimer,
Yongs Shin, Yong Wang and seminar participants at Princeton, Chicago, Chicago Booth, Northwestern,
ifo Institute, Chicago Fed, SED meetings in Seoul, NBER IFM Summer Institute, ECB, UCB, World
Bank, IFM, UC Irvine, USC, Atlanta Fed, NBER Macro across Time and Space conference, and the
Chicago Booth International Macro Finance conference for very helpful comments. Kevin Lim provided
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Oleg Itskhoki and Benjamin Moll. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Optimal Development Policies with Financial Frictions
Oleg Itskhoki and Benjamin Moll
NBER Working Paper No. 19994
March 2014
JEL No. E60,F40,O0

                                           ABSTRACT

We study optimal dynamic Ramsey policies in a standard growth model with financial frictions. For
developing countries with low financial wealth, the optimal policy intervention increases labor supply
and lowers wages, resulting in higher entrepreneurial profits and faster wealth accumulation. This
in turn relaxes borrowing constraints in the future, leading to higher labor productivity and wages.
The use of additional policy instruments, such as subsidized credit, may be optimal as well. In the
long run, the optimal policy reverses sign. Taking advantage of the tractability of our framework, we
extend the model to study its implications for optimal exchange rate and sectoral industrial policies.


Oleg Itskhoki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall 306
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
itskhoki@princeton.edu

Benjamin Moll
Department of Economics
Princeton University
106 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
moll@princeton.edu
1         Introduction
Is there a role for governments in underdeveloped countries to accelerate economic develop-
ment by intervening in product and factor markets? Should they use taxes and subsidies?
If so, which ones? To answer these questions, we study optimal policy intervention in a
standard growth model with financial frictions. In our framework, forward-looking hetero-
geneous producers face borrowing (collateral) constraints which result in a misallocation of
capital and depressed labor productivity. It is therefore similar to the one studied in a num-
ber of recent papers relating financial frictions to aggregate productivity (see e.g. Banerjee
and Duflo, 2005; Jeong and Townsend, 2007; Buera and Shin, 2013, as well as other papers
discussed below). Our paper is the first to study the implications of Ramsey-optimal policies
for a country’s development dynamics in such an economy.1
        We tackle the design of optimal policy using a simple and tractable model, which allows
us to obtain sharp analytical characterizations. Our economy is populated by two types of
agents: a continuum of heterogeneous entrepreneurs and a continuum of homogeneous work-
ers. Entrepreneurs differ in their wealth and their productivity, and borrowing constraints
limit the extent to which capital can reallocate from wealthy to productive individuals. In
the presence of financial frictions, productive entrepreneurs make positive profits; they then
optimally choose how much of these to consume and how much to retain for wealth accu-
mulation. Workers decide how much labor to supply to the market and how much to save.
Section 2 lays out the structure of the economy and characterizes the decentralized laissez-
faire equilibrium. We specialize our benchmark analysis to the case of a small open economy,
and consider the closed-economy extension in Section 6.2.
        As a result of financial frictions, marginal products of capital are not equalized in equilib-
rium, and if a redistribution of capital from unproductive towards productive entrepreneurs
were possible, it could be used to construct a Pareto improvement for all entrepreneurs and
workers. But also simpler deviations from the decentralized equilibrium may result in a
Pareto improvement. In Section 3 we provide a first example, namely a wealth transfer
between workers and all entrepreneurs, independently of their productivity, taking advan-
tage of the gap between the average return to capital of entrepreneurs and the interest rate
available to workers. While we think that transfers may not be a realistic policy option for
a number of reasons discussed later in the paper, this perturbation illustrates sharply the
nature of inefficiency in the model, and provides a natural benchmark for thinking about
    1
    Two other papers by Caballero and Lorenzoni (2007) and Angeletos, Collard, Dellas, and Diba (2013)
study Ramsey policies in economies with financial frictions, but with a different focus, as we discuss below.


                                                     1
the other policy interventions we analyze.
       In Section 4, we explore policy interventions more systematically: we introduce various
tax instruments into this economy and study the optimal Ramsey policies given the available
set of instruments. We consider the problem of a benevolent planner that seeks to maximize
the welfare of workers.2 Importantly, we view the financial friction as a technological feature
of the economic environment so that the planner faces the same constraints present in the
decentralized economy. We first consider the case with only three tax instruments, which
effectively allow the planner to manipulate worker savings and labor supply decisions, and
then show how the results generalize to cases with a much greater number of instruments,
including a capital (credit) subsidy and a transfer from workers to entrepreneurs.
       Our main result is that the optimal policy intervention involves distorting labor supply
of workers, but that it looks rather different for developing countries (far below their steady
state in terms of financial wealth) and developed countries (in the vicinity of the steady
state).3 In particular, it is optimal to increase labor supply in the initial phase of transition,
when entrepreneurs are undercapitalized, and reduce labor supply once the economy comes
close enough to the steady state, where entrepreneurs are well capitalized. Greater labor
supply reduces equilibrium wages paid by entrepreneurs, increasing their profits and accel-
erating wealth accumulation. This, in turn, makes future financial constraints less binding,
resulting in greater labor productivity and higher wages. The only case in which there is no
benefit from increasing labor supply in the initial transition phase, is when an unbounded
transfer from workers to entrepreneurs is available, that is when the planner can transfer
so much wealth from workers to entrepreneurs that the economy reaches its steady state
immediately.
       While our benchmark analysis focuses on a labor supply subsidy for concreteness, there
are of course many equivalent ways of implementing the optimal allocation, including non-
tax market regulation (as we discuss in Section 4.5). The common feature of such policies
is that they increase labor supply in the short run, thereby hurting workers, and simulta-
neously increase profits, thereby benefitting entrepreneurs. We show that such pro-business
development policies are optimal even when the planner puts zero weight on the welfare of
   2
     As will become clear, this constitutes a conservative benchmark for our analysis, and we generalize the
results to the case with an arbitrary positive Pareto weight on the welfare of entrepreneurs in Section 6.1.
   3
     In the simplest version of the model, countries only differ in their financial wealth (the only state vari-
able), and other factors affecting the steady state are held constant. In this special case the level of financial
wealth and overall economic development (income per capita) are one-to-one. In a richer environment with
cross-country steady state (or balanced growth path, BGP) differences, the precise determinant of the opti-
mal policy is the distance of financial wealth from its steady state (or BGP) level, which nonetheless is likely
positively correlated with income per capita.


                                                        2
entrepreneurs. Indeed, the planner finds it optimal to hurt workers in the short-run so as
to reward them with high wages in the long-run. An alternative way of thinking about this
result is that the labor supply decision of workers involves a dynamic pecuniary externality
(see Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1986): workers do not internalize the fact that working more
leads to faster wealth accumulation by entrepreneurs and higher wages in the future. The
planner corrects this using a Pigouvian subsidy.4
       The goal of our paper is to develop a tractable model for the analysis of optimal devel-
opment policies under financial frictions. This objective motivates a number of modeling
choices. In Section 5 we discuss these in detail, in particular which ones are made purely
for tractability and which ones are necessary for our results. The tractability of our model
makes it easily amenable to a number of extensions and generalizations, which we discuss in
Section 6. In particular, we introduce a nontradable sector to study the real exchange rate
implications of optimal development policies, and extend the model to multiple tradable
sectors with a comparative advantage to illustrate the implications for optimal industrial
policies.

Related Literature As mentioned in the first paragraph of this introduction, our paper is
related to the large theoretical literature studying the role of financial market imperfections
in economic development, and in particular the more recent literature relating financial
frictions to aggregate productivity.5 We contribute to this literature by studying optimal
   4
      In fact, a reduced form of our setup is mathematically equivalent to a setup in which production is
subject to a learning-by-doing externality, whereby working more today increases future productivity, as in
Krugman (1987), Young (1991), Matsuyama (1992), Lucas (1993) and more recently in Korinek and Serven
(2010) and Benigno and Fornaro (2012). While mathematically equivalent, the economics are quite different:
the dynamic externality in our framework is a pecuniary one stemming from the presence of financial frictions
and operating via the (mis)allocation of resources, rather than a technological externality.
    5
      Apart from the papers already cited there, see the early contributions by Banerjee and Newman (1993),
Galor and Zeira (1993), Aghion and Bolton (1997) and Piketty (1997), the more recent papers by Erosa
and Hidalgo-Cabrillana (2008), Caselli and Gennaioli (2013), Quintin (2008), Amaral and Quintin (2010),
Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), Midrigan and Xu (2014) and the
recent surveys by Matsuyama (2008) and Townsend (2010). These papers are part of a growing literature
exploring the macroeconomic effects of micro distortions, in particular their effects on aggregate total factor
productivity (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scar-
petta, 2013), which are, in turn, a part of a large literature arguing that cross-country income differences are
primarily accounted for by low TFP in developing countries (Hall and Jones, 1999; Klenow and Rodrı́guez-
Clare, 1997; Caselli, 2005). The modeling of financial frictions in the paper also follows the tradition in the
recently burgeoning macro-finance literature (e.g. Kiyotaki and Moore 1997; see Brunnermeier, Eisenbach,
and Sannikov 2013 for a comprehensive survey). The environment we study is also similar to that in the
literature on entrepreneurship and wealth distribution, e.g. Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), Bassetto, Cagetti,
and Nardi (2013) and in many of the papers surveyed by Quadrini (2011).




                                                       3
Ramsey policies and the resulting implications for a country’s transition dynamics.6
       Our paper is closely related to the work of Caballero and Lorenzoni (2007) who ana-
lyze the Ramsey-optimal response to a cyclical preference shock in a two-sector small open
economy with financial frictions in the tradable sector. Similarly to our framework, the
financial frictions in their work give rise to a pecuniary externality, which justifies a policy
intervention that distorts the allocation of resources across sectors.7 Our paper differs from
theirs in three respects. First, we study long-run development policies, whereas they consider
cyclical policies. Second, we focus on interventions that distort labor supply, whereas they
focus on interventions that distort consumption across sectors. Third, we study a different
framework, building on Moll (2014), which follows the tradition of the macro-development
literature and departs minimally from the neoclassical growth model by introducing financial
frictions, and is therefore particularly well-suited for studying transition dynamics.8 Another
related paper by Angeletos, Collard, Dellas, and Diba (2013) studies Ramsey policies in a
setup with heterogeneous producers and within-period liquidity constraints, but their focus
on optimal public debt management as supply of collateral is very different from ours.
       In terms of methodology, we follow the dynamic public finance literature and study a
Ramsey problem (see e.g. Lucas and Stokey, 1983). In particular, we analyze a Ramsey
problem in an environment with idiosyncratic risk and incomplete markets as in Aiyagari
(1995) and Shin (2006) among others. In contrast to most papers in this literature, however,
we are neither concerned with capital taxation (e.g. Chamley, 1986; Judd, 1985; Aiyagari,
1995), nor with optimal financing of government expenditure and debt management (e.g.
Barro, 1979; Lucas and Stokey, 1983).
   6
      A few papers in this literature evaluate the effects of various (not necessarily optimal) policies: for
example, Banerjee and Newman (2003) analyze trade policy, Buera, Moll, and Shin (2013) subsidies targeted
to individual entrepreneurs, and Buera and Nicolini (2013) monetary policy. Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2012)
study the macroeconomic effects of a large-scale micro finance program and argue that it may lead to higher
wages, lower profits and lower wealth accumulation (the reverse logic of the optimal policy intervention in
our paper). But none study Ramsey-optimal policies like we do.
    7
      A related strand of work emphasizes a different type of pecuniary externality that operates through prices
in borrowing constraints, for example Lorenzoni (2008), Jeanne and Korinek (2010) and Bianchi (2011).
    8
      Caballero and Lorenzoni study an economy in which entrepreneurs with linear preferences operate tech-
nologies that are Leontief in capital and labor, face sunk costs of investing and maximally tight financial
frictions (i.e., cannot borrow at all). Given these assumptions, optimal policy intervention during deter-
ministic transitions (in the absence of aggregate shocks) is always completely frontloaded, i.e. all taxation
is done in the first period. In our framework, in contrast, entrepreneurs have strictly concave preferences,
operate Cobb-Douglas technologies, and can borrow up to a multiple of their wealth. As a result, the time
path of optimal taxes and transition dynamics are more gradual. Finally, we also analyze in detail the role
of transfers between workers and entrepreneurs, and the robustness of our main result to the introduction
of other tax instruments.




                                                       4
Empirical relevance There exists a body of anecdotal evidence that the sort of policies
prescribed by our normative analysis have historically been used in countries with successful
development experiences. For example, Lin (2012, p. 191) provides a detailed discussion
of the distortionary macro-development policies that were implemented in China, and in
particular the “policy of low input prices—which included nominal wage rates for workers
and prices of raw materials, energy and transportation” to “enable firms to generate profits
large enough to repay the loans or accumulate enough funds for reinvestment”.9 Related,
Kim and Leipziger (1997) state that low labor costs in early stages of development have been
instrumental to the rapid development of South Korea, and that this was an official goal of
government policy.10
       From a more historical perspective, Ventura and Voth (2013) provide evidence that the
rapid economic growth in the 18th century Britain was in part due to reduced labor and
land prices, caused by expanding government borrowing which crowded out unproductive
agricultural investment and reduced factor demand by this declining sector. Lower factor
prices, in turn, increased profits in the new industrial sectors, allowing the capitalists in
these sectors to build up wealth, which in the absence of an efficient financial system was
the major source of reinvestment.
       One of the most commonly advocated development policies is (real) exchange rate deval-
uation. Rodrik (2008) provides a recent systematic study of the effects of this policy across
many developing countries (see also Woodford, 2008, for a cautious interpretation of the
evidence). The argument in favor of such intervention rests on the assumption that the scale
of the tradable sector is inefficiently small, and an exchange rate devaluation is aimed at
reducing labor costs and increasing international competitiveness of this sector. Our paper
spells out one particular friction which can speak to the potential benefits of a real exchange
   9
      Similarly, Lin (2013) notes that in China “big companies and rich people are receiving subsidies from the
depositors who have no access to banks’ credit services and are relatively poor” and that these distortions
“led to a high rate of investment and quick building up of production capacity.” In line with our result that
such policies should be “stage-dependent,” Lin also raises the possibility that such distortions may have
outlived their usefulness and should be removed. He also discusses the effects of such policies on income
inequality, an important topic that we do not address in this paper.
   10
      While the evidence of explicit wage suppression policies is harder to come by, the absence of any regula-
tion or policies protecting workers arguably contributed to reduced labor costs in the early stages of Korea’s
transition. This absence of worker protection is also a pervasive feature in many other developing countries.
Besides Korea, typical examples include Japan in the 1950s and 60s and many of the nowadays South-East
Asian countries. See also Cole and Ohanian (2004) and Alder, Lagakos, and Ohanian (2013) who argue
that the pervasiveness of unionization had a detrimental effect on development in the United States after
the Great Depression. Note, however, that we are not advocating the abandonment of worker protection
in developing countries, as our framework is silent on the exact implementation of the optimal employment
allocation, and there are other equivalent implementations like the wage subsidy in our benchmark model.



                                                      5
rate devaluation (see Section 6.3).
       Another commonly advocated and implemented policy involves support to comparative
advantage sectors (see e.g. Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare, 2010; Lin, 2012). Similarly Growth
Commission (2008) argues that export promotion policies may be beneficial, at least as long as
they are only temporary.11 We evaluate such policies in a multisector extension in Section 6.4,
where we show that it is optimal to temporarily subsidize the comparative advantage sector
to speed up the reallocation of resources across sectors.12



2        An Economy with Financial Frictions
In this section we describe our baseline economy with financial frictions. We consider a one-
sector small open economy populated by two types of agents: workers and entrepreneurs.
The economy is set in continuous time with an infinite horizon and no aggregate shocks so
as to focus on the properties of transition paths. We first describe the problem of workers,
followed by that of entrepreneurs. We then characterize some aggregate relationships and
the decentralized equilibrium in this economy.


2.1       Workers
The economy is populated by a representative worker with preferences
                                       ˆ    ∞
                                                e−ρt u c(t), `(t) dt,
                                                                 
                                                                                                    (1)
                                        0


where ρ is the discount rate, c is consumption, and ` is market labor supply. We assume that
u(·) is increasing and concave in its first argument and decreasing and convex in its second
argument, with a positive and finite Frisch elasticity of labor supply (see Appendix A.1).
Where it leads to no confusion, we drop the time index t.
       The household takes the market wage w(t) as given, as well as the price of the con-
sumption good which we choose as the numeraire. It can borrow and save using non-state-
contingent bonds which pay risk free interest rate r(t) ≡ r∗ . As a result, the flow budget
  11
     The Growth Commission report studies the growth experiences and policies of the thirteen economies
that have grown at an average rate of seven percent a year or more for 25 years or longer since 1950
(Botswana, Brazil, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Malta, Oman, Singapore,
Taiwan and Thailand). It argues that all of these benefited substantially from exports and many promoted
exports in some way or another.
  12
     See Bardhan (1971), Redding (1999) and Melitz (2005) for related analyses of optimal dynamic trade
policy in environments with physical learning-by-doing externalities, and the references in footnote 4.


                                                       6
constraint of the household is:
                                           c + ḃ ≤ w` + r∗ b,                                         (2)

where b(t) is the household asset position. The solution to the household problem is char-
acterized by an Euler equation
                                                 u̇c
                                                     = ρ − r∗ ,                                        (3)
                                                 uc
and a static optimality (labor supply) condition:

                                                      u`
                                                  −      = w,                                          (4)
                                                      uc

where subscripts denote respective partial derivatives.


2.2       Entrepreneurs
There is a unit mass of entrepreneurs that produce the homogeneous tradable good. En-
trepreneurs are heterogeneous in their wealth a and productivity z, and we denote their joint
distribution at time t by Gt (a, z). In each time period of length ∆t, entrepreneurs draw a
new productivity from a Pareto distribution Gz (z) = 1 − z −η with shape parameter η > 1,
with lower values of η corresponding to a greater heterogeneity of the productivity draws.
We consider the limit economy in which ∆t → 0, so we have a continuous time setting in
which productivity shocks are iid over time.13 Finally, we assume a law of large numbers so
the share of entrepreneurs experiencing any particular sequence of shocks is deterministic.
       Entrepreneurs have preferences
                                             ˆ   ∞
                                        E0           e−δt log ce (t)dt                                 (5)
                                             0


where δ is their discount rate. Each entrepreneur owns a private firm which can use k units
of capital and n units of labor to produce

                                             A(t)(zk)α n1−α                                            (6)

units of output where α ∈ (0, 1) and A(t) is aggregate productivity following an exogenous
  13
     Moll (2014) shows how to extend the environment to the case where shocks are persistent at the expense
of some extra notation and mathematical complication. Persistent shocks generate some additional endoge-
nous dynamics for aggregate total factor productivity, but the qualitative properties of the decentralized
equilibrium are otherwise unchanged. As explained in Moll (2014), an iid process in continuous time can
also be viewed as the limit of a mean-reverting process as the speed of mean reversion goes to infinity.



                                                        7
path. Entrepreneurs hire labor in the competitive labor market at wage w(t) and purchase
capital in a capital rental market at rental rate r(t) ≡ r∗ .14
       Entrepreneurs face collateral constraints:

                                                  k ≤ λa,                                                  (7)

where λ ≥ 1 is an exogenous parameter. By placing a restriction on an entrepreneur’s
leverage ratio k/a, the constraint captures the common prediction from models of limited
commitment that the amount of capital available to an entrepreneur is limited by his personal
assets.15 At the same time, the particular formulation of the constraint is analytically
convenient and allows us to derive most of our results in closed form. As shown in Moll
(2014), the constraint could also be generalized in a number of ways at the expense of some
extra notation.16 We can also allow for evolution of λ over time, and show below that this
is isomorphic to changes in the exogenous aggregate productivity, A. Finally, note that by
varying λ ∈ [1, ∞), we can trace out all degrees of efficiency of capital markets, with λ
therefore capturing the degree of financial development.
       An entrepreneur’s wealth evolves according to

                                          ȧ = π(a, z) + r∗ a − ce ,                                       (8)

where π(a, z) are his profits
                                                 n                       o
                            π(a, z) ≡ max         A(zk)α n1−α − wn − r∗ k .
                                         n≥0,
                                        0≤k≤λa

  14
     The setup with a rental market is chosen solely for simplicity. As shown by Moll (2014), it is equivalent
to a setup in which entrepreneurs own and accumulate capital k and can trade in a risk-free bond, provided
the entrepreneurs know their productivity one period in advance (see also Buera and Moll, 2012).
  15
     The constraint can be derived from the following limited commitment problem. Consider an entrepreneur
with wealth a who rents k units of capital. The entrepreneur can steal a fraction 1/λ of rented capital. As
a punishment, he would lose his wealth. In equilibrium, the financial intermediary will rent capital up
to the point where individuals would have an incentive to steal the rented capital, implying a collateral
constraint k/λ ≤ a, or k ≤ λa. See Banerjee and Newman (2003) and Buera and Shin (2013) for a similar
motivation of the same form of constraint. Note, however, that the constraint is essentially static because it
rules out optimal long-term contracts (as in Kehoe and Levine, 2001, for example). On the other hand, as
Banerjee and Newman put it, “there is no reason to believe that more complex contracts will eliminate the
imperfection altogether, nor diminish the importance of current wealth in limiting investment.”
  16
     For example, we could allow the maximum leverage ratio λ to be an arbitrary function of productivity
so that (7) becomes k ≤ λ(z)a. The maximum leverage ratio may also depend on the interest rate and
wages, calendar time and other aggregate variables. What is crucial is that the collateral constraint is linear
in wealth.




                                                      8
Maximizing out the choice of labor, n, profits are linear in capital, k. It follows that the
optimal capital choice is at a corner: it is zero for entrepreneurs with low productivity, and
the maximal amount allowed by the collateral constraints, λa, for those with high enough
productivity. Throughout the paper we assume that along all transition paths considered,
there always exist entrepreneurs with low enough productivity that choose to be inactive.
In this case, we have the following characterization:17

Lemma 1 Factor demands and profits are linear in wealth and can be written as:

                                 k(a, z) = λa · 1{z≥z} ,                                                 (9)
                                                               1/α
                                 n(a, z) = (1 − α)A/w        zk(a, z),                                  (10)
                                                 
                                             z
                                 π(a, z) =     − 1 r∗ k(a, z),                                          (11)
                                             z

where the productivity cutoff z is defined by:
                                                    1−α
                                              1−α      α
                                      α                     A1/α z = r∗ .                               (12)
                                               w

       The marginal entrepreneurs with productivity z break even and make zero profits, while
entrepreneurs with productivity z > z receive Ricardian rents given by (11), which depend on
both their productivity edge and the scale of operation determined by their wealth through
the collateral constraint. The labor demand depends on both entrepreneur’s productivity
and capital choice, with the marginal product of labor equalized across active entrepreneurs.
At the same time, the choice of capital among the active entrepreneurs is shaped by the
collateral constraint, which depends only on the assets of the entrepreneurs, and not on
their productivity. Therefore, the marginal product of capital increases with entrepreneurs’
productivity z, reflecting the misallocation of resources in the economy.
       Finally, entrepreneurs choose consumption and savings to maximize (5) subject to (8)
and (11). Under our assumption of log utility combined with the linearity of profits in wealth,
there exists an analytic solution to their consumption policy function, ce = δa, and therefore
  17
     Proof: Equation (10) is the first order condition of profit maximization
                                                                     n         with respect to n, whichsub-
                                                                                                           o
                                                                                     (1−α)/α 1/α
stituted into the profit equation results in π(a, z) = max0≤k≤λa α (1 − α)/w                 A z − r∗ k .
Equations (9) and (12) characterize the solution to this problem of maximizing a linear function of k.
Finally, we substitute (12) into the expression for profits to obtain (11). The assumption that the least
productive entrepreneur is inactive can be ensured, for any initial conditions, by choosing sufficient amount
of productivity heterogeneity (η small enough), however, in the limit without heterogeneity (η → ∞), this
assumption is necessarily violated. The analysis of the case when all entrepreneurs produce (z = 1) yields
similar qualitative results.

                                                       9
the evolution of wealth satisfies (see Appendix A.2 which spells out the value function of
entrepreneurs and proves the result):

                                          ȧ = π(a, z) + (r∗ − δ)a,                                        (13)

which completes our description.


2.3       Aggregation and equilibrium
We first provide a number of useful equilibrium relationships. Aggregating (9) and (10) over
all entrepreneurs, we obtain the aggregate capital and labor demand:18

                                   κ = λxz −η ,                                                            (14)
                                         η                 1/α
                                   `=           (1 − α)A/w      λxz 1−η ,                                  (15)
                                       η−1
                 ´
where x(t) ≡         adGt (a, z) is aggregate (or average) entrepreneurial wealth. Note that we
have made use of the assumption that productivity shocks are iid over time which implies
that, at each point in time, wealth a and productivity z are independent in the cross-section
of entrepreneurs.
       Aggregate output in the economy can be characterized by a production function:19
                                                                              α
                                      α 1−α                             η
                             y = Zκ `             with Z ≡ A               z        ,                      (16)
                                                                       η−1

where Z is aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) which is the product of aggregate
technology A and the average productivity of active entrepreneurs, E{z|z ≥ z} = ηz/(η − 1).
Using (14)–(16) together with the productivity cutoff condition (12), we characterize the
equilibrium relationship between average wealth x, labor supply ` and aggregate output y,
and express other equilibrium objects as functions of these three variables:20

  18
                         ´                                ´
     Specifically, κ(t) = kt (a, z)dGt´(a, z) and `(t) = nt (a, z)dGt (a, z).
  19                                                     α
     Aggregate output equals y(t) = A(t) zkt (a, z) nt (a, z)1−α dGt (a, z), i.e., integral of individual outputs
using production function (6). Aggregate production function (16) combines this definition with aggregate
capital and labor demand in (14) and (15).
  20
     Proof: Combine cutoff condition (12) and labor demand (15) to solve for (18). Substitute the result-
ing expression (18) and capital demand (14) into aggregate production function (16) to obtain (17). The
remaining equation are a result of direct manipulation of (14)–(16) and (18), after noting that aggregate
profits are an integral of individual profits in (11) and equal to Π(t) = κ(t)/(η − 1).




                                                       10
Lemma 2 (a) Equilibrium aggregate output satisfies:

                                          y = y(x, `) ≡ Θ xγ `1−γ ,                                        (17)

where                      "         η #γ
                        r∗
                                
                             ηλ   αA α                                        α/η
                     Θ≡                                     and     γ≡                  .
                        α η − 1 r∗                                        α/η + (1 − α)

(b) The productivity cutoff z and the division of income in the economy can be expressed as
follows:

                                                       ηλ r∗ x
                                               zη =            ,                                           (18)
                                                      η−1 α y
                                               w` = (1 − α)y,                                              (19)
                                                       η−1
                                              r∗ κ = α     y,                                              (20)
                                                        η
                                                     α
                                                Π = y,                                                     (21)
                                                     η
                 ´
where Π(t) ≡         πt (a, z)dGt (a, z) are aggregate profits of the entrepreneurs.

       Lemma 2 expresses equilibrium aggregates as functions of the state variable x and labor
supply `. Note that given (17), both the equilibrium wage rate, w = (1 − α)y/`, and the pro-
ductivity cutoff, z, are increasing functions of x/`. High entrepreneurial wealth, x, increases
capital demand and allows a given labor supply to be absorbed by a smaller subset of more
productive entrepreneurs, raising both the average productivity of active entrepreneurs and
aggregate labor productivity (hence wages). If labor supply, `, increases, less productive
entrepreneurs become active to absorb it which in turn reduces average productivity and
wages.21 Nonetheless, both higher x and higher ` lead to an increase in aggregate output
and aggregate incomes of all groups in the economy—workers, entrepreneurs and rentiers.
       The presence of financial frictions results in active entrepreneurs making positive prof-
its, and therefore a fraction of national income is received by entrepreneurs.22 Note from
Lemma 2 that the parameter γ is increasing in capital intensity (α) and productivity het-
erogeneity (i.e., decreasing in η), and equals the share of profits in the total income of
  21
      Note that the effect of increased labor supply on the marginal product of labor through declining
productivity, z, is partly offset by the expansion in demand for capital, κ, as can be seen from (14).
   22
      This happens at the expense of rentiers, whose share of income falls below α due to the decreased
demand for capital in a frictional environment and despite the maintained return on capital of r∗ . The share
of labor still equals (1 − α), as in the frictionless model (with an arbitrary bounded productivity distribution,
                                                         1/(1−α)
                                                                  , w` = (1 − α)y, r∗ κ = αy and Π = 0.
                                           α
z ≤ zmax ), where γ = 0, y = Θ`, Θ = Azmax        (α/r)α

                                                       11
imperfectly-mobile factors (i.e., labor and entrepreneurial wealth): γ = Π/(w` + Π). This
parameter measures the severity of financial frictions and therefore plays a crucial role in
the analysis of optimal policies in Section 4.
    Finally, integrating (13) across all entrepreneurs, aggregate entrepreneurial wealth evolves
according to:
                                              α
                                       ẋ =     y + (r∗ − δ)x,                                 (22)
                                              η
where from Lemma 2 the second term on the right-hand side equals aggregate entrepreneurial
profits Π = αy/η.       Therefore, greater labor supply increases output, which raises en-
trepreneurial profits and speeds up wealth accumulation.
    A competitive equilibrium in this small open economy is defined in the usual way: Taking
prices as given, (i) workers maximize their utility (1) subject to their budget constraint (2);
(ii) entrepreneurs maximize their respective utility (5) subject to their respective budget
constraint (8), which involves the optimal production decisions characterized in Lemma 1;
and (iii) the path of the wage rate, w(t) clears the labor market at each point in time, while
capital is in perfectly-elastic supply at interest rate r∗ . Given our analysis in the preceding
sections, a competitive equilibrium can be summarized as a time path for {c, `, b, y, x, w, z}t≥0
satisfying (2)–(4) and (17)–(22), given an initial asset position of the household b0 , initial
entrepreneurial wealth x0 , and a path of exogenous productivity {A}t≥0 .



3     Inefficiency of Laissez-faire Equilibrium
In our economy, financial frictions limit the ability of resources to relocate towards the
most productive entrepreneurs resulting in dispersion of the marginal product of capital
and inefficiency of the laissez-faire equilibrium allocation. However, the equilibrium fails to
satisfy much weaker notions of efficiency, which do not require the transfers of wealth from
unproductive towards productive entrepreneurs.
    In particular, consider a transfer between workers and all entrepreneurs independently of
their productivity. Availability of such transfers necessarily leads to a Pareto improvement
for all agents in the economy because workers and entrepreneurs face different rates of return,
which fail to equalize due to the financial friction. Indeed, the workers face a rate of return r∗ ,
                                                                                              + 
while an entrepreneur with productivity z faces a rate of return R(z) ≡ r∗ 1 + λ z/z − 1 ,
                                                                                     

with R(z) ≥ r∗ for all z and R(z) > r∗ for z > z. Because of the collateral constraint, an
entrepreneur with productivity z > z cannot expand his capital to drive down his return


                                                  12
to r∗ . The expected rate of return across entrepreneurs is given by:

                                            λz −η
                                                 
                                      ∗                    αy
                            Ez R(z) = r 1 +         = r∗ +    > r∗ ,                        (23)
                                            η−1            ηx

where the first equality integrates R(z) using the Pareto distribution G(z) and the second
equality uses the equilibrium cutoff expression (18). Due to this lack of equalization of re-
turns, a transfer of resources from workers to entrepreneurs at t = 0 and a reverse transfer at
                                                        ´ t0 y(t)
t0 > 0 with interest accumulated at a rate rω = r∗ + ω 0 αη x(t)  dt > r∗ for some ω > 0 neces-
sarily leads to a Pareto improvement for all workers and entrepreneurs (see Appendix A.3).
    We chose the above perturbation to illustrates sharply the nature of inefficiency in the
model, and provides a natural benchmark for thinking about various other policy interven-
tions. Yet, transfers may not be a realistic policy option for a number of reasons, as we
discuss in Section 4.5 below. Furthermore, the type of transfer policy discussed here effec-
tively allows the government to get around the specific financial constraint we have adopted,
and hence it is not particularly surprising that it results in a Pareto improvement. Such a
transfer policy may also not prove robust to alternative formulations of the financial friction.
It is for these two reasons that the main focus of the paper is on optimal Ramsey taxation
with a given set of simple policy tools. These have a similar capability to Pareto-improve
the equilibrium allocation, but constitute a more realistic and, we think, more robust policy
alternative to transfers.



4     Optimal Ramsey Taxation
In this section we study optimal interventions with a given set of policy tools. We start
our analysis with the following tax instruments: a labor tax τ` (t), a savings tax on work-
ers τb (t), a savings (asset) subsidy to entrepreneurs ςx (t), and a lump-sum transfer to workers
T (t). We show that the latter two instruments closely reproduce a transfer between work-
ers and entrepreneurs. In section 4.4, we then extend our analysis to include additional
tax instruments directly affecting the decisions of entrepreneurs, including a subsidy to the
cost of capital. We rule out any direct redistribution of wealth among entrepreneurs, which
would clearly be desirable given the inefficient allocation of capital. Instead, we ask how a
planner can improve upon the competitive equilibrium with a limited set of aggregate tax
instruments, which do not condition on entrepreneurs’ productivity.




                                               13
4.1       Economy with taxes
In the presence of labor and savings taxes (τ` , τb ) and subsidies/transfers (ςx , T ), the budget
constraints of the agents change from (2) and (8) to:

                                 c + ḃ ≤ (1 − τ` )w` + (r∗ − τb )b + T,                                (24)
                                     ȧ = π(a, z) + (r∗ + ςx )a − ce ,                                  (25)

Without loss of generality due to the Ricardian equivalence, we assume that the government
budget is balanced period-by-period, and therefore:

                                         τ` w` + τb b = ςx x + T.                                       (26)

In the presence of taxes, the optimality conditions of households become:

                                            u̇c
                                                = ρ − r ∗ + τb ,                                        (27)
                                            uc
                                            u`
                                           − = (1 − τ` )w,                                              (28)
                                            uc

while the consumption policy function for entrepreneurs remains ce = δa and wages still
satisfy the labor demand relationship (19).
       The following result simplifies considerably the analysis of the optimal policies:23

Lemma 3 Any aggregate allocation {c, `, b, x}t≥0 satisfying

                                  c + ḃ = (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b − ςx x,                                (29)
                                           α
                                     ẋ = y(x, `) + (r∗ + ςx − δ)x,                                     (30)
                                           η

and transversality conditions, where y(x, `) is defined in (17), can be supported as a com-
petitive equilibrium under appropriately chosen policies {τ` , τb , ςx , T }t≥0 , and the equilibrium
characterization in Lemma 2 still applies.

       Intuitively, equations (29) and (30) are the respective aggregate budget constraints of
  23
    Proof: The introduced policy instruments do not directly affect the static choices (profit maximization)
of entrepreneurs given their wealth a, productivity z, and wage rate w, and therefore the aggregation results
in Lemma 2 still apply, which we use to express out the aggregate wage bill and entrepreneurial profits
as functions of aggregate output. With a proportional subsidy to assets, ce = δa is still optimal, and
therefore aggregate entrepreneurial wealth must satisfy (30). Combining (24) and (26) results in (29), and
any allocation {c, `}t≥0 satisfying (29) and a transversality condition can be supported by an appropriate
choice of {τb , τ` }t≥0 .

                                                     14
workers and entrepreneurs, where we have substituted the government budget constraint (26)
and the expressions for the aggregate wage bill and profits as a function of aggregate income
(output) from Lemma 2, which still applies in this environment. The additional two con-
straints on the equilibrium allocation are the optimality conditions of workers, (27) and
(28), but they can always be ensured to hold by an appropriate choice of labor and savings
subsidies for workers. Finally, given a dynamic path of ` and x, we can recover all remaining
aggregate variables supporting the allocation from Lemma 2.
    Similarly to the primal approach in the Ramsey taxation literature (e.g. Lucas and Stokey,
1983), Lemma 3 allows us to replace the problem of choosing a time path of the policy
instruments subject to a corresponding dynamic equilibrium outcome by a simpler problem
of choosing a dynamic aggregate allocation satisfying the implementability constraints (29)
and (30). These two constraints differ somewhat from those one would obtain following the
standard procedure of the primal approach because we exploit the special structure of our
model to derive more tractable conditions.24
    Finally, note from (29)–(30) that the asset (savings) subsidy to entrepreneurs, ςx x, acts as
a tool for redistributing wealth from workers to entrepreneurs (or vice versa when ςx < 0). In
fact, the asset subsidy is essentially equivalent to a lump-sum transfer to entrepreneurs, as it
does not distort the policy functions of either workers or entrepreneurs. The only difference
with a lump-sum transfer is that a proportional tax to assets does not affect the consumption
policy rule of the entrepreneurs, in contrast to a lump-sum transfer which makes the savings
decision of entrepreneurs analytically intractable.25 In what follows we refer to ςx as transfers
to entrepreneurs to emphasize that it is a very direct tool for wealth redistribution towards
entrepreneurs. Note from (26) that a priori we do not restrict whether it is workers or
entrepreneurs who receive revenues from the use of the distortionary taxes τ` and τb (or who
pay lump-sum taxes in the case of subsidies).


4.2     Optimal policies without transfers to entrepreneurs
We start by analyzing the planner’s problem in the absence of transfers (asset subsidies) to
entrepreneurs, that is under the restriction that ςx ≡ 0. This allows us to isolate most clearly
  24
     In particular, the implementability condition for households differs. The standard approach substitutes
the household first order conditions (27)–(28) back into their budget constraint and integrates it over time,
while we only use the aggregate labor demand (19) instead and work with the flow version of the constraint.
Using the standard, less tractable, version of the implementability constraint yields identical results.
  25
     The savings rule of entrepreneurs stays unchanged when lump-sum transfers are unanticipated. In
this case the savings subsidy and lump-sum transfers are exactly equivalent, however, the assumption of
unanticipated lump-sum transfers is unattractive for several reasons.


                                                     15
the forces that shape optimal labor and savings subsidies to workers, which in this case are
financed by the lump-sum tax on workers. In Section 4.3 we relax this assumption to show
the qualitative robustness of our findings to the presence or absence of transfers.
   We assume that the planner maximizes the welfare of households and puts zero weight on
the welfare of entrepreneurs. As will become clear, this is the most conservative benchmark
for our results. We relax this assumption in Section 6.1, where we also show that the optimal
policy not only achieves a redistribution of welfare from entrepreneurs to workers, but also
can ensure a Pareto improvement.
   The Ramsey problem in this case is to choose policies {τ` , τb , T }t≥0 to maximize house-
hold utility (1) subject to the resulting allocation being a competitive equilibrium. From
Lemma 3, this problem is equivalent to maximizing (1) with respect to the aggregate allo-
cation {c, `, b, x}t≥0 subject to (29)–(30) after imposing ςx ≡ 0, which we reproduce as:
                                         ˆ   ∞
                             max                 e−ρt u(c, `)dt                             (P1)
                          {c,`,b,x}t≥0   0

                         subject to          c + ḃ = (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b,                (31)
                                                      α
                                                ẋ = y(x, `) + (r∗ − δ)x,                   (32)
                                                      η

and given initial b0 and x0 . (P1) is a standard optimal control problem with controls (c, `)
and states (b, x), and we denote the corresponding co-state vector by (µ, µν). To ease the
characterization of the solution and ensure the existence of a finite steady state, in what
follows we assume δ < ρ = r∗ . However, neither the first inequality nor the second equality
are essential for the pattern of optimal policies along the transition path, which is our focus.
   Before characterizing the solution to (P1), we provide a brief discussion of the nature of
this planner’s problem. Apart from the Ramsey interpretation that we adopt as the main
one, this planner’s problem admits two additional interpretations. First, it corresponds
to the planner’s problem adopted in Caballero and Lorenzoni (2007), which rules out any
transfers or direct interventions into the decisions of agents, and only allows for aggregate
market interventions which affect agent behavior by moving equilibrium prices (wages in our
case). Second, the solution to this planner’s problem is a constrained efficient allocation
under the definition developed in Dávila, Hong, Krusell, and Rı́os-Rull (2012) for economies
with exogenously incomplete markets and borrowing limits, as ours, where standard notions
of constrained efficiency are hard to apply. Under this definition, the planner can choose
policy functions for all agents respecting, however, their budget sets and exogenous borrowing



                                                      16
constraints. Indeed, in our case the planner does not want to change the policy functions of
entrepreneurs, but chooses to manipulate the policy functions of households exactly in the
way prescribed by the solution to (P1). The implication is that the planner in this case does
not need to identify who are the entrepreneurs in the economy, relaxing the informational
requirement of the Ramsey policy. As we show in later sections, the baseline structure of
the planner’s problem (P1) is maintained in a number of extensions we consider.
       By examining (P1), we observe that the planner has no reason to distort the worker’s
choice of c, but there are two reasons to distort their choice of `. First, the workers take wages
as given and do not internalize that w = (1 − α)y/` (see Lemma 2), that is, by restricting
labor supply the workers can increase their wages. As the planner only cares about the
welfare of workers, this monopoly effect induces the planner to reduce labor supply. Second,
the workers do not internalize the positive effect of their labor supply on entrepreneurial
profits and wealth accumulation, which affects future output and wages. This dynamic
productivity effect through wealth accumulation forces the planner to increase labor supply.
The interaction between these two forces shapes the optimal policy of the planner, which we
now characterize more formally.
       The optimality conditions for (P1) can be simplified to yield:26

                                       u̇c
                                            = ρ − r∗ = 0,                                         (33)
                                       uc
                                       u`                         y
                                      − = 1 − γ + γν · (1 − α) ,                                  (34)
                                       uc                          `
                                                              α y
                                         ν̇ = δν − 1 − γ + γν                                     (35)
                                                               ηx

An immediate implication of (33) is that the planner does not distort the intertemporal
margin and the consumption path still satisfies the Euler equation (3). There is no need to
distort the workers’ savings decision since, holding labor supply constant, consumption does
not have a direct effect on productivity and wages. In terms of implementation, this requires
no use of the savings tax on workers, τb ≡ 0.
       In contrast, the laissez-faire allocation of labor according to the labor supply condition (4)
is in general suboptimal. Indeed, combining planner’s optimality (34) with (19) and (28),
  26
       The present-value Hamiltonian for (P1) is given by:

                     H = u(c, `) + µ (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b − c + µν αy(x, `)/η + (r∗ − δ)x .
                                                                                       


The optimality for c and b, Hc = 0 and µ̇ − ρµ = −Hb result in (33). (34) and (35) correspond to the
optimality with respect to ` and x, H` = 0 and (µν)
                                                 ˙ − ρµν = −Hx , which we simplify using the properties
of y(·) given in (17) and the definition of γ.


                                                       17
                         0.08
                                                    ẋ = 0
                         0.06


                         0.04

                   τℓ
                         0.02   Opt im al Tr a je c t or y


                           0


                        −0.02


                        −0.04
                                               τ̇ ℓ = 0
                                0.5                                1                1.5
                                                               x

              Figure 1: Planner’s allocation: phase diagram for transition dynamics

the labor wedge (tax) can be expressed in terms of the co-state ν as:

                                                 τ` ≡ γ(1 − ν).                                       (36)

Whether labor supply is subsidized or taxed depends on whether ν is greater than one, which
emphasizes the interaction between the two forces outlined above. The statically optimal
monopolistic labor tax equals τ` = γ. The offsetting force is the dynamic productivity
gain from increased labor supply, which is reflected by the term γν > 0 in (36). When
entrepreneurial wealth is scarce, its shadow value for the planner is high (ν > 1), and the
planner subsidizes labor.27 Recall that γ is a measure of the distortion arising from the
financial frictions, and in the frictionless limit with γ = 0, the planner does not need to
distort any margin.
       We rewrite the optimality conditions (34) and (35), replacing the co-state ν with the
labor tax τ` = γ(1 − ν):

                                      u`                        y(x, `)
                                −         = (1 − τ` ) · (1 − α)         ,                             (37)
                                      uc                          `
                                                                     α y(x, `)
                                      τ̇` = δ(τ` − γ) + γ (1 − τ` )                                   (38)
                                                                      η x
  27
    Note that (35) can be solved forward to express ν as a net present value of future marginal products of
wealth, yx = γy/x, which are monotonically decreasing in x with limx→0 yx = ∞ (see Appendix A.5).



                                                          18
The planner’s allocation {c, `, b, x}t≥0 solving (P1), satisfies (31)–(33) and (37)–(38). With
r∗ = ρ, the marginal utility of consumption is constant over time, uc (t) ≡ µ̄, and the system
separates in a convenient way. Given a level of µ̄, which can be pinned down from the
intertemporal budget constraint, the optimal labor wedge can be characterized by means
of two ODEs in (τ` , x), (32) and (38), together with the static optimality condition (37).28
These can be analyzed by means of a phase diagram (Figure 1) and other standard tools
(see Appendix A.5) to yield:

Proposition 1 The solution to the planner’s problem (P1) corresponds to the globally stable
saddle path of the ODE system (32) and (38), as summarized in Figure 1. In particular,
starting from x0 < x̄, both x(t) and τ` (t) increases over time towards the unique positive
steady state (τ̄` , x̄), with labor supply taxed in steady state:29

                                                       γ
                                        τ̄` =                    > 0.                                       (39)
                                                γ + (1 − γ)(δ/ρ)

Labor supply is subsidized, τ` (t) < 0, when entrepreneurial wealth, x(t), is low enough. The
planner does not distort the workers’ intertemporal margin, τb (t) ≡ 0.

       The optimal steady state labor wedge is strictly positive, meaning that in the long-run
the planner suppresses labor supply rather than subsidizing it. This tax is however smaller
than the optimal monopoly tax equal to γ (i.e., 0 < τ̄` < γ), because with δ > r∗ the
entrepreneurial wealth accumulation is bounded and the financial friction is never resolved
(i.e., even in steady state the shadow value of entrepreneurial wealth is positive, ν̄ > 0).
Nonetheless, in steady state the redistribution force necessarily dominates the dynamic pro-
ductivity considerations. This, however, is not the case along the entire transition path to
steady state, as we prove in Proposition 1 and as can be seen from the phase diagram in
Figure 1. Consider a country that starts out with entrepreneurial wealth considerably below
its steady-state level, i.e. in which entrepreneurs are initially severely undercapitalized. Such
a country finds it optimal to subsidize labor supply during the initial transition phase, until
entrepreneurial wealth reaches a high enough level.
  28
     Interestingly, the system of ODEs (32) and (38) depends on the form of the utility function (and, in
particular, on preference parameters such as the Frisch elasticity of labor supply) only indirectly through
labor supply `(x, τ` ) defined by (37), as we discuss further in Appendix A.5. Furthermore, these parameters
do not affect the value of the steady state tax.
  29
     (39) follows from (32) and (38) evaluated in steady state (for ẋ = τ̇` = 0). Using the definition of y(·),
                                                                ¯ c̄) as a function of µ̄, which is then recovered
steady-state versions of (32), (37) and uc ≡ µ̄ determine (x̄, `,
as a fixed point from the intertemporal budget constraint of the households.



                                                       19
                     ( a) Labor Tax, τ ℓ                                  ( b) Ent r e pr e ne ur ial We alt h, x
 0.15                                                                1

  0.1
                                                                    0.8
 0.05

   0                                                                0.6
−0.05

 −0.1                                                               0.4

−0.15
                                                                    0.2
 −0.2                                       Equilibrium                                                  Equilibrium
                                            Planner                                                      Planner
−0.25                                                                0
     0          20         40              60             80          0   20            40             60              80
                          Ye ar s                                                      Ye ar s


          Figure 2: Planner’s allocation: labor tax τ` (t) and entrepreneurial wealth x(t)
Note: steady state entrepreneurial wealth in the laissez-faire equilibrium is normalized to 1 in panel (b).


       Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the transition dynamics for key variables, comparing the allo-
cation chosen by the planner to the one that would obtain in a laissez-faire equilibrium.30
The left panel of Figure 2 plots the optimal labor tax, which is negative in the early phase
of transition (i.e., a labor supply subsidy), and then switches to being positive in the long
run. This is reflected in the initially increased and eventually depressed labor supply in
the planner’s allocation in Figure 3a. The purpose of the labor supply subsidy is to speed
up entrepreneurial wealth accumulation (Figures 2b and 3b), which in turn translates into
higher productivity and wages in the medium run, at the cost of their reduction in the short
run (Figures 3c and 3d). The labor tax and suppressed labor supply in the long run are used
to redistribute the welfare gains from entrepreneurs towards workers through the resulting
increase in wages.31
       Figure 3e shows that during the initial phase of the transition, the optimal policy increases
GDP, as well as the incomes of all groups of agents—workers, active entrepreneurs and
rentiers (inactive entrepreneurs)—according to Lemma 2. Output y is higher both due to a
higher labor supply ` and increased capital demand κ (the capital-output ratio, κ/y, remains
  30
      Our numerical examples use the following benchmark parameter values: α = 1/3, δ = 0.1, ρ = 0.03,
η = 1.06 and λ = 2, as well as balanced growth preferences with a constant Frisch elasticity 1/φ: u(c, `) =
log c − ψ`1+φ /(1 + φ), with ψ = 1 and φ = 1. The initial condition x0 is 10% of the steady state level in the
laissez-faire equilibrium, and the initial wealth of workers is b0 = 0.
   31
      This long-run policy reversal is not surprising given that the planner puts no weight on the welfare
of entrepreneurs, an assumption that we relax in Section 6.1. Yet, even if this reversal was ruled out
(by imposing a restriction τ` ≤ 0), the planner still wants to subsidize labor during the early transition,
emphasizing that the purpose of this policy is not merely a reverse redistribution at a later date.



                                                               20
                    ( a) Labor Supply, ℓ                                   ( b) Ent r e pr e ne ur ial We alt h, x
 0.25                                                             0.08

  0.2                                                             0.06

                                                                  0.04
 0.15
                                                                  0.02
  0.1
                                                                    0
 0.05
                                                                 −0.02
   0
                                                                 −0.04
−0.05                                                            −0.06

 −0.1                                                            −0.08
     0         20           40             60         80              0     20            40             60             80
                           Ye ar s                                                       Ye ar s


         ( c ) Wage , w , and Labor Pr oduc t ivity, y /ℓ                 ( d) Tot al Fac t or Pr oduc t ivity, Z
 0.02                                                             0.02

 0.01
                                                                  0.01
   0
                                                                    0
−0.01

−0.02                                                            −0.01

−0.03
                                                                 −0.02
−0.04
                                                                 −0.03
−0.05

−0.06                                                            −0.04
     0         20           40             60         80              0     20            40             60             80
                           Ye ar s                                                       Ye ar s


                       ( e ) Inc ome , y                                  ( f ) Wor ke r Pe r iod Ut ility, u ( c, ℓ)
 0.15                                                             0.15

                                                                   0.1
  0.1
                                                                  0.05

 0.05
                                                                    0

   0                                                             −0.05

                                                                  −0.1
−0.05
                                                                 −0.15

 −0.1                                                             −0.2
     0         20           40             60         80              0     20            40             60             80
                           Ye ar s                                                       Ye ar s


 Figure 3: Planner’s allocation: proportional deviations from the laissez-faire equilibrium
Note: in (d), the deviations in TFP are the same as deviation in z α , as follows from (16); in (e), income
deviations characterize simultaneously the deviations in output (y), wage bill (w`), profits (Π), capital income
(r∗ κ), and hence capital (κ), as follows from Lemma 2.

                                                            21
constant according to (20)). This increase in demand is met by an inflow of capital, which
is in perfectly elastic supply in a small open economy. The effect of the increase in inputs `
and κ is partly offset by a reduction in the TFP due to a lower productivity cutoff z.
       Although our numerical example is primarily illustrative, it can be seen that the transition
dynamics in this economy may take a very long time, and the quantitative effects of the
Ramsey policies may be quite pronounced.32 In particular, in our example the Ramsey
policy increases labor supply by up to 18% and GDP by up to 12% during the initial phase
of the transition, which last around 20 years. This is supported by an initial labor supply
subsidy of over 20%, which switches to a 12% labor tax in the long run. Despite the increased
labor income, workers initially suffer in flow utility terms (Figure 3f) due to increased labor
supply. Workers are compensated with a higher utility in the future, reaping the benefits of
both higher wages and lower labor supply, and gain on net intertemporally.33

Implementation The Ramsey-optimal allocation can be implemented in a number of dif-
ferent ways. For concreteness, we focus here on the early phase of transition, when the
planner wants to increase labor supply. The way we set up the problem, the optimal alloca-
tion during this initial phase is implemented with a labor supply subsidy, ς` (t) ≡ −τ` (t) > 0,
financed by a lump-sum tax on workers. In this case, workers’ gross labor income including
subsidy is (1 + ς` )(1 − α)y, while their net income subtracting the lump-sum tax is still given
by (1 − α)y, hence resulting in no direct change in their budget set. Note that increasing
labor supply unambiguously increases net labor income (w`), but decreases the net wage rate
(w) paid by the firms. This is why we sometimes refer to this policy as wage suppression.
       An equivalent implementation is to give a wage bill subsidy to firms financed by a lump-
sum tax on workers. In this case, the equilibrium wage rate increases, but the firms pay
only a fraction of the wage bill, and the resulting allocation is the same. There are of
course alternative implementations that rely on directly controlling the quantity of labor
supplied, rather than its price; for example, forced labor—a forced increase in the hours
worked relative to the competitive equilibrium. Such a non-market implementation pushes
  32
      Slow transition dynamics are a generic feature of models in which heterogeneous producers face collateral
constraints. Such models therefore have the potential to explain observed growth episodes such as the
post-war miracle economies. This is in contrast to transitions in the neoclassical growth model which are
characterized by very fast convergence. See Buera and Shin (2013) who make this argument by means of a
quantitative theory of endogenous TFP dynamics in the presence of financial frictions.
   33
      While we found the patterns in Figures 3a–e to be robust to alternative setups, the specific pattern of the
flow-utility changes in Figure 3f is more sensitive to the assumptions, and in particular changes substantially
when workers are assumed to be hand-to-mouth (as well as in the closed economy), in which case the utility
gains come in significantly sooner due to the increasing path of consumption tied to that of output.



                                                       22
workers off their labor supply schedule and the wage is determined by moving along the labor
demand schedule of the business sector. Our theory is silent on the relative desirability of one
form of intervention over another. See Weitzman (1974) for a discussion. The general feature
of all these implementation strategies is their pro-business tilt in the sense that they reduce
the effective labor costs to firms, allowing them to expand production and generate higher
profits, in order to facilitate the accumulation of entrepreneurial wealth in the absence of
direct transfers to entrepreneurs. In Section 4.5 we discuss in more detail the implementation
strategies for this and other related allocations.

Learning-by-doing analogy One alternative way of looking at the planner’s problem (P1)
is to note that from (17), GDP depends on current labor supply `(t) and entrepreneurial
wealth x(t). But from (22), entrepreneurial wealth accumulates as a function of past profits,
which are a constant fraction of past aggregate incomes, or outputs. Therefore, current
output depends on the entire history of past labor supplies, {`}t≥0 , and the initial level of
wealth, x0 . This setup, hence, is isomorphic at the aggregate to a neoclassical growth model
in which productivity is a function of past labor supplies, and hence is a special case of
a general formulation with learning-by-doing externality in production (see, for example,
Krugman, 1987). As a result, some of our policy implications have a lot in common with
those that emerge in economies with learning-by-doing externalities, as we discuss in Sec-
tions 6.3–6.4. The detailed micro-structure of our environment not only provides discipline
for the aggregate planning problem, but also differs in qualitative ways from an environment
with learning by doing. In particular, we now switch to the characterization of optimal
policies in the presence of transfers, which are a powerful tool in our environment, but have
no bite in an economy with learning by doing.


4.3    Optimal policy with transfers to entrepreneurs
We now show that the conclusions obtained in the previous section, in particular that optimal
Ramsey policy involves a labor subsidy when entrepreneurial wealth is low, are robust to
allowing for transfers to entrepreneurs as long as these are constrained to be finite. Formally,
we extend the planner’s problem (P1) to allow for an asset subsidy to entrepreneurs, ςx .
The planner now chooses a sequence of three taxes, {τb , τ` , ςx }t≥0 to maximize household
utility (1) subject to the resulting allocation being a competitive equilibrium. We again
make use of Lemma 3, which allows us to recast this problem as the one of choosing a
dynamic allocation {c, `, b, x}t≥0 and a sequence of transfers {ςx }t≥0 which satisfy household


                                              23
budget constraint (29) and aggregate wealth accumulation equation (30).
       We impose an additional constraint on the aggregate transfer:34

                                                 s ≤ ςx (t) x(t) ≤ S,                                      (40)

where s ≤ 0 and S ≥ 0. The previous section analyzed the special case of s = S = 0.
The case with unrestricted transfers corresponds to S = −s = +∞, which we consider as a
special case now, but in general we allow s and S to be bounded.
       We reproduce the planning problem in this case as:
                                             ˆ   ∞
                              max                    e−ρt u(c, `)dt                                        (P2)
                            {c,`,b,x}t≥0 ,   0
                        {ςx : s≤ςx x≤S}t≥0

                             subject to           c + ḃ = (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b − ςx x,
                                                           α
                                                     ẋ = y(x, `) + (r∗ + ςx − δ)x,
                                                           η

given the initial conditions b0 and x0 . We still denote the two co-states by µ and µν.
Appendix A.4 sets up the Hamiltonian for (P2) and provides the full set of equilibrium
conditions, following the same steps outlined in footnote 26. In particular, the optimal-
ity conditions (33)–(35) still apply, but now with two additional complementary slackness
conditions:
                           ν ≥ 1,      ςx x ≤ S           and         ν ≤ 1,   ςx x ≥ s.                   (41)

       This has two immediate implications. First, as before, the planner never distorts the
intertemporal margin of workers, that is τb ≡ 0. Second, whenever the bounds on transfers
are slack, s < ςx x < S, the co-state for the wealth accumulation constraint is unity, ν = 1.
In particular, this is always the case when transfers are unbounded, S = −s = +∞. Note
that ν = 1 means that the planner’s shadow value of wealth, x, equals µ̄—the shadow
value of extra funds in the household budget constraint. This equalization of marginal
values is intuitive given that the planner has access to a transfers between the two groups
of agents. From (34) and (36), ν = 1 immediately implies that the labor supply condition
is undistorted, that is τ` = 0.35 This discussion allows us to characterize the planner’s
  34
     Why transfers may be constrained in reality is discussed in detail in Section 4.5. Given the reasons
discussed there, for example political economy considerations limiting aggregate transfers from workers to
entrepreneurs, we find a constraint on the aggregate transfer (ςx x) more realistic than one on the subsidy
rate (ςx ). However, the analysis of the alternative case is almost identical and we leave it out for brevity. In
fact, it is straightforward to generalize (40) to allow s and S to be functions of aggregate wealth, x(t).
  35
     Note that when transfers are unbounded, (P2) can be replaced with a simpler optimal control problem


                                                           24
                     ( a) Tr ans fe r , ς x                                      ( b) Ent r e pr e ne ur ial We alt h, x
                                                                        1
 0.03                                          Equilibrium
                                               Planner
 0.02                                                                  0.8

 0.01
                                                                       0.6
    0
                                                                       0.4
−0.01

−0.02                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                Equilibrium
−0.03                                                                                                           Planner
                                                                        0
        0       20          40                60             80              0    20           40             60              80
                           Ye ar s                                                            Ye ar s


                      Figure 4: Planner’s allocation with unlimited transfers
Note: in (a), transfer refers to the asset (savings) subsidy to entrepreneurs, which equals ςx (0) = ∞ and
ςx (t) = −r∗ , financed by a lump-sum tax on workers, and resulting in the path of entrepreneurial wealth x(t)
depicted in (b); other variables instantaneously reach their steady state values, while labor and savings wedges
(taxes) for workers are set to zero.


allocation when unbounded transfers are available (see illustration in Figure 4):

Proposition 2 In the presence of unbounded transfers (S = −s = +∞), the planner dis-
torts neither intertemporal consumption choice, nor intratemporal labor supply along the
entire transition path: τb (t) = τ` (t) = 0 for all t. The steady state is achieved in one instant,
at t = 0, and the steady state asset subsidy equals ςx (t) = ς¯x = −r∗ for t > 0, i.e. a transfer
of funds from entrepreneurs to workers. When x(0) < x̄, the planner makes an unbounded
transfer from workers to entrepreneurs at t = 0, i.e. ςx (0) = +∞, to ensure x(0+) = x̄.36

    Proposition 2 shows that the asset subsidy to entrepreneurs dominates the other instru-
ments at the planner’s disposal, as long as it is unbounded. When the planner can freely
reallocate wealth between households and entrepreneurs, he no longer faces the need to dis-
tort the labor supply or savings decisions of the workers. Clearly, the infinite transfer in
the initial period, ςx (0), is an artifact of the continuous time environment. In discrete time,
with a single state variable m ≡ b + x and one aggregate dynamic constraint:

                                 ṁ = 1 − α + α/η y(x, `) + r∗ m − δx − c.
                                                  


The choice of x in this case becomes static, maximizing the right-hand side of the dynamic constraint at
each point in time, and the choice of labor supply can be immediately seen to be undistorted. The results
of Proposition 2 can be obtained directly from this simplified formulation (see Appendix A.4).
   36                                                                                                       ¯
      The steady state entrepreneurial wealth is determined from (30) substituting in ς¯x : δ = α/η · y(x̄, `)/x̄,
where `¯ satisfies the labor supply condition (37) with τ` = 0 and uc = µ̄.

                                                                  25
                    ( a) Lab or Tax, τ ℓ                                  ( b) Ent r e pr e ne ur ial We alt h, x
 0.15                                                              1

  0.1
                                                                  0.8
 0.05

   0                                                              0.6
−0.05

 −0.1                                                             0.4

−0.15
                                    Equilibrium                   0.2                            Equilibrium
 −0.2                               Planner, No Transf.                                          Planner, No Transf.
                                    Planner, Lim. Transf.                                        Planner, Lim. Transf.
−0.25                                                              0
     0         20          40              60           80          0      20           40              60           80
                          Ye ar s                                                      Ye ar s


                        Figure 5: Planner’s allocation with limited transfers
Note: evolution of the labor tax τ` (t) and entrepreneurial wealth x(t) when transfers to entrepreneurs are
bounded by ςx (t)x(t) ≤ S < ∞, while s is not binding (i.e., s ≤ −r∗ x̄); until the steady state is reached, the
transfer is maxed out (ςx (t) = S/x(t)); in steady state, x̄ and ς¯x = −r∗ are the same as in Figure 4.


the required transfer is simply the difference between initial and steady state wealth, which
however can be very large if the economy starts far below its steady state in terms of en-
trepreneurial wealth. There is a variety of reasons why large redistributive transfers may be
undesirable or infeasible in reality, as we discuss in detail in Section 4.5, and already alluded
to in Section 3. We, therefore, turn now to the analysis of the case with bounded transfers.
    For brevity, we consider here the case in which the upper bound is binding, S < ∞, but
the lower bound is not binding, that is s ≤ −r∗ x̄, while Appendix A.4 presents the general
case. The planner’s allocation in this case is characterized by uc = µ̄, (30), (34), (35) and
(41), and the transition dynamics has two phases. In the first phase, x(t) < x̄ and τ` (t) < 0
(as ν(t) > 1), while the planner simultaneously chooses the maximal possible transfer from
workers to entrepreneurs each period, ςx (t)x(t) = S. During this phase, the characterization
is the same as in Proposition 1, but with the difference that a transfer S is added to the
entrepreneurs’ wealth accumulation constraint (32) and subtracted from the workers’ budget
constraint (31). That is, starting from x0 < x̄, entrepreneurial assets accumulate over time
and the planner distorts labor supply upwards at a decreasing rate: x(t) increases and
τ` (t) < 0 decreases in absolute value towards zero. The second phase is reached at some
finite time t̄ > 0, and corresponds to a steady state described in Proposition 2: x(t) = x̄,
ν(t) = 1, τ` (t) = 0 and ςx (t) = −r∗ for all t ≥ t̄. Throughout the entire transition the
intertemporal margin of workers is again not distorted, τb (t) = 0 for all t.
    We illustrate the planner’s dynamic allocation in this case in Figure 5 and summarize its

                                                             26
properties in the following Proposition:

Proposition 3 Consider the case with S < ∞, s ≤ −r∗ x̄, and x(0) < x̄. Then there exists
t̄ ∈ (0, ∞) such that: (1) for t ∈ [0, t̄), ςx (t)x(t) = S and τ` (t) < 0, with the dynamics of
              
  x(t), τ` (t) described by a pair of ODEs (30) and (38) together with a static equation (37),
with a globally-stable saddle path as in Proposition 1; (2) for t ≥ t̄, x(t) = x̄, τ` (t) = 0 and
ςx (t) = −r∗ , corresponding to the steady state in Proposition 2. For all t ≥ 0, τb (t) = 0.

Therefore, our main result that optimal Ramsey policy involves a labor supply subsidy when
entrepreneurial wealth is low is robust to allowing for transfers from workers to entrepreneurs
as long as these transfers are bounded. Applying this logic to a discrete-time environment,
whenever the transfers cannot be large enough to jump entrepreneurial wealth immediately
to its steady state level (therefore, resulting in a transition period with ν > 1), the optimal
policy involves a pro-business intervention of increasing labor supply.


4.4    Other tax instruments
In order to evaluate the robustness of our conclusions, we now briefly consider the case with
additional tax instruments which directly affect the decisions of entrepreneurs. Specifically,
in addition to an asset subsidy ςx , we introduce a profit subsidy ςπ , a revenue subsidy ςy ,
a wage-bill subsidy ςw , and a capital subsidy ςk , all financed by a lump-sum tax on households,
so that the budget set of the entrepreneurs is now given by:

                   ȧ = (1 + ςπ )π(a, z) + (r∗ + ςx )a − ce ,                               (42)
                               n                                             o
             π(a, z) = max (1 + ςy )A(zk)α n1−α − (1 − ςw )w` − (1 − ςk )r∗ k ,
                        n≥0,
                       0≤k≤λa


and the entrepreneurs’ consumption-saving decision still satisfies ce = δa.
   Note that the capital subsidy ςk is similar to a credit subsidy ςr , i.e. a subsidy on (k − a)
rather than k. In fact, in our framework, where all active entrepreneurs have the same
leverage ratio λ, the two instruments have identical effects (operating through reducing the
cost of capital) when ςk = (λ − 1)ςr /λ. Hence, our exclusive focus on ςk is without loss of
generality. Credit and capital subsidies are, arguably, a natural tax instrument to address
the financial friction, and they have been an important element of real world industrial
policies (see McKinnon, 1981; Diaz-Alejandro, 1985; Leipziger, 1997).
   In the presence of the additional subsidies to entrepreneurs, the equilibrium characteri-
zation in Lemma 2 no longer applies and needs to be generalized, as we do in Appendix A.6.

                                               27
In particular, the aggregate output function is now:
                                                          γ(η−1)
                                                  1 + ςy
                                  y(x, `) =                          Θxγ `1−γ ,
                                                  1 − ςk

with γ and Θ defined as before. Furthermore, the planner’s problem has a similar structure
to (P1) and (P2) with the added optimization over the choice of the additional subsidies.
    We prove the following in Appendix A.6:

Proposition 4 The profit subsidy ςπ , as well as a synthetic profit subsidy ςy = −ςk = −ςw ,
have the same effect as a transfer from workers to entrepreneurs, just like the asset subsidy ςx .
(i) When the available instruments can be combined to engineer an unbounded transfer from
workers to entrepreneurs, no other instrument is used, and in particular the labor margin is
undistorted (as in Proposition 2).
(ii) Otherwise, there is a period of transition during which all available policy instruments
are used to speed up the accumulation of entrepreneurial wealth, and in particular the labor
supply margin is distorted (as in Propositions 1 and 3).37

    The profit subsidy, just like the asset subsidy, does not affect the policy rules of en-
trepreneurs, and therefore approximates the effect of a pure transfer between workers and
entrepreneurs. When either of these instruments is available and unbounded, Proposition 2
applies and other taxes are not used. A revenue subsidy can be combined with taxes on
capital and labor to replicate the effect of a profit subsidy.
    Taken separately, the effects of the revenue subsidy ςy are similar to those of the wage bill
subsidy ςw (which, in turn, is equivalent to the labor supply subsidy, ς` ≡ −τ` ), however, not
identical, as ςy leads to a larger increase in entrepreneurial revenues and profits for a given
increase in labor supply. The effects of the capital subsidy ςk are quite different from those
of the labor subsidy ςw , as ςk increases entrepreneurial profits by means of distorting the
extensive margin of active entrepreneurs (rather than the labor supply decision of workers).
All of these instruments are inferior to transfers as they introduce their specific distortions to
the allocation, and hence in general they cannot be ranked. Yet, either of these instruments
(and their combinations) are beneficial during the transition by enhancing entrepreneurial
profits and wealth accumulation to reduce the severity of the financial constraints.
  37
    Using the planner’s problem (P4) set up in Appendix A.6, we show that when only ςy or only ςk is
available, the planner sets them proportional to (ν − 1), in parallel with the optimal labor supply subsidy
analyzed in Section 4.2. When only ςk and ςw are available jointly, the planner sets ςk = ςw ∝ (ν − 1).
Similarly, when only ςy and ςw are available jointly, the planner sets ςy = −ςw ∝ (ν − 1). In all cases,
ν gradually declines during the transition, similar to the patterns described in Figure 1 and Proposition 1.

                                                      28
   The general conclusion from this analysis is that, whenever an unbounded transfer be-
tween workers and entrepreneurs cannot be engineered, there is a period of transition during
which all available policy instruments are used in a pro-business manner to speed up the
accumulation of entrepreneurial wealth in the least distortive way.


4.5    Constraints on implementation
The analysis above suggests the superiority of transfers to alternative policy tools. Here
we discuss a number of arguments why transfers may not constitute a feasible or desirable
policy option, as well as other constraints on implementation, which justify our focus on the
optimal policy under a restricted set of instruments.
   First, large transfers may be infeasible simply due to the budget constraint of the gov-
ernment (or the household sector), when the economy starts far away from its long-run level
of wealth. Furthermore, unmodeled distributional concerns in a richer environment with
heterogeneous workers may make large transfers—which are large lump-sum taxes from the
point of view of workers—undesirable or infeasible (see Werning, 2007). Note that, in con-
trast, the policy of subsidizing labor supply, while in the short run also shifting gains towards
the entrepreneurial sector, has the additional advantage of increasing GDP and incomes of
all groups of agents in the economy. If not just entrepreneurs but also the household sector
were financially constrained, or if there were an occupational choice such that workers had
the option to become entrepreneurs, large lump-sum taxes on households would be even more
problematic and the argument in favor of a labor supply subsidy would be even stronger.
   Second, large transfers from workers to entrepreneurs may be infeasible for political econ-
omy reasons. This limitation is particularly relevant under socialist or populist governments
of many developing countries, but even for more technocratic governments a policy of di-
rect financial injections into the business sector, often labelled as a bailout, may be hard
to justify. In contrast, it is probably easier to ensure broad public support of more indirect
policies, such as labor supply subsidies or competitive exchange rate devaluations. Another
political economy concern is that transfers to businesses may become entrenched once given
out, e.g. due to political connections. As a result originally “well-intended” transfers may
persist far beyond what is optimal from the point of view of a benevolent planner (see Buera,
Moll, and Shin, 2013).
   Third, the information requirement associated with transfers is likely to be unrealistically
strict. Indeed, the government needs to be able to separate entrepreneurs from workers, as
every agent in the economy will have an incentive to declare himself an entrepreneur when the

                                               29
government announces the policy of direct subsidies to business. As a result, the government
is likely to be forced to condition its support on some easily verifiable observables. One
potential observable is the amount of labor hired by entrepreneurs, and the labor supply
subsidy implicitly does just that.38
       Furthermore, and as already mention in Section 3, transfers constitute such a powerful
tool in our environment because they allow the government to effectively side-step the collat-
eral constraint in the economy, by first inflating entrepreneurial wealth and later imposing
a lump-sum tax on entrepreneurs to transfer the resources back to the households. Such
a policy may be infeasible if entrepreneurs can hide their wealth from the government. In
contrast, labor supply taxes are less direct, affecting entrepreneurs only via the equilibrium
wage rate, and hence less likely to trigger such deviations.
       Finally, the general lesson from our analysis is the optimality of a pro-business stance of
government policy during the initial phase of the transition, which may be achieved to some
extent with whatever instrument the government has at its disposable. It is possible that
the government has very limited flexibility in the use of any tax instruments, and hence has
to rely on alternative non-tax market regulation. For example, the government can choose
how much market and bargaining power to leave to each group of agents in the economy,
or affect the market outcomes by means of changing the value of the outside options of
different agents.39 Such interventions may allow the government to implement some of the
Ramsey-optimal allocations without the use of explicit taxes and transfers.



5        Discussion of Assumptions
The goal of this paper is to develop a model of transition dynamics with financial frictions
in which we can analyze optimal government interventions. This motivates a number of the
assumptions we adopt, which allow for tractable aggregation of the economy and result in
a simple characterization of equilibrium under various government policies (see Lemma 3).
  38
      For tractability, the way we set up the Ramsey problem without transfers, the subsidy to labor supply is
financed by a lump-sum tax on workers. An alternative formulation is to levy the lump-sum tax on all agents
in the economy without discrimination. The two formulations yield identical results in the limiting case when
the number (mass) of entrepreneurs is diminishingly small relative to the number (mass) of workers, which
we take to be a realistic benchmark.
   39
      During the New Deal policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the government increased the monopoly power
of unions in the labor market and businesses in the product markets. Many Asian countries, for example
Korea, have taken an alternative pro-business stance in the labor markets, by halting unions and giving
businesses an effective monopsony power. The governments of relatively rich European countries, on the
other hand, tilt the bargaining power in favor of labor by providing generous unemployment insurance and
a strict regulation of hiring and firing practices.


                                                     30
We now discuss these assumptions systematically, emphasizing which ones are made purely
for tractability and which ones are necessary for our results.

Functional forms Our results are robust to many different functional forms for the utility
function of households, as long as these feature a positive and finite Frisch elasticity of labor
supply. For entrepreneurs, we assume logarithmic utility as it delivers a simple closed-form
consumption policy function and makes it easy to characterize wealth dynamics, but the
analysis can be generalized to CRRA utility (see Moll, 2014).40 The Pareto productivity
distribution is useful for tractable aggregation and in order to maintain log-linearity of the
equilibrium conditions, but is not essential for any of the results, and in certain applica-
tions may be conveniently replaced with other distributions. The time-invariant paths of
exogenous productivity (At ≡ A) and maximum leverage ratio (λt ≡ λ) can be immediately
generalized to arbitrary deterministic or stochastic time series processes without major con-
sequences for the results, as they affect the planner’s problem only through the reduced-form
productivity Θt defined in (17).41
    The three functional form assumptions that are essential for tractability are the constant
returns to scale (CRS) in production, CRRA utility of entrepreneurs which implies linear
savings rules, and the linearity of the collateral constraint in the wealth of entrepreneurs.
Together they result in optimal production and accumulation decisions that are linear in the
wealth of the entrepreneurs, allowing for tractable aggregation and substantial reduction in
the size of the state space. Indeed, in general, the state space of the model should include the
time-varying joint distribution of endogenous wealth and exogenous productivity, Gt (a, z).
Yet, with our assumptions, the state space reduces to a single variable—the aggregate (or
average) wealth of all entrepreneurs xt —and we only need to keep track of its dynamics
characterized by (30). In the earlier literature, the enormous state space typical in the models
with financial frictions and heterogeneity has been the main impediment to the optimal
policy analysis outside of stationary equilibria.42 While there is a sharp discontinuity in the
   40
      We additionally adopt a technical assumption that entrepreneurs are more impatient than households
(δ > ρ = r∗ ) in order to insure the existence of a steady state. This assumption can be dropped if one is
willing to stick to the analysis of the transition path in a model without a steady state. Alternatively, this
assumption is not needed if workers are hand-to-mouth (in equilibrium) or subject to idiosyncratic income
risk, in which case δ = ρ > r∗ is a natural assumption in a small open economy and would arise endogenously
in a closed economy (Aiyagari, 1994).
   41
      For example, the analysis could be extended at little cost to the case where the economy is on a balanced
growth path (BGP), with growth driven by sustained improvements in productivity (At ) and/or sustained
financial development (growth in λt ). In this case it is not the absolute level of entrepreneurial wealth, but
rather its deviation from the BGP level, that matters for whether the planner subsidizes or taxes labor.
   42
      Some existing analyses of optimal policy do take into account transition dynamics but restrict tax



                                                      31
tractability of the framework once one departs from CRS in production, there is no reason to
expect such discontinuity in optimal policies, as the equilibrium allocation itself is continuous
in returns to scale (see Moll, 2014). For example, with CRS all active firms are financially
constrained, while with returns to scale slightly below one, almost all firms are constrained.
Therefore, the CRS economy is simply the tractable limiting case of a decreasing returns
economy. And standard calibrated values for returns to scale are relatively close to one
(see e.g. Atkeson and Kehoe, 2007; Buera and Shin, 2013). More generally, the conceptual
requirement for our policy prescriptions to hold is that a non-trivial share of output is
produced by financially constrained firms during the transition period.

Heterogeneity We develop a particularly tractable model of heterogeneity and aggrega-
tion. Many of our results can be illustrated in economies without heterogeneity, i.e. with
a single productivity type of entrepreneurs. There are three main reasons why we opt in
favor of a model with heterogeneity. First, this makes our framework closer to the canonical
model of financial frictions used in the macro-development literature (see references in the
Introduction) to which we want to relate our optimal policy analysis. Second, it allows us
to capture misallocation and endogenous TFP dynamics, as well as their response to opti-
mal policies, along the transition path. Financial frictions introduce two distortions in the
allocation of resources: one, the economy hires less capital in the aggregate, which reduces
labor productivity and depresses wages; and, two, capital is misallocated across firms, which
reduces aggregate TFP and also depresses wages. The two effects reinforce each other in
our framework, while a model without heterogeneity captures only the first effect of the de-
pressed demand for capital at the aggregate. Third, and somewhat surprisingly, the model
with a continuum of heterogeneous entrepreneurs is more tractable than its analogue without
heterogeneity. This is because continuous heterogeneity is regularizing, adding smoothness
to the equilibrium conditions without complicating them. This in turn allows us to cap-
ture the declining force of the financial frictions as the economy accumulates wealth and
approaches the steady state, but at the same time avoids the need to keep track of different
binding patterns of the financial constraint and the corresponding switches in the equilibrium
instruments to be constant over time, making the optimal policy choice effectively a static problem (see
e.g. Conesa, Kitao, and Krueger, 2009). Our result that the sign of the optimal policy differs according
to whether an economy is close to or far away from steady state underlines the importance of examining
time-varying optimal policy. The tools developed in Lucas and Moll (2013) and Nuño (2013) in simpler
environments, should eventually make it possible to extend our analysis of time-varying Ramsey-optimal
policies to cases in which the joint distribution of productivity and wealth is a state variable.




                                                  32
regime.43
       The iid assumption for the productivity process delivers particular tractability to the
model by reducing the state space to a single variable—the aggregate wealth of the en-
trepreneurs. Our results are robust to the alternative extreme of constant productivity
types (and, in particular, to the special case with no heterogeneity). Further, as opposed to
the CRS assumption, the iid assumption can be relaxed without a dramatic increase in the
size of the state space. In particular, if productivity follows a Markov process, the number
of state variables equals the number of possible productivity realizations, as we only need to
characterize the aggregate wealth dynamics for each productivity group (see Moll, 2014).
       Finally, we rule out endogenous occupation choice, i.e. there are no transitions be-
tween the group of workers and the group of entrepreneurs. This is important for analytical
tractability of the model, in particular the savings policy function of the entrepreneurs. In
the data, the probability of entering entrepreneurship over a time period of a year is typ-
ically small (see e.g. Hurst and Lusardi, 2004; Cagetti and De Nardi, 2009). Furthermore
and as already discussed, the wage subsidy prescribed in our analysis increases labor income
and wealth accumulation of workers and therefore it may have additional beneficial effects
in a richer environment with occupational choice. Therefore, we expect our results to also
hold in a model with occupational choice, though such a model would be substantially more
complicated and would have to be solved numerically.

Financial frictions Following the tradition in the literature (see references in the Intro-
duction), we model financial frictions as the interaction between incomplete markets and
collateral constraints, both exogenously imposed. The particular form of the collateral con-
straint can be generalized in a number of ways, in particular letting the financial friction
parameter λ be a function of time or other individual or aggregate variables (see Moll, 2014).
Note that in our model even when λ is constant, the severity of the financial frictions re-
duces over time as wealth x accumulates, endogenously making more developed countries
less financially constrained.
       The key conceptual assumption, however, is that the use of capital and production require
a certain minimal skin in the game, and thus the effects generalize to a model with a richer set
of available assets, including equity.44 More generally, the effects we emphasize are likely to
  43
      In the case without heterogeneity, such regime switches would happen, for example, if the financial
frictions stopped to bind altogether around or at the steady state. In the case with a discrete number of
productivity types such regime switches occur more often throughout the transition. These regime switches
make the complete characterization of dynamics substantially less tractable.
   44
      Note that issuing equity does not replicate transfers between agents, which have the ability to sidestep


                                                     33
be present as long as the scale of production of a non-trivial share of businesses is constrained
by their net worth or the wealth of their owners.45 A large development literature (see e.g.
Banerjee and Duflo, 2005, and the references cited therein) has documented the importance
of such constraints for developing countries.



6     Extensions
In this section we discuss ways in which our analysis can be generalized and extended. In
particular, we offer four extensions to our benchmark analysis. First, we consider the case
when the planner puts an arbitrary positive Pareto weight on the welfare of entrepreneurs.
Second, we characterize optimal policies in a closed economy. Third, we consider a rein-
terpretation of the baseline model which introduces a non-tradable sector and allows for a
discussion of the policy implications for the real exchange rate. And, finally, we extend our
analysis to multiple tradable sectors to allow for comparative advantage and the discussion
of optimal industrial policies.


6.1     Pareto weight on entrepreneurs
Our analysis generalizes in a natural way to the case where the planner puts an arbitrary
non-zero Pareto weight on the welfare of the entrepreneurs. In Appendix A.2, we show that
the expected present value of an entrepreneur with assets a0 at time t = 0 is given by:
                                                        ˆ      ∞
                                                                                      
                                       1         1                      α y x(t), `(t)
                        V0 (a0 ) = v0 + log a0 +                   e−δt                 dt,                (43)
                                       δ         δ         0            η    x(t)

where v0 is a constant, and the last term represent the discounted present value of expected
entrepreneurial returns (see (23)). In Appendix A.7 we extend the baseline planner’s prob-
lem (P1) to allow for an arbitrary Pareto weight, θ ≥ 0, on the utilitarian welfare function for
                         ´
all entrepreneurs, V0 = V0 (a)dGa,0 (a). We show that the resulting optimal policy parallels
that characterized in our main Proposition 1, with the optimal labor tax now given by:

                                                                 θ γ
                                 τ`θ (t) = γ 1 − ν(t) − e(ρ−δ)t
                                                     
                                                                          .                                (44)
                                                                δ µ̄ x(t)
the financial constraints. This is because equity does not increase the net worth (assets) of the entrepreneurs,
which we assume to be the relevant variable for the collateral constraint. In other words, it is the net worth
of entrepreneurs that limits borrowing, not the absence of markets in risky assets.
  45
     Indeed, the model identifies the derivative of aggregate output with respect to aggregate wealth of
the business sector, ∂y/∂x = γ · y/x, as the key statistic determining the benefits of a pro-business policy
intervention (see footnote 27)—an insight we expect to persist beyond the specific environment of our model.

                                                      34
Therefore, the optimal tax schedule simply shifts down (for a given value of ν) in response
to a greater weight on the entrepreneurs in the social objective. That is, the transition is
associated with a larger subsidy to labor supply initially and a smaller tax on labor later
on.46 In this sense, we view our results in Section 4 as a conservative benchmark, since even
when the planner does not care about entrepreneurs, he still chooses a pro-business policy
tilt during the early transition.


6.2       Closed economy
We can also extend our analysis to the case of a closed economy in which the total supply of
capital equals the sum of assets held by workers and entrepreneurs, κ(t) = x(t)+b(t), and the
interest rate, r(t), is determined endogenously to equalize the demand and supply of capital.47
In Appendix A.8 we set up the closed economy. In particular, we generalize Lemmas 2 and 3
to show that the constraints on allocations (29)–(30) in the closed economy become:
                                                   
                                             η−1b
                            ḃ = (1 − α) + α          y(κ, x, `) − c − ςx x,                              (45)
                                              η κ
                                h           xi α
                           ẋ = 1 + (η − 1)      y(κ, x, `) + (ςx − δ)x,                                  (46)
                                            κ η

and where the output function is now:
                                                                                         α
                                c   η−1
                                          α   1−α                  c           η
                y(κ, x, `) = Θ κ          x `          with       Θ ≡A             λ1/η        ,          (47)
                                                                               η−1

instead of (17). The only other difference between (45)–(46) and (29)–(30) is that we have
substituted in the expression for the equilibrium interest rate from (20), r = α(η − 1)/η · y/κ,
which continues to hold in the closed economy. The closed economy dynamics depend on an
additional state variable—the capital stock, κ.
       Appendix A.8 further solves the planner’s problem and characterizes the optimal poli-
cies in the closed economy. The main new result is that the planner no longer keeps the
intertemporal margin undistorted, and chooses to encourage worker’s savings in the early
phase of transition, provided x/κ is low enough. This allows the economy to accumulate
  46
     Interestingly, the long-run optimal tax rate is the same for all θ ≥ 0, as a consequence of our assumption
that entrepreneurs are more impatient than workers, δ > ρ. When δ = ρ, the long-run tax depends on θ and
can be negative for θ large enough.
  47
     Another interesting case, which we do not consider here, is that of a large open economy, in which
the optimal unilateral policy additionally factors in the incentives to manipulate the country’s intra- and
intertemporal terms of trade (see, for example, Costinot, Lorenzoni, and Werning, 2013).



                                                      35
capital, κ, faster, which in turn raises output and profits, and speeds up entrepreneurial
wealth accumulation. The long-run intertemporal wedge may be positive, negative or zero,
depending on how large x/κ is in the steady state. The qualitative prediction for the la-
bor wedge remain the same as in the small open economy: an initial labor supply subsidy
is replaced eventually by a labor supply tax after entrepreneurs have accumulated enough
wealth.48


6.3     Nontradables and the real exchange rate
In this section we reinterpret our framework to feature two sectors—a tradable sector with
financially constrained entrepreneurs and a frictionless non-tradable sector. Although very
stylized, the advantage of this formulation is that it maps directly into our setup of Section 2
without any adjustment to the modeling structure. Furthermore, it is a realistic first ap-
proximation if one thinks of the non-tradable sector as less capital intensive and with firms
operating on a smaller scale, hence less subject to financing constraints. The assumption
that the non-tradable sector is frictionless is also adopted by Caballero and Lorenzoni (2007).
We here present this reinterpretation of our framework for illustrative purposes and leave a
full treatment of a multisector economy with both tradable and non-tradable sectors that
are all subject to financial constraints for future research.
   Specifically, we think of an environment with workers having utility over tradable and
                                  
non-tradable goods, U c(t), cN (t) , who inelastically supply one unit of labor. For simplic-
ity, entrepreneurs consume only tradables, but this assumption can be easily relaxed. Labor
supply is split between the tradable sector, `(t), and the non-tradable sector, `N (t) = 1−`(t).
Production in the non-tradable sector uses only labor with a constant returns technology,
yN (t) = AN (t)`N (t), and the market for non-tradables is competitive. Assuming constant
non-tradable productivity and normalizing AN (t) ≡ 1, this economy is mathematically iso-
morphic to the one described in Section 2, with leisure replaced by non-tradable consumption,
cN = yN = 1 − `. The wage rate now equals the price of non-tradables, pN (t) = w(t), main-
taining the tradable good as numeraire. The equilibrium characterization in Lemma 2 still
applies with y(t) now denoting tradable output, or aggregate revenues of the tradable sector.
  48
     Formally, we show that, in the absence of transfers, the optimal tax on labor supply and worker savings
satisfy:
                                                                                   
          c                   x(t) α                          c                1 x(t) α           
         τ` (t) = 1 + (η − 1)          1 − ν(t)      and      τb (t) = r(t) 1 −            1 − ν(t) ,
                              κ(t) η                                            γ κ(t) η

where ν(t) is again the co-state for x(t).


                                                    36
       Furthermore, the planner’s problems studied in Section 4 also stays unchanged and
Lemma 3 still applies, with an interpretational change that instead of subsidizing labor
supply the planner is using a tax on non-tradable goods, τN (t) ≡ −τ` (t), to manipulate the
demand for non-tradables (which is the counterpart to the labor supply condition (28)):

                                            UN
                                               = (1 + τN )pN ,
                                            Uc

with the tax revenues rebated lump-sum back to the households. An alternative equivalent
implementation uses a labor tax in the non-tradable sector, creating a wedge between the
wage rate and the cost of labor for non-tradable firms.
       Since this environment is mathematically isomorphic to the one studied in Sections 2–4,
the characterization of the optimal policy in Propositions 1–3 still applies, and the planner
now optimally taxes the non-tradable sector (either consumption or labor supply) in the
early phases of transition, which is equivalent to a labor supply subsidy to the tradable
sector. This has additional implications for the real exchange rate, which in this model is
pinned down by the net (after-tax) price of non-tradables, (1+τN )p. Since the planner makes
non-tradables more expensive during the initial phase of transition, the economy faces an
appreciated real exchange rate.
       This conclusion contrasts with the prescriptions to devalue the exchange rate obtained
by Rodrik (2008), Korinek and Serven (2010) and Benigno and Fornaro (2012) in economies
featuring a version of learning-by-doing externality. As we argued in the end of Section 4.2,
the reduced-form version of our economy looks similar to an economy with learning-by-
doing externality, so what is the source of this difference? Indeed, it arises only because
we do not rule out a static instrument (i.e., a tax on non-tradables), which as we show in
Proposition 1 dominates the intertemporal instrument (e.g., a savings subsidy, or capital
controls under an alternative implementation, as in Jeanne, 2012). In Appendix A.9, we
show that if the static tax is not available, the planner indeed encourages savings in the
early transition, which in turn leads to a depreciated real exchange rate.49 Therefore, the
real exchange rate implications of the optimal policy crucially depend on which instruments
are available, even when the nature of inefficiency remains the same. This emphasizes that
the real exchange rate might not be a particularly useful guide for policymakers, as there is
  49
     The static tax instrument may be infeasible because of binding trade agreements or if it is hard to
distinguish tradable from non-tradable labor supply for taxation purposes. The intertemporal wedge tilts
the path of consumption and aims to both reduce the demand for non-tradables and increase the labor supply
to the tradable sectors via an income effect. This leads to higher exports and net foreign asset accumulation,
which is however accompanied by an inflow of productive capital to satisfy increased capital demand.


                                                     37
no robust theoretical link between this variable and growth-promoting policy interventions.


6.4       Comparative advantage and industrial policies
To illustrate the main new insight, we consider here the simplest multisector extension of
the model which allows for intratemporal trade with comparative advantage, while Ap-
pendix A.10 describes a more general environment. In particular, we consider a small open
economy with perfect capital mobility producing two goods traded at the world prices, p∗1
and p∗2 . Aggregate labor is supplied inelastically and split between the two sectors. Each
sector is exactly as described in Section 2, and in particular Lemma 2 applies now at the
sectoral level. Specifically, the sectoral output, by analogy with (17), is a function of sectoral
labor supply `i and sectoral entrepreneurial wealth xi : yi = Θi xγi `1−γ
                                                                      i   for i = 1, 2.
       We assume that sectors are symmetric in everything except their latent comparative
advantage which is given by p∗i Θi .50 As reflected in its definition following (17), Θi may
differ across sectors due to either physical productivity Ai or financial constraints λi , which
for example depend on the pledgeability of sectoral assets. The actual comparative advantage
is also shaped by the allocation of sectoral entrepreneurial wealth, xi , which accumulates
according to analogues of (22). In the short run, the country may specialize against its latent
comparative advantage, if entrepreneurs in that sector are poorly capitalized (as was pointed
out in Wynne, 2005). In the long-run, the latent comparative advantage forces dominate,
and entrepreneurial wealth relocates towards the sector with the highest p∗i Θi .
       Appendix A.10 characterizes the decentralized allocation in this economy, and sets up the
planner’s problem that maximizes the welfare of workers by choosing the dynamic allocation
of labor supply across sectors. We show that the planner chooses to distort the decentralized
allocation, and instead of equalizing marginal revenue products of labor across the two
sectors, tilts the labor supply towards the latent comparative advantage sector. This is
because the planner’s allocation is not only shaped by the current labor productivity, which
is increasing in current xi , but also takes into account the shadow value of the sectoral
entrepreneurial wealth (denoted νi and defined by the analogs of (35)), which depends on
the latent comparative advantage p∗i Θi . Figure 6 provides an illustration by plotting the
  50
     The difference between autarky and open economy relative prices determines comparative advantage.
Assuming the final good is homothetic in the two sectoral outputs, and if both sectors are active in the
long-run (as, for example, with a Cobb-Douglas final good), the long-run autarky relative price is given by
                                                                                     ∗  ∗
pA   A
 1 /p2 = Θ2 /Θ1 . A small open economy instead takes international relative price p1 /p2 as given. Hence the
        ∗        ∗
ratio (p1 Θ1 )/(p2 Θ2 ) determines the country’s long-run comparative advantage. See Section 5 of Lucas (1988)
for a general analysis of relative price dynamics in an environment with a learning-by-doing externality.



                                                     38
                   ( a) Subs idy t o Se c t or 1                              ( b) Se c t or al We alt h, x i
                                                             2.5
0.24
                                                              2
0.22                                                                                   Se c t or 1
                                                             1.5
 0.2
                                                              1
0.18                                                                          Se c t or 2
                                                             0.5
0.16
                                                              0
    0         20           40          60          80          0         20           40             60         80
                            Ye ar s                                                    Ye ar s

                         Figure 6: Planner’s allocation in a two-sector economy
Note: The sectors are symmetric in everything (including the initial entrepreneurial wealth), but their latent
comparative advantage: p∗1 Θ1 > p∗2 Θ2 , i.e. Sector 1 has the latent comparative advantage. Panel (a) plots
the labor supply subsidy to the comparative advantage Sector 1; the long-run level of the subsidy is not
consequential, as the comparative disadvantage Sector 2 shrinks to zero. Panel (b) plots the evolution of
the sectoral entrepreneurial wealth under the decentralized allocation (dashed lines) and under the planner’s
allocation (solid lines).


dynamics of the optimal labor subsidy to the comparative advantage sector and the resulting
paths of the sectoral entrepreneurial wealth. The planner favors the comparative advantage
sector and speeds up the relocation of factors towards it, consistent with some popular policy
prescriptions (see Lin, 2012, and other references in the Introduction).



7        Conclusion
The presence of financial frictions opens the door for welfare-improving government inter-
ventions in product and factor markets. We develop a framework to study the Ramsey
optimal interventions which accelerate economic development in financially underdeveloped
economies. In this framework, financial frictions justify a policy intervention that reduces
wages and increases labor supply in the early stages of transition so as to speed up en-
trepreneurial wealth accumulation and to generate higher labor productivity and wages in
the long-run.
       To gain a better understanding of the optimal development policies and their implica-
tions for a country’s growth dynamics, we set up our Ramsey problem in as tractable an
environment as possible. By making a number of strong assumptions, we obtain a sharp


                                                        39
analytical characterization of the optimal policies and a precise qualitative understanding of
the mechanisms at play, which are likely to persist in more detailed and complex quantitative
models with financial frictions.
   Our framework is also tractable enough to be extended in a number of different direc-
tions. For example, we can study the Ramsey-optimal policies in a heterogeneous multisector
economy where each sector differs in the extent of financial frictions, comparative advantage
and tradability of the output, so as to relate to the popular discussion of exchange rate
and industrial policies. Another natural application of our framework is an analysis of the
optimal policy response to transitory shocks and the resulting cyclical fluctuations.




                                             40
A      Appendix
A.1      Frisch labor supply elasticity
For any utility function u(c, `) defined over consumption c and labor `, consider the system of
equations

                                             uc (c, `) = µ,                                       (A1)
                                             u` (c, `) = −µw.                                     (A2)

These two equations define ` and c as a function of the marginal utility µ and the wage rate w.
The solution for ` is called the Frisch labor supply function and we denote it by ` = `F (µ, w). We
assumed that the utility function features a positive and finite Frisch labor supply elasticity for all
(µ, w):
                                    ∂ log `F (µ, w)          1
                          ε(µ, w) ≡                 =               2  ∈ (0, ∞),                 (A3)
                                        ∂ log w       u`` `
                                                         u` − (uc` ) `
                                                                 ucc u`

where the second equality comes from a full differential of (A1)–(A2) under constant µ, which we
simplify using w = −u` /uc implied by the ratio of (A1) and (A2). Therefore, the condition we
impose on the utility function is:

                              u`` `   (uc` )2 `
                                    >               ⇔         u`` ucc > (uc` )2                   (A4)
                               u`      ucc u`

for all possible pairs (c, `). Due to convexity of u(·), this in particular implies u`` < 0.


A.2      Value and policy functions of entrepreneurs
Lemma A1 Consider an entrepreneur with logarithmic utility, discount factor δ and budget con-
straint ȧ = Rt (z)a − ce for some Rt (z), where z is iid over time. Then his consumption policy
function is ce = δa and his expected value starting from initial assets a0 is
                                                           ˆ
                                 1             1          1 ∞ −δt
                     V0 (a0 ) = − (1 − log δ) + log a0 +         e Ez Rt (z)dt.            (A5)
                                 δ             δ          δ 0

Proof: This derivation follows the proof of Lemma 2 in Moll (2014). Denote by vt (a, z) the value
to an entrepreneur with assets a and productivity z at time t, which can be expressed recursively
as (see Chapter 2 in Stokey, 2009):
                                                                                 
                                       1
              δvt (a, z) = max log ce + E{dvt (a, z)}, s.t. da = [Rt (z)a − ce ]dt .
                            ce         dt

The value function depends on calendar time t because prices and taxes vary over time. In the
absence of aggregate shocks, from the point of view of entrepreneurs, calendar time is a “sufficient
statistic” for the evolution of the distribution Gt (a, z).
   The proof proceeds with a guess and verify strategy. Guess that the value function takes the
form vt (a, z) = Bṽt (z)+B log a. Using this guess we have that E{dvt (a, z)} = Bda/a+BE{dṽt (z)}.


                                                    41
Rewrite the value function:
                                                                               
                                                  B               1
              δBṽt (z) + δB log a = max log ce +   Rt (z)a − ce + B E{dṽt (z)} .
                                      ce          a                 dt

Take first order condition to obtain ce = a/B. Substituting back in,

                                                                                                      1
                 δBṽt (z) + δB log a = log a − log B + BRt (z) − 1 + B                                  E{dṽt (z)}.
                                                                                                      dt
Collecting the terms involving log a, we see that B = 1/δ so that ce = δa and ȧ = [Rt (z) − δ]a, as
claimed in (13) in the text.
    Finally, the value function is

                                                               1                
                                          vt (a, z) =            ṽt (z) + log a ,                                      (A6)
                                                               δ
confirming the initial conjecture, where ṽt (z) satisfies

                                                                                          1
                              δṽt (z) = δ(log δ − 1) + Rt (z) +                             E{dṽt (z)}.               (A7)
                                                                                          dt
Next we calculate expected value:
                                          ˆ
                                                                                      1             
                             V0 (a0 ) =         v0 (a0 , z)gz (z)dz =                   Ṽ0 + log a0 ,
                                                                                      δ
                                            ´
where gz (·) is the pdf of z and Ṽ0 ≡            ṽ0 (z)gz (z)dz. Integrating (A7):
                                                                       ˆ
                               δ Ṽt = δ(log δ − 1) +                        Rt (z)gz (z)dz + Ṽ˙ t ,                   (A8)

where we have used that (under regularity conditions so that we can exchange the order of inte-
gration)     ˆ                              ˆ               
                1                       1                         1
                   E{dṽt (z)}gz (z)dz = E d ṽt (z)gz (z)dz = E{dṼt } = Ṽ˙ t .
                dt                      dt                        dt
Integrating (A8) forward in time:
                                                          ˆ    ∞             ˆ                      
                                                                       −δt
                             Ṽ0 = log δ − 1 +                     e              Rt (z)gz (z)dz dt,
                                                           0

and hence                                                                         ˆ   ∞
                             1             1         1
                 V0 (a0 ) = − (1 − log δ) + log a0 +                                      e−δt Ez {Rt (z)}dt.      
                             δ             δ         δ                            0


    We now calculate the average return in our model:
                    ˆ                   ˆ                           + !                         
                                                  ∗            z             −η−1       ∗     λ −η
    Ez {Rt (z)} =       Rt (z)dG(z) =         r           1+λ      −1     ηz      dz = r 1 +     z   ,
                                                              z(t)                           η−1




                                                                   42
where we used (9) and (11) to express Rt (z) and integrated using the Pareto productivity distri-
bution. Finally, using (18), we can rewrite:
                                                                 
                                                ∗  α y x(t), `(t)
                                 Ez {Rt (z)} = r +                 ,
                                                   η    x(t)

which corresponds to equation (23) in the text. Substituting it into (A5) results in expression (43)
in the text. A similar derivation can be immediately applied to the case with an asset subsidy,
ςx (t), as long as it is finite.


A.3       Inefficiency of decentralized equilibrium
Proposition A1 Consider a (small) transfer of wealth x̂0 = −b̂0 > 0 at t = 0 from a representative
household uniformly to all entrepreneurs and a reverse transfer at time t0 > 0 equal to
                               (         ˆ t0                )
                                  ∗ 0         α y x(t), `(t)            ∗ 0
                        x̂0 exp r t + γ                      dt > x̂0 er t ,
                                          0   η    x(t)

holding constant `(t) and ce (t) for all t ≥ 0. Such perturbation strictly improves the welfare of
workers and leaves the welfare of all entrepreneurs unchanged, constituting a Pareto improvement.

Proof: For any time path {c, `, b, x, ce }t≥0 satisfying the household and entrepreneurs budget
constraints:

                                  ḃ(t) = (1 − α)y x(t), `(t) + r∗ b(t) − c(t),
                                                             
                                                                                               (A9)
                                          α
                                  ẋ(t) = y x(t), `(t) + r∗ x(t) − ce (t),
                                                      
                                                                                              (A10)
                                          η

starting from (b0 , x0 ), consider a perturbation x̃(t) ≡ x(t) + β x̂(t), where β is a scalar and x̂
is a differentiable function from R+ to R, and similarly for other variables. Finally, consider
perturbations such that:

                                        x̂(0) = −b̂(0) = x̂0 > 0,
                                           ˆ = ĉe (t) = 0
                                           `(t)                ∀t ≥ 0,
                                                    ĉ(t) = 0   ∀t ∈ [0, t0 ],

         ˜ b̃, x̃, c̃e }t∈(0,t0 ) satisfy (A9)–(A10).
and {c̃, `,
    For such perturbations, we Taylor-expand (A9)–(A10) around β = 0 for t ∈ (0, t0 ):
                                                           
                             ˙               ∂y x(t), `(t)
                             b̂(t) = (1 − α)                 x̂(t) + r∗ b̂(t),
                                                  ∂x
                                     α ∂y x(t), `(t)
                             ˙
                            x̂(t)  =                  x̂(t) + r∗ b̂(t),
                                     η       ∂x




                                                          43
with x̂(0) = −b̂(0) = x̂0 . Note that these equations are linear in x̂(t) and b̂(t), and we can integrate
them on (0, t) for t ≤ t0 to obtain:
                                           ˆ t                                     
                                     r∗ t        r∗ (t−t̃)         ∂y x(t̃), `(t̃)
                       b̂(t) = −x̂0 e +         e          (1 − α)                   x̂(t̃)dt̃,
                                              0                        ∂x
                                       (ˆ                               ! )
                                            t
                                                α ∂y x(t̃), `(t̃)      ∗
                      x̂(t) = x̂0 exp                               + r dt̃ ,
                                          0     η          ∂x

     Therefore, by t = t0 , we have a cumulative deviation in the state variables equal to:
                              "    ( ˆ 0                )    !           ˆ t0                               #
                                       t   y x(t), `(t)                                y x(t), `(t)
                          ∗ 0            α                                        ∗  α                x̂(t)
x̂(t0− )+b̂(t0− ) = x̂0 er t    exp γ                   dt − 1 + (1 − γ)       e−r t                        dt
                                      0 η     x(t)                         0         η    x(t)         x̂0

where t0− denotes an instant before t0 , and we have used the functional form for y(·) and definition
of γ in (17), which imply ∂y/∂x = γy/x and (1 − α)γ = (1 − γ)α/η. Both terms inside the
square bracket are positive (since x̂(t)/x̂0 > 1 due to the accumulation of the initial transfer). The
first term is positive due to the higher return the entrepreneurs make on the initial transfer x̂0
relative to households. The second term represents the increase in worker wages associated with
the higher entrepreneurial wealth, which leads to an improved allocation of resources and higher
labor productivity.51
       At t = t0 , a reverse transfer from entrepreneurs to workers equal to
                                           (          ˆ t0                )
                                                           α y x(t), `(t)
                                    x̂0 exp r∗ t0 + γ                     dt
                                                       0 η      x(t)

result in x̂(t0 ) = 0 and b̂(t0 ) > 0, which allows to have ĉ(t) = r∗ b̂(t0 ) > 0 for all t ≥ t0 , with
ˆ = ĉe (t) = 0. This constitutes a Pareto improvement since the new allocation has the same
`(t)
labor supply by workers and consumption by entrepreneurs with a strictly higher consumption for
          ˜ = `(t), c̃e (t) = ce (t), c̃(t) ≥ c(t) for all t ≥ 0 and with strict inequality for t ≥ t0 . 
workers: `(t)


A.4         Optimality conditions for the planner’s problem
Consider the more general problem (P2). The present-value Hamiltonian for this problem is
given by:

H = u(c, 1−`)+µ (1−α)y(x, `)+r∗ b−c−ςx x +µν αη y(x, `)+(r∗ +ςx −δ)x +µξ(S−ς
                                                                       ¯
                                                                 
                                                                             x x)+µξ(ςx x−s),


where we have introduced two additional Lagrange multipliers µξ¯ and µξ for the corresponding
bounds on transfers. The full set of optimality conditions is given by:
  51
       Note that for small t0 , we have the following limiting characterization:
                                                                     
                                   x̂(t0 ) + b̂(t0 )   α y x(0), `(0)
                                                     →                 as t0 → 0,
                                         x̂0 t0        η     x(0)

which corresponds to the average return differential between entrepreneurs and workers, Ez R0 (z) − r∗ .


                                                        44
                       ∂H
                   0=        = uc − µ,                                                         (A11)
                       ∂c
                       ∂H                               y
                   0=        = −u` + µ 1 − γ + γν (1 − α) ,                                    (A12)
                       ∂`                                `
                       ∂H
                             = µx ν − 1 − ξ¯ + ξ ,
                                                
                   0=                                                                          (A13)
                       ∂ςx
                       ∂H
           µ̇ − ρµ = −       = −µr∗ ,                                                          (A14)
                       ∂b
         ˙ − ρµν = −   ∂H                           α y
                                                         − µν(r∗ − δ) − µςx ν − 1 − ξ¯ + ξ ,
                                                                                          
       (µν)                  = −µ 1 − γ + γν                                                   (A15)
                       ∂x                            ηx

where we have used the fact that ∂y/∂` = (1 − γ)y/` and ∂y/∂x = γy/x which follow from the
definition of y(·) in (17), as well as the definition of γ. Additionally, we have two complementary
slackness conditions for the bounds-on-transfers constraints:

                            ξ¯ ≥ 0,      ςx x ≤ S     and      ξ > 0,      ςx x ≥ s.           (A16)

   Under our parameter restriction ρ = r∗ , (A14) and (A11) imply:

                                   µ̇ = 0      ⇒      uc (t) = µ(t) ≡ µ̄     ∀t.

With this, (A12) becomes (34) in the text. Given µ ≡ µ̄ and r∗ = ρ and (A13), (A15) becomes
(35) in the text. Finally, (A13) can be rewritten as:

                                                 ν − 1 = ξ¯ − ξ.

When both bounds are slack, (A16) implies ξ¯ = ξ = 0, and therefore ν = 1. When the upper
bound is binding, ν − 1 = ξ¯ > 0, and when the lower bound is binding ν − 1 = −ξ < 0. Therefore,
we obtain the complementary slackness condition (41) in the text.

The case with no transfers (S = −s = 0) results in planner’s problem (P1) with Hamil-
tonian provided in footnote 26. The optimality conditions in this case are (A11), (A12), (A14)
and
                      ˙ − ρµν = − ∂H = −µ 1 − γ + γν  α y − µν(r∗ − δ),
                    (µν)
                                   ∂x                    ηx
which also results in (35) after simplification.

The case with unbounded transfers (S = −s = +∞) allows to simplify the problem
considerably, as described in footnote 35. Indeed, in this case we defined a single state variable
m ≡ b + x and combine the two constraints in problem (P2), to write the resulting problem as:
                               ˆ ∞
                      max          e−ρt u(c, 1 − `)dt                                        (P3)
                    {c,`,x,m}t≥0     0

                                            ṁ = 1 − α + α/η y(x, `) + r∗ m − δx − c,
                                                            
                        subject to



                                                       45
with a corresponding present-value Hamiltonian:

                     H = u(c, 1 − `) + µ 1 − α + α/η y(x, `) + r∗ m − δx − c ,
                                                                          


with the optimality conditions given by (A11), (A14) and

                                       ∂H                  y
                                    0=    = −u` + µ(1 − α) ,                                    (A17)
                                       ∂`               `
                                       ∂H           αy
                                    0=    = µ −δ +        .                                     (A18)
                                       ∂x           ηx

(A17) immediately implies τ` (t) ≡ 0, and (A18) pins down x/` at each instant. The required
transfer is then backed out from the aggregate entrepreneurial wealth dynamics (30).

The case with bounded transfers Consider the case with S < ∞. There are two possibili-
ties: (a) s ≤ −r∗ x̄, as discussed in the text; and (b) r∗ x̄ < s ≤ 0, which we consider first. In this
case there are two regions:

   1. for x < x̄, ςx x = S binds, ξ¯ = ν − 1 > 0 and ξ = 0. This immediately implies τ` =
      γ(1 − ν) < 0, and the dynamics of (x, τ` ) is as in Proposition 1, with the difference that
      ẋ = αy/η + (r∗ − δ)x + S with S > 0 rather than S = 0.

   2. when x = x̄ is reached, the economy switches to the steady state regime with ς¯x x̄ = s < 0
      binding, and hence ν − 1 = −ξ < 0 and ξ¯ = 0, in which:

                                        α y x̄, `¯
                                                  
                                                                 s
                                                    = (δ − r∗ ) − < δ,
                                        η x̄                     x̄
                                                              γ
                                  τ̄` = γ 1 − ν̄ =                        > 0.
                                                      γ + (1 − γ) r∗δx̄+s
                                                                      x̄



      When this regime (steady state) is reached, there is a jump from labor supply subsidy to a
      labor supply tax, as well as a switch in the aggregate transfer to entrepreneurs from S to s.

In the alternative case when s < −r∗ x̄, the first region is the same, and in steady state ς¯x x̄ =
−r∗ x̄ > s and hence the constraint is not binding: ξ = ξ¯ = ν̄ − 1 = τ̄` = 0. The steady state in this
case is characterized by (A17)–(A18), and ς¯x = −r∗ ensures ẋ = 0 at x̄. In this case, τ` continuously
increases to zero when steady state is reached, and the aggregate transfer to entrepreneurs jumps
from S to −r∗ x̄.


A.5      Proof of Proposition 1
Consider (32), (37) and (38). Under our parameter restriction ρ = r∗ , the households’ marginal
utility is constant over time µ(t) = uc (t) = µ̄ for all t. Using the definition of the Frisch labor
supply function (see Appendix A.1), (19) and (17), (37) can be written as
                                                                 
                                ` = `F µ̄, (1 − τ` )(1 − α)Θ(x/`)γ .


                                                   46
For given (µ̄, τ` , x), this is a fixed point problem in `, and given positive and finite Frisch elastic-
ity (A3) (i.e., under the condition on the utility function (A4)) one can show that it has a unique
solution, which we denote by ` = `(x, τ` ), where we suppress the dependence on µ̄ for notational
simplicity. Note that

                ∂ log `(x, τ` )     εγ                             ∂ log `(x, τ` )      ε
                                =        ∈ (0, 1),                                 =        ∈ (0, 1/γ)                       (A19)
                   ∂ log x        1 + εγ                           ∂ log(1 − τ` )    1 + εγ

where the bounds follow from (A3). Substituting `(x, τ` ) into (38) and (32), we have a system of
two autonomous ODEs in (τ` , x)

                                                               `(x, τ` ) 1−γ
                                                                       
                                                        α
                              τ̇` = δ(τ` − γ) + γ 1 − τ` Θ                   ,
                                                         η        x
                                    α
                               ẋ = Θxγ `(x, τ` )1−γ + (r∗ − δ)x.
                                    η

We now show that the dynamics of this system in (τ` , x) space can be described with the phase
diagram in Figure 1.

Steady State We first show that there exists a unique positive steady state (τ̄` , x̄), i.e. a solution
to
                                                                      1−γ
                                            α            `(x̄, τ̄` )
                                γ (1 − τ̄` ) Θ                                = δ(γ − τ̄` ),                                 (A20)
                                            η               x̄
                                                                      1−γ
                                               α         `(x̄, τ̄` )
                                                 Θ                            = δ − r∗ .                                     (A21)
                                               η            x̄

Substituting (A21) into (A20) and rearranging, we obtain the expression for τ̄` in (39). From (A21),
x̄ is then the solution to the fixed point problem
                                                              1
                                               α Θ             1−γ
                                    x̄ =                               `(x̄, τ̄` ) ≡ Φ(x̄)                                   (A22)
                                               η δ − r∗

Depending on the properties of the Frisch labor supply function, there may be a trivial solution
x̄ = 0. We instead focus on positive steady states. Consider ε(µ, w) from (A3) and define
                                                                                   ε1 γ                            ε2 γ
     ε1 ≡ min ε(µ̄, w) > 0,     ε2 ≡ max ε(µ̄, w) < ∞,                    θ1 ≡            > 0,         θ2 ≡               < 1.
            w                              w                                     1 + ε1 γ                        1 + ε2 γ

From (A19), there are constants k1 and k2 such that k1 xθ1 ≤ `(x, τ̄` ) ≤ k2 xθ2 . Since θ1 > 0, θ2 < 1,
there are x1 > 0 sufficiently small and x2 < ∞ sufficiently large such that Φ(x1 ) > x1 and
Φ(x2 ) < x2 . Finally, taking logs on both sides of (A22), we have
                                                                                                               1

                           ˜        ˜ ≡ log `(exp(x̃), τ̄` ),                                    α Θ            1−γ
                 x̃ = Θ̃ + `(x̃),   `(x̃)                                      Θ̃ ≡ log                                      (A23)
                                                                                                 η δ − r∗

                  ˜ 1 ) > x̃1 and Θ̃ + `(x̃
satisfying Θ̃ + `(x̃                    ˜ 2 ) < x̃2 , where x̃j ≡ log xj , for j ∈ {1, 2}. From (A19), we
have 0 < `˜0 (x̃) < 1 for all x̃ and therefore (A23) has a unique fixed point x̃1 < log x̄ < x̃2 .


                                                              47
Transition dynamics (A21) implicitly defines a function x = φ(τ` ), which is the ẋ = 0 locus.
We have that
                                                       ∂ log `
                                ∂ log φ(τ` )    ∂ log(1−τ` )
                                              =              = ε ∈ (0, ∞).
                               ∂ log(1 − τ` )   1 − ∂∂ log
                                                       log `
                                                           x

Therefore the ẋ = 0 locus is strictly downward-sloping in (x, τ` ) space, as drawn in Figure 1. The
τ̇` = 0 locus may be non-monotonic, but we know that the two loci intersect only once (the steady
state is unique). The state space can then be divided into four quadrants. It is easy to see that
τ̇` > 0 for all points to the north-west of the τ̇` = 0 locus, and ẋ > 0 for all points to the south-west
of the ẋ = 0 locus, as indicated by the arrows in Figure 1. It then follows that the system is
saddle path stable. Assuming Inada conditions on the utility function and given output function
y(·) defined in (17), the saddle path is the unique solution to the planner’s problem (P1).
    Now consider points (x, τ` ) along the saddle path. There is a threshold x̂ such that τ` < 0
whenever x < x̂ and vice versa, that is labor supply is subsidized when wealth is sufficiently low.
There is an alternative argument for this result along the lines of footnote 27. Equation (35) can
be solved forward to yield:
                                   ˆ ∞ ´
                                           t
                            ν(0) =      e− 0 (δ−αyx (s)/η)ds (1 − α)yx (t)dt,
                                      0

with x(0) = x0 and where yx (t) ≡ ∂y(x(t), `(t))/∂x = γy(x(t), `(t))/x(t) ∝ (`(t)/x(t))1−γ . The
marginal product of x, yx , is unbounded as x → 0. Therefore, for low enough x0 , we must have
ν(0) > 1 and hence τ` (0) < 0. 


A.6      Additional tax instruments (proof of Proposition 4)
We first prove an equilibrium characterization result, analogous to Lemma 2:

Lemma A2 When subsidies (ςx , ςπ , ςy , ςk , ςw ) are used, the output function is given by:
                                                      γ(η−1)
                                              1 + ςy
                                     y=                          Θxγ `1−γ ,                        (A24)
                                              1 − ςk

where Θ and γ are defined as in Lemma 2, and we have:

                                                        1 − ςk ηλ r∗ x
                                               zη =                      ,
                                                        1 + ςy η − 1 α y
                                    (1 − ςw )w` = (1 − α)(1 + ςy )y,
                                                    η−1
                                    (1 − ςk )r∗ κ =     α(1 + ςy )y,
                                                      η
                                                    α
                                               Π = (1 + ςy )y.
                                                    η




                                                        48
Proof: Consider the profit maximization problem (42) in this case. The solution to this problem
is given by:

                                       k = λa1{z≥z} ,
                                                     (1 + ς y )A 1/α
                                                                
                                       ` = (1 − α)                   zk,
                                                    (1 − ς w )w
                                                 
                                             z
                                       π=      − 1 (1 − ς k )r∗ k,
                                             z

where the cutoff is defined by the zero-profit condition:
                                                                     1−α
                                         1/α            1−α           α
                            α (1 + ς y )A                                    z = (1 − ς k )r∗ .
                             
                                                                                                              (A25)
                                                       (1 − ς w )w

Finally, labor demand in the sector is given by:

                                             (1 + ς y )A 1/α ηλ
                                                        
                                 ` = (1 − α)                    xz 1−η ,                                      (A26)
                                             (1 − ς w )w    η−1

and aggregate output is given by:
                                                      1−α
                                          (1 + ς y )
                                
                                                        α        ηλ
                             y = (1 − α)       w
                                                           A1/α     xz 1−η .                                  (A27)
                                         (1 − ς )w              η−1

Combining these three conditions, we solve for z, w and y, which result in the first three equations
of the lemma. Aggregate capital demand and profits in this case are still given by:

                                  κ = λxz −η              and        Π = κ/(η − 1),

and combining these with the solution for z η we obtain the last two equations of the lemma. 

    The immediate implication of this lemma is that asset and profit subsidies do not affect the
equilibrium relationships directly, but do so only indirectly through their affect on aggregate en-
trepreneurial wealth.
   With this characterization, and given that the subsidies are financed by a lump-sum tax on
households, we can write the planners problem as
                                             ˆ ∞
                                                 e−ρt u c(t), `(t) dt
                                                                  
                                  max                                                    (P4)
                                 {c,`,b,x,ςx ,ςπ ,ςk ,ςw ,ςy } 0

subject to
                                                               
                              ςy         ςk η − 1             α
        c + ḃ ≤ (1 − α) −          −                  α − ςπ     (1 + ςy )y(x, `, ςy , ςk ) + r∗ b − ςx x,
                            1 + ςy    1 − ςk η                η
                         α
           ẋ = (1 + ςπ ) (1 + ςy )y(x, `, ςy , ςk ) + (r∗ + ςx − δ)x,
                         η



                                                              49
where y(x, `, ςy , ςk ) is defined in (A24) and the negative terms in the square brackets correspond
to lump-sum taxes levied to finance the respective subsidies. Note that ςw drops out from the
constraints, and it can be recovered from

                               uc                1 + ς`                   y
                           −      = (1 + ς` )w =        · (1 + ςy )(1 − α) ,
                               u`                1 − ςw                   `

assuming ς` = 0, otherwise there is implementational indeterminacy since ς` and ςw are perfectly
substitutable policy instruments as long as ςw = ς` /(1 + ς` ).
    When unbounded asset or profit subsidies are available, we can aggregate the two constraints
in (P4) in the same way we did in Appendix A.4 in planner’s problem (P3) by defining a single
state variable m ≡ b + x. The corresponding Hamiltonian in this case is:
               "                                                                               #
                                                      (1 + ςy )1+γ(η−1)
                                                    
                          α     ςy       ςk η − 1
H = u(c, `)+µ 1 − α + −              −            α                     Θxγ `1−γ + r∗ m − δx − c ,
                          η   1 + ςy   1 − ςk η        (1 − ςk )γ(η−1)

where we have substituted (A24) for y. The optimality with respect to (ςy , ςk ) evaluated at ςy =
ςk = 0 are, after simplification:

                         ∂H                          1
                                           ∝−               + 1 + γ(η − 1) = 0,
                         ∂ςy   ςy =ςk =0        1 − α + α/η
                                                   η−1
                         ∂H                         η α
                                           ∝−                 + γ(η − 1) = 0,
                         ∂ςk   ςy =ςk =0        1 − α + α/η

and combining ∂H/∂c = 0 and ∂H/∂` = 0, both evaluated at ςy = ςk = 0, we have:

                                            u` /uc = (1 − α)y/`.

Finally, optimality with respect to m implies as before µ̇ = 0 and uc (t) = µ(t) ≡ µ̄ for all t. This
implies that whenever profit and/or asset subsidies are available and unbounded, other instruments
are not used:
                                    ςy = ςk = (ς` + ςw ) = ςb = 0.

Indeed, both ςπ and ςy , appropriately chosen, act as transfers between workers and entrepreneurs,
and do not affect any equilibrium choices directly, in particular do not affect y(·), as can be seen
from (A24). This is the reason why these instruments are favored over other distortionary ways to
affect the dynamics of entrepreneurial wealth.
    Examining (42), we see that the following combination of taxes ςy = −ςk = −ςw = ς is equivalent
to a profit subsidy ςπ = ς, and therefore whenever these three instruments are jointly available,
they are used in this way to replicate a profit subsidy.
   Next, in planner’s problem (P4) we restrict ς a = ς π ≡ 0, and write the resulting Hamiltonian:

                                             ςy       ςk η − 1
                                                                                               
                    ∗                                                  y          ∗       α      y
H = u(c, `) + µ r b − c + (1 − α) −               −            α (1 + ς )y + µν (r − δ)a + (1 + ς )y ,
                                           1 + ςy   1 − ςk η                              η




                                                      50
where y is given in (A24). The optimality conditions with respect to b and c are as before, and
result in uc = µ ≡ µ̄. The optimality with respect to x results in a dynamic equation for ν,
analogous to (35). The optimality with respect to ς k , ς y and ` are now given by:
                   y
                              ςk
                                   
         ∂H          ς                   α
            k
              ∝−        y
                          +      k
                                     + (ν − 1) = 0,
         ∂ς        1+ς      1−ς          η
                          y            k
                                           
         ∂H                 ς         ς
              ∝ −(η − 1)         +           + (ν − 1) = 0,
         ∂ς y             1 + ςy    1 − ςk
                            η ςy                    ςk               (1 + ς y )(1 − α)y
                                                                  
         ∂H     u`
              ∝    + 1−γ              −  γ(η − 1)        + γ(ν − 1)                     = 0.
         ∂`     uc          α 1 + ςy              1 − ςk                       `

We consider the case when there is an additional restriction—either ς y = 0 or ς k = 0—so that a
profit subsidy cannot be engineered. We immediately see that in the former case ς k /(1 − ς k ) ∝
ς` ∝ (ν − 1), and in the latter ς y /(1 + ς y ) ∝ −ς` ∝ (ν − 1). The results under the restriction
ςw = ςw = 0 are more tedious to derive, and we omit them for brevity. This completes the proof of
the statements in Proposition 4. 


A.7      Pareto weight on entrepreneurs
Consider an extension to the planning problem (P1) in Section 4.2 (without transfers, ςx ≡ 0)
in which the planner puts a positive Pareto weight θ > 0 on the utilitarian welfare criterion of
                         ´
all entrepreneurs V0 ≡ V0 (a)dGa,0 (a) where V0 (·) is the expected value to an entrepreneur with
initial assets a0 . From Appendix A.2, this value can be written as (43) and therefore
                                    ˆ                    ˆ
                                                        1 ∞ −δt α y x, `
                                                                         
                                  1
                        V0 = v0 +     log a dGa,0 (a) +      e             dt.
                                  δ                     δ 0      η x

Since given the instruments the planner cannot affect the first two terms in V0 , the planner’s
problem in this case can be written as:
                                    ˆ ∞                ˆ
                                                      θ ∞ −δt α y x, `
                                                                      
                                         −ρt
                          max           e u(c, `)dt +     e             dt                (P7)
                       {c,`,b,x}t≥0  0                δ 0     η x
                        subject to     c + ḃ = (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b,
                                                α
                                          ẋ = y(x, `) + (r∗ − δ)x,
                                                η

The Hamiltonian for this problem is:
                                                                                        
                   θ −(δ−ρ)t α y                      ∗
                                                                    α             ∗
      H = u(c, `) + e            + µ (1 − α)y(x, `) + r b − c + µν     y(x, `) + (r − δ)x ,
                   δ         ηx                                      η

and the optimality conditions are uc (t) = µ(t) = µ̄ for all t and:




                                                  51
                                                                         
                            ∂H              θ −(δ−ρ)t γ                            y
                               = u` + µ̄        e           + (1 − γ) + γν (1 − α) = 0,
                            ∂`             δ µ̄           x                        `
                                                                               
                         1 ∂H                       θ −(δ−ρ)t γ                   αy
             ν̇ − ρν = −       = (δ − r∗ )ν −           e        + (1 − γ) + γν      .
                         µ̄ ∂x                     δ µ̄        x                  ηx

The dynamic system characterizing (x, ν) is the same as in Section 4.2 with the exception of an
additional term δθµ̄ e−(δ−ρ)t γx ≥ 0 in the condition above. Similarly, the optimal labor wedge which
we denote by τ`θ is given by (44).


A.8     Closed economy
Lemma 1, as well as aggregation equations (14)–(16) and income accounting equations (19)–(21)
from Lemma 2, still apply in the closed economy. The difference however is that now r is endogenous
and we have an additional equilibrium condition κ = x + b. Substituting in capital demand (14)
into the aggregate production function (16), we obtain (47) which defines y(x, κ, `) in the text. We
can then summarized the planner’s problem in the closed economy as:
                                  ˆ
                        max         e−ρt u(c, `)dt,                                             (PC)
                      {c,`,κ,b,x}
                                                              
                                                        η−1 b
                         subject to ḃ = (1 − α) + α             y(x, κ, `) − c,
                                                         η κ
                                            h          xi α
                                      ẋ = 1 + (η − 1)      y(x, κ, `) − δx
                                                       κ η

and given (b0 , x0 ), κ = x + b, and where we have used (20) to substitute out endogenous interest
rate r.
   To simplify notation, we replace the first constraint with the sum of the two constants to
substitute κ for b + x. The Hamiltonian for this problem is:
                                                      h                               
                                                                   xi α
            H = u(c, `) + µ [y(κ, `, x) − c − δx] + µν 1 + (η − 1)      y(κ, `, x) − δx
                                                                   κ η

and the optimality conditions are:

                          ∂H
                      0=       = uc − µ,
                          ∂c                                    
                          ∂H                  α              x          y
                      0=       = u` + µ 1 + ν    1 + (η − 1)       (1 − α) ,
                          ∂`                  η               κ           `
                          ∂H              α              x         x
              µ̇ − ρµ = −      = −µr − µν     1 + (η − 1)     r + µν r,
                          ∂κ              η               κ          κ
                                                                              
            ˙ − ρµν = − ∂H
          (µν)                 = −µ
                                       αy
                                          − δ − µν
                                                       α
                                                           1 + (η − 1)
                                                                       x α y
                                                                              +r−δ .
                          ∂x           ηx              η               κ ηx




                                                 52
From the second condition we have labor wedge:
                                      
         u`         α              x           y                                α             x
       − = 1+ν          1 + (η − 1)      (1 − α)              ⇒       τ`c = −ν       1 + (η − 1)    .
         uc          η              κ            `                                η              κ

Next we use the other conditions to characterize the intertemporal wedge:
                                                                              
     u̇c                α x          η−1                    c        α x        η−1
         = ρ − r − νr     −     1−α               ⇒       τb = −νr     −    1−α        .
     uc                 η   κ         η                              η   κ       η

Finally, we have:
                                                                        
                        α x         η−1      α             x α y        αy
          ν̇ = δ + νr     −     1−α        −    1 + (η − 1)          ν−      −δ .
                        η   κ        η       η              κ ηx          ηx

This dynamic system can be solved using conventional methods. Note that ν in this problem
corresponds to (ν −1) in the text, as we have used the sum of the two constraint (country aggregate
resource constraint) instead of using the household budget constraint.


A.9      Optimal intertemporal wedge
Assume the planner cannot manipulate the labor supply margin, and only can distort the intertem-
poral margin. The planner’s problem in this case can be written as:
                                    ˆ ∞
                             max         e−ρt u(c, `)dt                                     (P6)
                             {c,`,b,x}t≥0   0

                            subject to          c + ḃ = (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b,
                                                         α
                                                   ẋ = y(x, `) + (r∗ − δ)x,
                                                         η
                                                  uc            y(x, `)
                                                − = (1 − α)             ,
                                                  u`               `

where the last constraint implies that the planner cannot distort labor supply, and we denote by
µψ the Lagrange multiplier on this additional constraint. We can write the Hamiltonian for this
problem as:

H = u(c, `) + µ (1 − α)y(x, `) + r∗ b − c + µν αη y(x, `) + (r∗ − δ)x + µψ (1 − α)y(x, `) − h(c, `) ,
                                                                                              


where h(c, `) ≡ −`u` (c, `)/uc (c, `). The optimality conditions are:

                        ∂H                    
                     0=       = uc − µ 1 + ψhc ,
                        ∂c
                        ∂H                              y                  y    
                    0=        = u` + µ 1 − γ + γν (1 − α) + µψ (1 − γ)(1 − α) − h` ,
                        ∂`                               `                   `
                        ∂H
            µ̇ − ρµ = −       = −µr∗ ,
                        ∂b
          ˙ − ρµν = −   ∂H                          α y                          αy
        (µν)                  = −µ 1 − γ + γν            − µν(r∗ − δ) − µψ(1 − γ)    .
                        ∂x                           ηx                           ηx



                                                      53
Under our parameter restriction ρ = r∗ , the third condition implies µ̇ = 0 and µ(t) ≡ µ̄ for all t,
however, now uc = µ̄(1 + ψhc ) and is no longer constant in general, reflecting the use of the savings
subsidy to workers. Combining this with the second optimality condition and the third constraint
on the planner’s problem, we have:
                                                             
                          y      uc      (1 − γ)(1 + ψ) + γν (1 − α)y/` − ψh`
                   (1 − α) = − =                                                 ,
                          `      u`                    1 + ψhc

which we simplify using h = (1 − α)y:

                                                              γ(ν − 1)
                                              ψ=                              .                                            (A28)
                                                        hc + `h` /h − (1 − γ)

Finally, the dynamics of ν satisfies:
                                                                                       α y
                                      ν̇ = δν − (1 − γ)(1 + ψ) + γν                         ,
                                                                                        ηx

and the distortion to the consumption smoothing satisfies:

                                                                                               γhc
                  uc = µ̄(1 + ψhc ) = µ̄(1 + Γ(ν − 1)),                        Γ≡                           .              (A29)
                                                                                      hc + `h` /h − (1 − γ)

Recall that under ρ = r∗ , u̇c /uc = −ςb , and therefore ςb > 0 whenever ψhc = Γ(ν − 1) is decreasing.


A.10       Multisector model
We consider the simplest setup with multiple sectors: (i) small open economy with perfect capital
mobility; (ii) an arbitrary number of sectors which we denote with i = 1, . . . , n; (iii) all goods are
internationally tradable and the international prices {p∗i } are taken as given by the country; (iv) all
sectors are symmetric and differ in (αi , ηi , λi ) as well as initial conditions {xi (0)}; (v) aggregate labor
supply is exogenous and it must be split between labor supply to individual sectors, ni=1 `i (t) = L.
                                                                                                P

     Given fixed world prices p∗i , the planner’s problem separates in a convenient way: the planner
first maximizes labor income and then chooses the optimal consumption allocation. The labor
income maximization problem is
                                                  ˆ   ∞          n
                                                                 X
                                   max                    e−ρt         (1 − αi )yi (xi (t), `i (t))dt,
                             {`i (·),xi (·)}n
                                            i=1   0              i=1
                                                       αi ∗
                                   s.t. ẋi =            p yi (xi , `i ) + (r∗ − δ)xi ,
                                                       ηi i
                                      n
                                      X
                                             `i ≤ L.
                                       i=1

given {xi (0)}i and where
                                                                               "                             ηi #γi
                                                                       r∗
                                                                                               
                                                                                     ηi            α i Ai     αi
                   yi =   Θi xγi i `1−γ
                                    i
                                       i
                                         ,            with        Θi =                    λi                           .
                                                                       αi          ηi − 1           r∗


                                                                  54
Decentralized solution In the decentralized equilibrium, labor is allocated in such a way
to ensure wage equalization across all sectors. More formally, the equilibrium conditions for the
decentralized allocation are given by:
                                                                    yi
                                                  w = (1 − αi )        ,
                                                                    `i
                                                                           Pn
for all i, and the total wage bill in the economy is wL =                   i=1 (1   − αi )yi .

Planner Denoting ω the Lagrange multiplier on the labor resource constraint and νi the La-
grange multiplier on the xi accumulation constraint, the optimality conditions are given by (for
i = 1, . . . , n):

                                                                   yi (xi , `i )
                                     ω = (1 − γ + γνi )(1 − αi )                 ,
                                                                        `i
                                                                αi yi (xi , `i )
                                     ν̇i = δνi − 1 − γ + γνi
                                                                 ηi      xi
                                           αi                ∗
                                     ẋi = yi (xi , `i ) + (r − δ)xi
                                           ηi

The consumption allocation is undistorted, both across goods and across time. Only the labor
supply to particular sectors is subsidized when νi (t) > 1 and taxed when νi (t) < 1.

Two sector example Suppose sectors are symmetric in everything except p∗i Θi . In particular,
assume α1 = α2 , η1 = η2 , but p∗1 Θ1 > p∗2 Θ2 . Then, in the decentralized equilibrium, wage
equalization across sectors implies y1 /`1 = y2 /`2 , and hence:

                                                       (p∗i Θi )1/γ xi
                                      `i =                                     L.
                                             (p∗1 Θ1 )1/γ x1 + (p∗2 Θ2 )1/γ x2

From this, it is easy to see that when p∗1 Θ1 > p∗2 Θ2 , then `1 (t) > `2 (t) and ẋ1 (t) > ẋ2 (t) for all t,
and hence `1 (t) → L and `2 (t) → 0 as t → ∞ (as well as x2 (t) → 0).
    The planner’s labor allocation instead satisfies (from the optimality conditions above):

                                           ((1 − γ + γνi )p∗i Θi )1/γ xi
                     `i =                                                                 L.
                            ((1 − γ + γν1 )p∗1 Θ1 )1/γ x1 + ((1 − γ + γν2 )p∗2 Θ2 )1/γ x2

The labor supply FOCs can also be rewritten as

                            y1 (x1 , `1 )           y2 (x2 , `2 )                                 1 − γ + γν1
          (1 + τ )(1 − α)                 = (1 − α)                        where         1+τ =
                                `1                      `2                                        1 − γ + γν2

is the subsidy to Sector 1, and we’re interested in its evolution over time. It is convenient to make
a substitution of variables mi ≡ `i /xi , which is well-defined for Sector 2 even as `2 and x2 converge
to zero over time. The optimality conditions for ν̇i and ẋi can be rewritten in terms of {νi , xi , mi },
and mi are defined according to the labor supply conditions above. This dynamic system can be
analyzed using conventional methods, and Sector 1 is subsidized whenever ν1 > ν2 .



                                                          55
References
Aghion, P., and P. Bolton (1997): “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Development,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151–172.
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659–84.
          (1995): “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing Con-
  straints, and Constant Discounting,” Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), 1158–75.
Alder, S., D. Lagakos, and L. Ohanian (2013): “The Decline of the U.S. Rust Belt: A
  Macroeconomic Analysis,” Working paper, UCLA.
Amaral, P. S., and E. Quintin (2010): “Limited Enforcement, Financial Intermediation, And
  Economic Development: A Quantitative Assessment,” International Economic Review, 51(3),
  785–811.
Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, H. Dellas, and B. Diba (2013): “Optimal Public Debt
  Management and Liquidity Provision,” NBER Working Papers 18800.
Atkeson, A., and P. J. Kehoe (2007): “Modeling the Transition to a New Economy: Lessons
  from Two Technological Revolutions,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 64–88.
Banerjee, A. V., and E. Duflo (2005): “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development
  Economics,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 1 of
  Handbook of Economic Growth, chap. 7, pp. 473–552. Elsevier.
Banerjee, A. V., and A. F. Newman (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of Devel-
  opment,” The Journal of Political Economy, 101(2), 274–298.
         (2003): “Inequality, Growth and Trade Policy,” Working paper, MIT.
Bardhan, P. K. (1971): “On Optimum Subsidy to a Learning Industry: An Aspect of the Theory
  of Infant-Industry Protection,” International Economic Review, 12(1), 54–70.
Barro, R. J. (1979): “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy,
  87(5), 940–71.
Bartelsman, E. J., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2013): “Cross Country Differences
  in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection,” American Economic Review, 103(1),
  305–335.
Bassetto, M., M. Cagetti, and M. D. Nardi (2013): “Credit Crunches and Credit Allocation
  in a Model of Entrepreneurship,” Nber working papers, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.
Benigno, G., and L. Fornaro (2012): “Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial Crises,”
  CEPR Discussion Papers 9224.
Bianchi, J. (2011): “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” American
  Economic Review, 101(7), 3400–3426.
Brunnermeier, M. K., T. M. Eisenbach, and Y. Sannikov (2013): “Macroeconomics with
  Financial Frictions: A Survey,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics, ed. by D. Ace-
  moglu, M. Arellano, and E. Dekel, vol. II of Tenth World Congress of the Econometric Society,
  pp. 3–94. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Buera, F., and J.-P. Nicolini (2013): “Liquidity Traps and Monetary Policy: Managing a
  Credit Crunch,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two
  Sectors,” American Economic Review, 101(5), 1964–2002.

                                              56
         (2012): “The Macroeconomics of Microfinance,” NBER Working Papers 17905, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Buera, F. J., and B. Moll (2012): “Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch,” NBER Working
  Papers 17775.
Buera, F. J., B. Moll, and Y. Shin (2013): “Well-Intended Policies,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 16(1), 216–230.
Buera, F. J., and Y. Shin (2013): “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A
  Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(2), 221 – 272.
Caballero, R. J., and G. Lorenzoni (2007): “Persistent Appreciations and Overshooting: A
  Normative Analysis,” NBER Working Papers 13077.
Cagetti, M., and M. De Nardi (2006): “Entrepreneurship, Frictions and Wealth,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 114(5), 835–870.
         (2009): “Estate Taxation, Entrepreneurship, and Wealth,” American Economic Review,
  99(1), 85–111.
Caselli, F. (2005): “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Handbook of Economic
  Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth, chap. 9, pp.
  679–741. Elsevier.
Caselli, F., and N. Gennaioli (2013): “Dynastic Management,” Economic Inquiry, 51(1),
  971–996.
Chamley, C. (1986): “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with Infinite
  Lives,” Econometrica, 54(3), 607–22.
Cole, H. L., and L. E. Ohanian (2004): “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
  Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 779–816.
Conesa, J. C., S. Kitao, and D. Krueger (2009): “Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea after
  All!,” American Economic Review, 99(1), 25–48.
Costinot, A., G. Lorenzoni, and I. Werning (2013): “A Theory of Capital Controls as
  Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Dávila, J., J. Hong, P. Krusell, and J.-V. Rı́os-Rull (2012): “Constrained Efficiency in
  the Neoclassical Growth Model With Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Shocks,” Econometrica, 80(6),
  2431–2467.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. (1985): “Good-bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,” Journal
  of Development Economics, 19(1), 1–24.
Erosa, A., and A. Hidalgo-Cabrillana (2008): “On Finance As A Theory Of TFP, Cross-
  Industry Productivity Differences, And Economic Rents,” International Economic Review, 49(2),
  437–473.
Galor, O., and J. Zeira (1993): “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 60(1), 35–52.
Greenwald, B. C., and J. E. Stiglitz (1986): “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect
  Information and Incomplete Markets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 229–64.
Growth Commission (2008): The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive
  Development.
Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
  Per Worker Than Others?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83–116.
Harrison, A., and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2010): Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial


                                              57
  Policy for Developing Countries pp. 4039–4214, Handbook of Development Economics. Elsevier.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.
Hurst, E., and A. Lusardi (2004): “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and En-
  trepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 319–347.
Jeanne, O. (2012): “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate,” NBER Working
  Papers 18404.
Jeanne, O., and A. Korinek (2010): “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation
  Approach,” NBER Working Papers 16377, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Jeong, H., and R. Townsend (2007): “Sources of TFP Growth: Occupational Choice and
  Financial Deepening,” Economic Theory, 32, 179–221.
Judd, K. L. (1985): “Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 28(1), 59–83.
Kehoe, T. J., and D. K. Levine (2001): “Liquidity Constrained Markets versus Debt Con-
  strained Markets,” Econometrica, 69(3), 575–598.
Kim, K., and D. M. Leipziger (1997): “Korea: A Case of Government-Led Development,” in
  Lessons from East Asia, ed. by D. M. Leipziger, pp. 155–212. University of Michigan Press, Ann
  Arbor.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
  211–48.
Klenow, P., and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (1997): “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Eco-
  nomics: Has It Gone Too Far?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume 12.
Korinek, A., and L. Serven (2010): “Undervaluation through foreign reserve accumulation :
  static losses, dynamic gains,” Policy Research Working Paper Series 5250, The World Bank.
Krugman, P. R. (1987): “The narrow moving band, the Dutch disease, and the competitive
  consequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on trade in the presence of dynamic scale economies,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 27(1-2), 41–55.
Leipziger, D. M. (1997): Lessons from East Asia. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.
Lin, J. Y. (2012): The Quest for Prosperity: How Developing Economies Can Take Off. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.
          (2013): “Demystifying the Chinese Economy,” Australian Economic Review, 46(3), 259–
  268.
Lorenzoni, G. (2008): “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3), 809–833.
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1988): “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 22(1), 3–42.
          (1993): “Making a Miracle,” Econometrica, 61(2), 251–72.
Lucas, Jr., R. E., and B. Moll (2013): “Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time,”
  Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Lucas, Jr., R. E., and N. L. Stokey (1983): “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy
  without capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), 55–93.
Matsuyama, K. (1992): “Agricultural productivity, comparative advantage, and economic
  growth,” Journal of Economic Theory, 58(2), 317–334.
          (2008): “Aggregate Implications of Credit Market Imperfections,” in NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 2007, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford, vol. 22, pp. 1–60.

                                              58
  Chicago, Il: University of Chicago Press.
McKinnon, R. I. (1981): “Financial Repression and the Liberalization Problem within Less
  Developed Countries,” in The World Economic Order: Past and Prospects, ed. by S. Grassman,
  and E. Lundberg, pp. 365–386. St. Martin’s Press, New York.
Melitz, M. J. (2005): “When and how should infant industries be protected?,” Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 66(1), 177–196.
Midrigan, V., and D. Y. Xu (2014): “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level
  Data,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo Capital
  Misallocation?,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Nuño, G. (2013): “Optimal control with heterogeneous agents in continuous time,” Working Paper
  Series 1608, European Central Bank.
Piketty, T. (1997): “The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and the Interest Rate with Credit
  Rationing,” The Review of Economic Studies, 64, 173–189.
Quadrini, V. (2011): “Financial Frictions in Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Economic Quarterly,
  97(3), 209–254.
Quintin, E. (2008): “Limited enforcement and the organization of production,” Journal of Macroe-
  conomics, 30(3), 1222–1245.
Redding, S. (1999): “Dynamic Comparative Advantage and the Welfare Effects of Trade,” Oxford
  Economic Papers, 51(1), 15–39.
Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
  Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707–720.
Rodrik, D. (2008): “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 2008(2), 365–412.
Shin, Y. (2006): “Ramsey Meets Bewley: Optimal Government Financing with Incomplete Mar-
  kets,” Working paper, Washington University St. Louis.
Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2011): “Growing Like China,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 101(1), 196–233.
Stokey, N. L. (2009): The Economics of Inaction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Townsend, R. M. (2010): “Financial Structure and Economic Welfare: Applied General Equi-
  librium Development Economics,” Annual Review of Economics, 2, 507–546.
Ventura, J., and J. Voth (2013): “Debt into Growth: How Government Borrowing Accelerated
  the First Industrial Revolution,” unpublished.
Weitzman, M. L. (1974): “Prices vs. Quantities,” Review of Economic Studies, 41(4), 477–91.
Werning, I. (2007): “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Redistribution,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 122(3), 925–967.
Woodford, M. (2008): “Comment on “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth”,” Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008(2), 420–437.
Wynne, J. (2005): “Wealth as a Determinant of Comparative Advantage,” American Economic
  Review, 95(1), 226–254.
Young, A. (1991): “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2), 369–405.




                                              59
