NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK ADJUSTMENT OF HEALTH PLAN PAYMENTS TO CORRECT INEFFICIENT
PLAN CHOICE FROM ADVERSE SELECTION
Jacob Glazer
Thomas G. McGuire
Julie Shi
Working Paper 19998
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19998

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

Research for this paper was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290)
and the National Institute of Aging (P01-AG032952). This paper is prepared for presentation at the
NBER Conference, “Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs,” October 18-19, 2013 in Washington
DC. We are grateful to Randy Ellis, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan Kolstad, Tim Layton, Karen Stockley,
Aaron Schwartz and a referee for comments on a previous version. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jacob Glazer, Thomas G. McGuire, and Julie Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Adjustment of Health Plan Payments to Correct Inefficient Plan Choice from Adverse
Selection
Jacob Glazer, Thomas G. McGuire, and Julie Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 19998
March 2014
JEL No. I13,I18
ABSTRACT
This paper develops and implements a statistical methodology to account for the equilibrium effects
(aka adverse selection) in design of risk adjustment formula in health insurance markets. Our setting
is modeled on the situation in Medicare and the new state Exchanges where individuals sort themselves
between a discrete set of plan types (here, two). Our “Silver” and “Gold” plans have fixed characteristics,
as in the well-known research on selection and efficiency by Einav and Finkelstein (EF). We build
on the EF model in several respects, including by showing that risk adjustment can be used to achieve
the premiums that will lead to efficient sorting. The target risk adjustment weights can be found by
use of constrained regressions, where the constraints in the estimation are conditions on premiums
that should be satisfied in equilibrium. We illustrate implementation of the method with data from
seven years of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.

Jacob Glazer
Department of Economics
Warwick University and
Faculty of Management
Tel Aviv University
glazer@post.tau.ac.il
Thomas G. McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Julie Shi
Harvard Medical School
jshi@hcp.med.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
In the U.S. and a number of other countries, individuals choose health insurance from among
competing health plans. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) mandates previously uninsured
individuals choose a plan offered in the new state-level health insurance Exchanges (now
sometimes referred to as “Marketplaces”). Parts C (managed care plans) and D (drug plans) in
Medicare use private health insurance markets, as do the national health care systems of the
Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland and other countries. A fundamental premise of payment
regulation in all of these markets is that plans’ revenue should be “risk-adjusted” to account for
cost differences among enrollees. Risk adjustment protects plans and mitigates incentives
related to adverse selection. The risk adjustment formulas can be complicated, as they are in the
ACA where they involve demographics, scores of diagnostic variables, and interactions.
Weights on risk adjuster variables, like age or diagnoses for certain conditions, are generally
derived from regression-based statistical procedures on data sets with millions of people.
A well-known limitation of risk adjustment methods is that the weights are sometimes
estimated from data not from the plans paid by risk adjustment. For example, in Medicare,
private managed care plans are paid with a risk adjustment system estimated with data from
beneficiaries who elect not to join one of the private plans. In the new Exchanges, the risk
adjustment formulas the federal government recommends are estimated from employees of large
employers and their dependents, individuals generally not eligible to participate in Exchanges.
The issue is partly practical and temporary in the sense that once data from Exchanges
accumulate or Medicare private plans report more complete data, weights can be recalculated
based on the “real data.” But there is a more fundamental problem access to data doesn’t solve:
Statistical procedures make risk adjustment weights a function of the data, and, economic
equilibrium makes the data a function of the risk adjustment formula. In other words, the risk
distribution of individuals who choose to join a plan, and even the services a plan decides to
offer to its enrollees, are a function of how plans are paid. This is more than a technical concern
– equilibrium effects on enrollment and services are precisely the adverse selection problems risk
adjustment is designed to avoid.1

1

Another way to say this: if risk adjustment didn’t affect enrollment and/or services offered, there would
be no need to risk adjust. The law of large numbers would deal with any plan-level risk.

2

This paper develops and implements a statistical methodology to account for the
equilibrium effects (aka adverse selection) in design of risk adjustment formula in health
insurance markets. We focus on the “Einav-Finkelstein” form2 of adverse selection in which
enrollees sort between plans with fixed benefit offerings as a function of the plans’ premiums.
Because these premiums do not reflect each person’s marginal costs, the plan with the better
coverage tends to be a bargain for the sick and too expensive for the healthy, leading some
people to choose the wrong plan. 3 We show that risk adjustment affects the equilibrium sorting,
and can be used to improve upon the adverse selection outcome. We find the “second-best”
allocation between plans, second best meaning the most efficient that can be achieved given the
premium categories available, and then show how choice of risk adjustors can attain this secondbest outcome.
Section 2 reviews the literature, highlighting recent papers by Einav and Finkelstein (EF)
which study enrollee sorting between plans with fixed characteristics charging the same premium
to all enrollees. Section 3 incorporates risk adjustment into the EF framework, oriented around
the working of the ACA. We retain the EF assumption that there are two plan types (which we
call Silver and Gold) with fixed characteristics and build on EF in a number of ways: in addition
to introducing risk adjustment, we allow for many premium categories (for example, premiums
conditioned on age). We also incorporate an explicit model of selection in which individuals
choosing between plan types make imperfect forecasts of their future health care costs. The
nature of adverse selection is critical to efficiency interpretations of an EF model. The
fundamental normative implication of the EF model is that when a more generous plan
experiences adverse selection, the “Gold Plan” premium should be subsidized to encourage more
enrollment than would occur in competitive equilibrium. We show: 1) the optimal subsidy
should correct for individuals’ imperfect forecasts in addition to the “marginal-average cost gap”
in the EF model; 2) the resulting allocation minimizes but does not eliminate inefficiencies in
sorting (i.e., is a second best), and 3) the optimal subsidy can be achieved by risk adjustment.
2

E.g., Einav and Finkelstein (2011), Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010), and Einav, Finkelstein and
Cullen (2010).
3
Major precursors of the Einav-Finkelstein paper are Cutler and Reber (1998) who studied sorting in the
benefit plans at one employer, and before that and more generally, Akerloff (1970). The second form of
adverse selection in health insurance markets stems from Rothschild and Stigliz (1976) in which plan
offerings are not fixed and plans distort benefit offerings to attract less costly enrollees. Glazer and
McGuire (2000) used the Rothschild-Stiglitz model to draw the implications for risk adjustment in health
insurance.

3

Section 4 implements the theoretical ideas with data from seven years of the Medical
Expenditure Panels Survey (MEPS), drawing a population representative of those eligible for
Exchanges in the ACA. Operationalizing the model from Section 3 requires simulating the
payment system in Exchanges, specifying costs in the Gold and Silver plans, and specifying the
underlying demand (selection) behavior. Importantly, the regulator needs to know the nature of
the inefficiency due to selection in order to design the right risk adjustment system to correct the
inefficiency.
Empirical results are contained in Section 5 where we evaluate several equilibria in terms
of the efficiency of plan sorting and in the degree to which the payment system associated with
risk adjustment “fits” costs at the Silver and Gold plans (in equilibrium). We start with no risk
adjustment where premiums for twelve age-geography categories are determined in equilibrium
between competing Gold and Silver Plans. The welfare loss from sorting is high and the fit of
plan costs is poor. Conventional risk adjustment, of the type proposed in the ACA, improves
sorting and improves the fit of play payments to cost. We then show how a modification of
conventional risk adjustment methods can set risk adjustment weights so that in equilibrium, the
incremental premium for the Gold plan leads to the efficient (second-best) sorting. The method
is constrained regression, were the constraints (on the risk adjustment weights) require that risk
adjustment transfer sufficient funds to the premium group to achieve the desired subsidy in
equilibrium.

2. Background and Literature Review
A foundation of the policy of managed competition, and of the many regulated health
insurance markets based on the idea, is that consumers choose among competing health plans in
the presence of prices that reflect the additional costs of more versus less generous plans. In the
U.S. Medicare program, for example, competing private health plans can add benefits over the
required minimum but must finance these by higher premiums. The ACA creates an ordered set
of plans designated Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum with more coverage for higher prices.
Consumer utility maximization leads to efficient sorting among plans if consumers face
premiums that present them with the “incremental cost” of benefits in the more generous plan
(Keeler, Carter and Newhouse, 1998). The argument is the same as that for prices generally:
when consumers face prices equal to costs, net utility equals social welfare and consumers make
4

efficient choices. The problem is that managed competition does not deliver the required
incremental prices (Bundorf, Levin, Mahoney, 2012; Glazer and McGuire, 2011). When the
product is health insurance, incremental cost is person-specific. In other words, the incremental
cost across two plans differs for each person depending on their expected health care costs.
Asymmetric information between plans and enrollees interferes with efficient pricing.
Furthermore, managed competition policies purposefully limit the degree to which plans may
price discriminate based on observables related to health care costs. Higher premiums for those
with previous illnesses are, for example, nearly universally prohibited. (The ACA also has ageband restrictions.)
Managed competition policies rely on risk adjustment of payment to plans in order to pay
more for higher-cost enrollees. While this deals with some aspects of efficient plan service
provision, it may not help at all with consumer sorting among plans. Our main objective in this
paper is to study how risk adjustment payments schemes, set by a regulator, can affect the
premiums that plans charge enrollees, which in turn will affect enrollees choice of plans and,
hence, welfare. We build on the model introduced in a series of papers by Einav and Finkelstein,
primarily the well-known version in Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010). We will refer to the
model as the “EF” model, and review its basics here.
The EF model shows how to measure the welfare losses due to adverse selection using
demand and cost curves. Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) outline a stylized version of their
approach and discuss its application in different settings. In what they refer to as their “textbook
example,” consumers choose between a high-coverage contract, H, and a low-coverage contract,
L. In their example the L contract refers to no insurance and, hence, it is costless to all
consumers and is free. The (incremental) price of the H contract is denoted by p paid by all
potential enrollees, and consumers purchase the H contract if their valuation of it, net of the price
p, exceeds their valuation of the low contract, normalized to zero. As premium falls, new
enrollees choose H, defining an average and marginal cost curve. For a given price p, average
cost for plan H (denoted by AC(p)) is the expected costs of the enrollees, who (endogenously)
choose to enroll in contract H, divided by the number of individuals who purchase it. For a
given price p, marginal cost (denoted by MC(p)) is the expected cost for the individual(s) whose
willingness to pay is exactly p. See Figure 1, a replica (omitting some labeling) of Figure 1 in
Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010).
5

In market equilibrium, insurers are assumed to price competitively, such that p = AC(p).
As in a standard welfare analysis, consumer surplus for a given individual in the high contract is
measured by their willingness to pay for the H contract minus the price, and producer surplus for
a given individual is measured by price minus the cost of that individual. The efficient price
(premium) and quantity (enrollment in H) are given by the point where the marginal cost
intersects demand, and the equilibrium price and quantity are given by the point where the
average cost intersects demand. The efficiency loss, in their setting, is given by the
“conventional” welfare triangle bounded by the marginal cost and demand curve, between the
efficient quantity and the equilibrium one (the shaded area in Figure 1).4 In their empirical
application using data on insurance choices and costs from a large employer, Einav, Finkelstein
and Cullen detect adverse selection, but they estimate the welfare costs of adverse selection to be
small.5
We modify and extend the basic EF model in several ways to further illuminate
properties of markets with insurance choice.6 The first has to do with the relationship between
willingness to pay and costs. In the “textbook case,” the ordering in willingness to pay of those
who join as a function of p is matched by a one-to-one ordering of falling costs. As was
acknowledged by Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), if individuals’ costs are not
monotonically increasing or decreasing with willingness to pay, as generally they will not be,
then the point where marginal cost intersects the demand will not be first best and the welfare
triangle in Figure 1 will not describe the welfare loss.7 The reason is that with heterogeneity in
the relationship between demand and incremental cost, “marginal cost,” MC(p) is, in fact, an
average of the marginal costs over all individuals whose willingness to pay is exactly p. Thus,
even when MC(p) = p, there are individuals (those whose willingness to pay is higher than p but
4

There are two cases, the “adverse selection” case, where individuals’ willingness to pay for plan H is
increasing with their cost (to the plan) and the other, the “advantageous selection” case, where
individuals’ willingness to pay cost is decreasing with their cost. In the adverse selection case, the one
shown in Figure 1 and the one we work with in this paper, the welfare loss is due to the fact that “too
few” individuals join the H plan, relative to social optimum.
5
The authors also discuss how the welfare losses (gains) from imperfect competition or discriminatory
prices can be quantified. They also compare the estimated welfare loss to the social cost of subsidized
prices or mandates.
6
Kolstad and Kowalski (2014) use a modification of the Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) model to
study the reduction in adverse selection as a result of an “individual mandate” in the recent reform in
Massachusetts.
7
See their footnote 3.

6

their cost is higher than their willingness to pay) who join the plan even though, from social
point of view, they shouldn’t, and there are individuals (those whose willingness to pay is less
than p but their cost is lower than their willingness to pay) who will choose not to join the plan
even though, from social point of view, they should. Another way to say this is that only in the
very special circumstances assumed in the textbook version of the EF model is a single premium
(equal to MC) able to eliminate welfare loss from sorting.8 In general, the situation will be as
depicted in Figure 2. Two groups (here 1 and 2) have different incremental marginal costs and
demand, but must share a common incremental premium (Δp). Any Δp is associated with
welfare losses. The second-best analysis we perform later essentially seeks to minimize the sum
of the losses, L1 and L2 in the Figure, as a function of the incremental premium. An example of
the welfare losses that will emerge with heterogeneity is that under the ACA, plans cannot
discriminate in premium across individuals with different health status or other characteristics
that may affect their costs. In our analysis we allow for individual heterogeneity at the margin in
our welfare analysis.9
Second, we consider a “real” alternative plan and take account of what is happening in
equilibrium for this plan as the distribution of risks shifts in response to changes in the
incremental premium for the high-coverage (Gold) plan. When the “other plan” is not a zerocost plan, the average costs and equilibrium premium in that plan also change as demand
changes for the Gold plan. This modifies the interpretation of the EF textbook diagram and is
essential in any empirical application to a multiple plan context.
Third, we allow for individuals’ willingness to pay for a plan to differ from their (social)
benefit from that plan.10 If, for example, individuals are not fully informed about their health
cost risk, or cannot fully understand their risks, they will not accurately anticipate the services
8

This point is emphasized by Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney (2012). Commenting on analyses which
imply a single premium can efficiently sort a population between two plans, they observe, “These
analyses, however, assume perfect correlation between enrollee risk and preferences for coverage and
make strong assumptions about the relationship between preferences and plan costs. We show that if these
assumptions are violated, a uniform contribution policy (i.e., a policy under which individuals face the
same prices for the plans) cannot induce efficient consumer choices.” (page 3215). Glazer and McGuire
(2011) show that in general a single-premium policy cannot lead to efficiency.
9
Spinnewijn (2013) considers a different explicit model of selection in which “demand frictions”
introduce heterogeneity and affect choice. He also finds that the welfare economics of the standard
selection model are altered.
10
See Abaluck and Gruber (2011) for an example of an analysis of “mistakes” in buying health insurance
made by the elderly in choosing their drug plans in Medicare.

7

they will receive upon joining a particular plan. They may over or underestimate how much they
have to gain from joining the H plan. This issue is tied to adverse selection, because it is just this
anticipation that drives the higher cost people to join the H plan. As long as this process is
imperfect, that is, the anticipation is only partial, then consumers will make “mistakes” in their
plan choice. In such a case, demand and marginal benefit curves do not generally coincide and
even if price is equal to marginal cost, equilibrium will not be socially efficient.
Fourth, we enrich the payment system studied and introduce multiple premium categories
and risk adjustment. In the ACA, plans can discriminate on the basis of age (within limits),
geography and smoking status. Furthermore, risk adjustment will move funds to plans drawing a
sicker population, affecting equilibrium premia and consumer sorting. We explicitly incorporate
the effect of risk adjustment within an EF model, and show that an appropriately designed risk
adjustment payment scheme may reduce welfare losses associated not only with EF adverse
selection but also with individuals’ inability to perfectly evaluate the services they will receive if
they join a plan.
Our paper is also related to a number of other recent papers that have studied the welfare
implications of policy changes or changes in the market conditions in the health insurance
market. A comprehensive review of this emerging literature is contained in Einav, Finkelstein
and Levin (2010). Recent papers have specified more complete models of consumer preferences
to enable a more thorough normative interpretation of market outcomes. These models allow
authors to quantify the magnitude of welfare loses from, among other things, distortionary
pricing (see Bundorf, Levin, Mahoney (2012), Carlin and Town (2010), Geruso (2012) and
Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2013)), restrictions on the choice set (see Lustig (2008), Dafny,
Ho, and Varela (2013), Lucarelli, Prince, and Simon (forthcoming)), and changes in the
allocation of consumers to plans (see Handel (2011), Lustig (2008)).

3. Risk Adjustment to Fix Adverse Selection
This section presents a model of a health insurance market with regulated benefits and two types
of competing plans which we refer to as Silver plans and Gold plans. Enrollees face premiums
and choose a plan. We allow multiple premium categories and risk adjustment. Our risk

8

adjustment system pays the same for an individual independent of what plan they join.11 As in
the standard EF model, we describe equilibrium and efficient sorting between plan types, and
identify the efficient incremental premium for the Gold Plan for each premium category.
3.1 Costs and Demand for Health Plan Alternatives
N people in an insurance pool vary in two observable dimensions, according to health
status, the basis of risk adjustment, and according to another set of characteristics, the basis of
premiums. Health status is indexed by h, h = 1,…,H; premium characteristics are indexed by t, t
= 1,…,T. Each categorization is mutually exclusive so that a person is characterized by an (h,t)
pair. There can be overlap between the factors (e.g., age might be a used in both h and t), but
there is some independent information about health care costs in each of h and t. For example,
geography might be used as a basis for premiums but not risk adjustment and prior health
conditions might be a basis for risk adjustment but not premiums. We will refer to a person with
characteristics h and t as a person of type ht. Nht is the number of people of type ht in the
population and Nt is the number of people with premium type t.12
Plans provide services, x, according to h and t, and services a person of type ht would get
are fixed in each plan. Gold is more generous so that x
dollars. x

and x

x

for all ht, with x measured in

are thus also the costs of serving a person of type ht in the Gold and Silver

plans respectively. Define the incremental costs for a person of type ht as x

≡ x

x . For

simplicity in presentation, we let incremental cost xht represent both social incremental cost and
plan incremental cost, implying that the out-of-pocket costs to an ht type are the same in Silver
and Gold.13

11

The model captures features of the managed competition approach to individual health insurance which
serves as the intellectual basis of ACA Exchanges, Medicare Parts C and D, and health policy in a number
of European countries. Premium subsidies are a feature of all of these policy contexts. Incremental
premiums (the difference between Gold and Silver) govern sorting and efficiency so we can be agnostic
about whether there are subsidies for the basic plan type. Our approach is also consistent with “premiumsupport” policies awarding a risk-adjusted voucher to enrollees who can apply the voucher towards
premium at any plan.
12
A similar model of plan costs is used in McGuire et al. (2013) for one plan type. That paper shows how
to choose risk adjustment weights when premiums also contribute to fit but the premiums are determined
in market equilibrium.
13
Premiums of course will differ between plans. In Exchanges, Gold plans have more coverage, so part
of more services would be due to moral hazard in demand. Keeping track of out-of-pocket differences
would complicate the presentation of the accounting in this paper without adding insight.

9

Although every member of type ht gets the same increment in services going from Silver
to Gold, individuals are heterogeneous in their valuation of Gold over Silver plans. Demand is
n

p , the number of people among type ht who choose to enroll in the Gold plan as a function

of the incremental premium for members of this premium type, where the incremental premium
is the difference between the Gold and Silver plan premiums for that premium group: p ≡
p

p . Heterogeneity in demand could be due to tastes for health care services, risk aversion

or other preferences regarding cost management methods in the two plans. As in EF, our
normative framework includes these preferences as a component of welfare. We assume demand
is downward-sloping: n

p

0. The Gold plan’s “aggregate” demand function of

individuals in premium category t sums enrollment demand over the h categories:
n

p

∑ n

p

The corresponding “inverse” demand function of each ht type is p

(1)
n

, and the “inverse”

aggregate demand, p n .
“Demand” can be distinct from “benefit” in the context of selection and insurance choice.
Selection is driven by consumers being able to anticipate their health care costs, but they do so
imperfectly. Consumers are therefore also generally imperfect in their anticipation of how much
they would benefit from membership in alternative health insurance plans, introducing a
distinction between what consumers anticipate in terms of benefits and what they actually get in
terms of benefits of plan choice. Demand is based on what consumers anticipate ex ante,
whereas welfare is naturally based on ex post benefits.
3.2 Efficiency
When enrollees know their type ht and face incremental premiums equal to the
incremental cost, xht, their utility-maximizing choice of plan type achieves efficient sorting.
However, since incremental premiums can be conditioned only on t and not on h, first-best
sorting between Gold and Silver plans is generally impossible. With the first-best unattainable,
we characterize the premiums that minimize the welfare loss from inefficient sorting, assuming
that people know their type, and subject to the constraint that premiums must be the same for all
persons with the same t.
For a premium group t, the common incremental premium that maximizes social welfare
solves the following problem:

10

∑

Max

p

Recall that n

n

dn

n

p x

(2)

p is the demand function of the ht types and p

n

is its inverse. When

consumers know their type demand has the conventional interpretation as willingness to pay or
consumer surplus. x

is the cost of an individual of type ht moving from Silver to Gold.

Assuming an interior solution (members from all h groups are in both the Gold and Silver
Plans), the solution to (2) is p∗ :
p∗

∗

∑
∑

(3)

∗

We state this result formally:
Proposition 1: Assuming demand indicates benefit, the welfare-maximizing incremental
premium for premium group t equals the Gold plan’s incremental cost averaged over the h
groups joining the plan.
Proposition 1 extends the EF result by showing that the incremental premium should
equate (averaged) incremental marginal cost to demand even when there is heterogeneity in the
mix of persons joining Gold as a function of premium.
The EF analysis and Proposition 1 share the important assumption that individuals can
accurately forecast their expected cost. When this is not true, Proposition 1 must be modified.
Equating incremental marginal cost to marginal benefit is then not the same as equating marginal
cost to demand. The efficient second-best premium must also correct for the gap between
expected and actual benefit of joining Gold.
3.3 Equilibrium with Risk Adjusted Payments and Selection
Equilibrium consists of premiums for each of the T premium categories for the Silver and
Gold plans, and of an allocation of enrollees across the plan types. The equilibrium will be a
function of the risk-adjustment formula. Let r denote the risk adjustment payment that (Gold
or Silver) plans receive for each individual of type h. Suppose, as in Exchanges, the risk
adjustment system is financed by premium payments of enrollees. We can regard a plan paying
into a risk adjustment fund a constant amount for each enrollee, perhaps, as here, set equal to
costs at the Silver plan averaged over the entire population, x . The plan (either Gold or Silver)
then receives rh back from the fund for each person of type h joining the plan. The risk
adjustment system is balanced budget if ∑ N r

Nx . Plans must charge premiums that cover
11

costs (after risk adjustment) according to each t group. (The “budget constraint” for risk
adjustment, x , could be set at some other level, affecting the equilibrium premiums plans must
charge.)
The premium for the Silver plan for type t is p . We can write the Gold plan premium as
p

p , the Silver plan premium plus the incremental premium for group t. Risk adjustment is

set the by a regulator, and premiums are determined in market equilibrium. We assume that
competition drives the profit for Silver and Gold plans to zero for each premium group. Thus,
for each t we have two zero-profit conditions:
∑ r

x

p

∑ r

x

p

where N

n

x
p

N
x

n
n

p
p

0,
0.

(4)
(5)

p is the number of individuals of type ht in the Silver plan, and n

p ,

defined in (1) above, is the number in the Gold plan
Conditions (4) and (5) incorporate utility maximization as well as competitive
equilibrium among plans and thus describe a complete equilibrium in the insurance market,
given a risk adjustment system with weights, rh.
3.4 Risk Adjustment Weights that Achieve (Second-best) Efficient Sorting
The 2T equations in (4) and (5) describe a relationship between the risk-adjustment
weights, rh, and the equilibrium premiums, pt. The idea is to take this relationship into account
when deciding risk adjustment policy; specifically, to set the weights, rh, so that the equilibrium
premiums hit the desired target. When demand represents benefit, risk adjustment weights that
achieve efficient sorting in equilibrium satisfy (3), subject to (4) and (5). Each of the T premium
categories generates an equation describing the condition for second-best pt and a pair of zeroprofit conditions. Substituting the equations for premiums, (4) and (5), into the efficiency
condition (3) yields equation in the risk adjustment weights, rh. After these substitutions, there
are T equations. The “unknowns” are the H risk adjustment weights, rh. In general there are
relatively few premium categories in individual health insurance markets (e.g., age categories),
and many risk adjustment weights (age, gender, many diagnostic conditions). We refer to a set
of weights that solve the T equations for efficiency as r .
With T<<H, as is typical (in the standard EF model, T = 1), there are many r

solutions.

How should we pick among these many alternatives? The luxury of multiple solutions allows
12

pursuit of a second criterion in the choice of weights, the fit of the payment system, which, in the
case of both MA and Markeplaces, consists of a risk adjustment system and enrollee premiums.
Assessing and maximizing fit in a particular institutional context requires incorporation of
payment rules, and data, both of which are introduced next.

4. Empirical Application: Gold Plan Incremental Premiums and Risk
Adjustment
We draw an “Exchange population” from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) to
implement the efficient (second-best) incremental premiums. Risk adjustment weights are set by
a Regulator; premiums are determined in market equilibrium. Taking advantage of the multiple
solutions available via risk adjustment, we use constrained regression methods to find the risk
adjustment weights that do the best job of fitting plan payments to costs subject to achieving the
efficient incremental premiums. Our purpose is to develop and illustrate the application of a
method for using risk adjustment to correct for selection problems. We model key features of
Exchnages – the population, the plans, the premium and risk adjustment with MEPS data.
4.1 Data and the Exchange Population
MEPS is a nationally representative survey of the civilian non-institutionalized U.S.
population conducted annually since 1996. Each year MEPS collects information on
approximately 33,000 individuals, enlisting a new panel of respondents followed for two years.
Data are collected in five rounds of interviews covering the two-year period. The Household
Component (HC) is the source for personal and household characteristics, including insurance
coverage and self-reported health and health conditions. The HC is also the source of data on
medical “events” (e.g. an inpatient stay or office visit) including information about diagnoses,
procedures, and payments from various sources. The HC data are supplemented with
information from the Medical Provider Component (MPC), based on phone surveys of hospitals,
physician offices, pharmacies, and home health agencies. We use data from 2004 through 2010.
MEPS data understate health expenditures (Sing et al., 2002; Aizcorbe et al., 2012; Zuvekas and
Olin, 2009). We follow the correction proposed by Zuvekas and Olin (2009) to inflate total

13

expenditures by a factor of 1.09 for individuals with an inpatient claim and by a factor of 1.546
for all other claims.14
We select a population of adults who would be eligible to enroll in state-level Exchanges
under current law based on their income, insurance, and employment status. We identify nonelderly individuals (aged 19-64) in households earning at least 138% of the federal poverty
level.15 We select those who live in a household where an adult is ever (in either year)
uninsured, a holder of a non-group insurance policy, self-employed, employed by a small
employer, or paying an out-of-pocket premium for their employer-sponsored health insurance
(ESI) plan that is deemed to be unaffordable (as defined in the ACA).16 We include both years
of data for a person who would qualify for Exchanges in either year of the data, with the idea that
these individuals are vulnerable to loss of insurance and share the same distribution of health
care costs as persons who would enroll in Exchanges. In total, we have 64,667 person years.17
Children may also be in Exchanges, but since they are paid with a separate risk adjustment
system, we confine the analysis here to adults.
Table 1 summarizes some statistics on this group. The population contains a relatively
high proportion of Hispanics and lives disproportionately in the South. The education and
income range is large because we include persons who may have health insurance but in the
individual or small-group market. By in large, this is a relatively healthy population, with 60%
rating their health Excellent or Very Good. Average health care spending from all sources was
$2,648 in 2010 dollars.
4.2 Silver and Gold Plan Costs
14

MEPS surveys the “noninstitutionalized” population and underrepresents persons in nursing homes or
with very long hospital stays. This also contributes to underreporting average medical expenses, but has a
small effect on an Exchanage population.
15
Annual household income from each year is inflated to 2010 dollars using the Consumer Price Index
(CPI-U) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and we apply 2009 federal poverty guidelines for the
48 contiguous states available online at: http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/09poverty.shtml. We follow the
methodology of the Kaiser Family Foundation that uses these income criteria to select the population
eligible to purchase insurance through an Exchange (Trish et al., 2011). Adults and children in
households with lower incomes are deemed to qualify for Medicaid. We do not simulate employer
behavior as does the CBO model (CBO, 2011).
16
Small employers are either (1) those with fewer than 50 employees or (2) those with fewer than 100
employees and who report only one business location. The ACA states that individuals whose out-ofpocket premiums for employer-sponsored insurance exceed 9.5% of family income will be eligible to
purchase health insurance through an Exchange.
17
Most people contribute two years of data. If someone dies in the first year, they would contribute just
one. We used no additional weighting of observations.

14

The ACA allows for four plan levels, Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum, (along with a
high-deductible plan for young adults) distinguished by the “actuarial value” of coverage in each
level.18 All so-called Qualified Health Plans (QHPs) plans must cover a set of mandated benefits
but are free to contract with networks of providers and to “manage” care. We assume two plan
types, and exaggerate the difference between “Gold” and “Silver.” Specifically, we assume the
costs in a Gold plan are to 120% of costs in a Silver plan, making incremental costs equal to 20%
of Silver plan costs for each person. In the empirical application, we use MEPS data to classify
Exchange participants into ht groups, and then assign the average costs within the group as Silver
plan costs. We inflate the costs for each ht group by 20% to assign Gold Plan costs.
4.3 Plan Revenues
The ACA specifies that premiums be based on age (with regulated rate bands), smoking
status, geography, and family size, but not on pre-existing conditions, gender, or other factors.19
We set three age categories, young adult (19-30), middle-age adult (31-50) and older adult (5164), and four geographic areas, the four census regions (to mimic geographic areas within a
state). We thus have 12 (3x4) premium categories for which we will study the incremental
premium between Gold and Silver plans. We do not use smoking status because this variable,
conditional on age, is weakly associated with health care costs in the Exchange population.20 For
purposes of this analysis, we treat couples as two individuals. Rate-band regulation applies to
the total premium at plans, not the incremental premiums. After risk adjustment our equilibrium
premiums satisfy ACA rate-band restrictions.21
We risk adjust with the Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC) model recommended for
Exchanges by CMS (Department of Health and Human Services 2013). A simpler version of
this model pays private drug and managed care plans in Medicare. The Exchange version maps
18

Actuarial value in the ACA is the share of covered costs paid by the plan. Bronze Plans have an
actuarial value of .6, Silver, .7, Gold, .8 and Platinum, .9. Deductibles and copayments/coinsurance
determine the actuarial value.
19
CMS has recently recommended a particular age-profile to be used in premiums, though states are free
to set their own subject to the maximum 3-1 ratio between old and young (Department of Health and
Human Services, 2013).
20
We found this in our earlier paper on premiums and risk adjustment with these data (McGuire et al.,
2013). Smoking status is problematic also from the standpoint of accurate reporting.
21
Our premium analyses ignore the temporary reinsurance features of Exchanges. In the first three years
of Exchanges, plans will be forced to participate in a federally run system of reinsurance in which the
“attachment point” where reinsurance kicks in is set at $60,000. Plans are responsible for only 20% of
costs after this point. Reinsurance could be incorporated by refiguring plan net costs with this feature as
we have done in other research (Zhu et al., forthcoming).

15

diagnoses from ICD-9 codes from claims into one of 100 HCCs. Diseases within an HCC are
similar clinically. Each individual is given a (0,1) indicator for each HCC, and these become
part of a linear regression model with individual demographics and some disease interactions to
predict cost. The coefficients from this model are the “weights” on age, gender, HCC and other
factors used in risk adjustment (Pope et al., 2011). We use the same age categories for risk
adjustment as the CMS-HCC model. Our goal is to find the best weights on the elements going
into the CMS risk adjustment model.
Notably, CMS recommends that the HCC model for Exchanges be concurrent, using this
year’s medical events to determine the risk-adjusted payment for this year. This is in contrast to
its use in Medicare, and virtually all other formal risk adjustment systems, where the model is
prospective, using last year’s medical experience to predict this year’s costs. We follow CMS
recommended practice and use concurrent risk adjustment here.22
Our risk adjustment model diverges from the CMS recommendation in several ways to
accommodate the MEPS data. First, whereas the CMS-HCC model uses 5-digit ICD-9 diagnosis
code to classify diagnoses, the MEPS public use files do not include 5-digit ICD-9 codes. We
use the 3-digit ICD-9 codes which are publicly available.23 Documentation of the CMS-HCC
model indicates that moving from 3 to 5-digit classification does little to improve model fit in
MEPS.24 In MEPS, diagnostic data come from household reports which lack the specificity and
precision of physician reports (AHRQ 2011). Second, we do not include the full set of HCC
indicators because of limitations of our sample size, nor do we include interaction effects for the
same reason. The 58 HCCs with more than 20 observations are entered in the model. The
remaining 9 HCCs appearing in the data with a total of 73 observations are aggregated into a
single category. HCC classifications HCC108 (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) and
22

Concurrent risk adjustment has two things going for it: first, it doesn’t require data from a previous
year to figure; and second, it will do a much better job of fitting plan costs than prospective risk
adjustment. The main problem with concurrent risk adjustment is that it weakens incentives for plans to
contain costs (Van de ven and Ellis, 2000). Medicare has a version of the same problem as Exchanes of
how to pay for the “new” beneficiaries without a prior year of experience. For these new beneficiaries
they use a simplified age-gender risk adjustment model. Echanges could do the same.
23
In our model we assume that the 3-digit code we observe in the data corresponds to the smallest ICD-9
code that starts with those three digits. For example, an ICD-9 code of 003 in MEPS is assumed to
represent 0031, which is the smallest code within the 003 category.
24
MEPS documentation states: “DxCG Inc. staff have examined how using 3-digit diagnoses (rather than
5-digit codes) would affect the prospective DCG/HCC model’s performance. They concluded that,
although using 3-digit codes would reduce the model’s specificity in clinical classification and its
predictive accuracy, the loss in specificity and predictive power was small.” (AHRQ 2008, page C-2).

16

HCC 176 (Artificial Openings for Feeding and Elimination) are too inclusive with our 3-digit
classification, so broke these into finer categories. We also added HCCs for pregnancy. The
exact algorithm we used to modify the HCCs is described in Table A in the Appendix. We will
refer to the risk adjustment system we use as CMS-HCCs, even though we modified it in the
ways just described. Risk-adjustment regressions (conventional and constrained) are represented
in Table B of the Appendix.
4.4 Demand for Gold Plan and Efficiency of Sorting
We specify demand and efficiency in ways that can be operationalized empirically. Our
assumptions respect important economic properties: first best is attained with full information
and incremental premiums equal to incremental costs for all persons; no selection emerges when
everyone has the same expectation about their health care costs; and, with limited premium
discrimination, individuals’ more accurate forecasting of their own costs increases selection.
Demand for the Gold plan depends on the benefits a person expects to get in Gold over
Silver, and on the incremental premium. Efficiency depends on the added benefits a person
actually gets in a plan, and on the incremental cost. We start with efficiency and assume the
incremental benefit a person i of type ht gets in the Gold Plan, biht, has two components, both
measured in dollars.
biht = βxht + vi,

β > 1, vi ~ uniform [vmin, vmax]

The first component of benefit is the value of incremental services type ht gets in the Gold Plan,
βxht, common to all members of group ht. In what follows we assume that all individuals share
the same β. When β>1, these services are valued at more than cost (cost = 1). (β could also be
less than one.) Second is an idiosyncratic component of benefit that differs by person, vi, which
captures idiosyncratic valuation of the incremental services, risk aversion, taste for plan
management styles and other factors. We assume for simplicity, that vi, is uniformly distributed
between a minimum and maximum value, but the range [vmin, vmax] depends on t.
For efficiency, a person should be in the Gold Plan if and only if the incremental benefits
of Gold exceed the incremental costs. Incremental costs in Gold are xht so the rule for efficiency
is that individual i should be in Gold iff:
βxht + vi - xht > 0

(6)

17

In relation to the first-best, the welfare loss in any equilibrium is the lost benefits for those in the
“wrong” plan. Generally, for a person in Silver when (6) is positive, the loss is βxht + vi - xht; for
a person in Gold when (6) is negative, the loss is -(βxht + vi - xht).
Turning to demand, we specify what individuals expect in terms of incremental benefits
at the Gold Plan. Selection on the basis of health costs depends on individuals’ ability to forecast
their health care demand.25 Better forecasting aggravates selection incentives. We assume a
person of type ht expects the following incremental services in the Gold plan:
x

γx

1

γ x

Individuals’ expectations of their added services are a weighted average of their ht-group
incremental cost, xht, and the population average, x. The weight, γ, on ht-group specific spending
in expectations could differ by person, but for simplicity we assume all persons share the same
ability to predict. The case of “no selection” corresponds to γ = 0; when γ = 1, individuals fully
anticipate their incremental services in the Gold Plan. We operationalize xht by the predicted
values from a regression using all the h-variables from the CMS-HCC model as well as the tvariables used to define premiums. This regression is reported in Table B of the Appendix.
Recalling that pt is the incremental premium charged to a person of type t in a Gold plan,
an individual i chooses Gold iff:
βx

+ vi - pt > 0.

(7)

The (7) rule can be aggregated to define demand curves for Gold Plan membership. Assuming
an interior solution (i.e., the premium p is such that some individuals choose the Gold plan and
some choose the Silver plan) demand for membership in Gold for one ht group is
N

N

(8)

The nature of selection and efficiency in our EF-type model can be illustrated with
demand curves for two h groups of the same size with the same t and therefore facing the same
premium. See Figure 3. We let h take the values 1 and 2 and call the groups 1t and 2t, with
costs higher for group 1t. Demands for Gold for each group (from (8)) will be linear, with a

25

Selection could also arise based on another factor correlated with health care costs. Correlation with
“other factors” is why in some settings researchers observe favorable selection. (See, e.g., Cutler, Lincoln
and Zeckhauser, 2010) For example, if risk aversion is inversely related to health care costs, more
generous plans will experience favorable selection. Here we set vi, representing “other factors,” to be
independent of health care costs so no such correlations are introduced.

18

N , (which, in this example is identical to both types). The intersection on the

slope of

vertical axis will be where p

v

βx , taking a value higher for the higher demand group.

Since expectations of health care use are imperfect, actual benefits will diverge from expected
benefits (demand). Suppose groups 1t and 2t both underestimate what their actual incremental
use in the Gold plan. Benefits are also shown in Figure 3. Finally, Figure 3 contains the
incremental costs for the two groups, equal to x1t and x2t respectively, and the efficient
memberships in Gold, N

∗

∗

and N .

We make several observations based on the Figure. First, for any premium pt which the
two h groups have in common, more members of the more expensive group 1t will join Gold
than the equal-sized less expensive group 2t, i.e., selection happens. Indeed, until the premium
falls to v

βx , only group 1t will join. With further premium reductions, some of both
N , at the margin

Groups join Gold. Since in our model both demands have slope of

the mix of joiners is 50-50, reflecting the overall mix in the t category. As premium falls, the
composition of the Gold joiners will move towards the mix of h groups in the t category,
reducing the degree of selection. (This is consistent with the EF model.)
Second and importantly, no single premium will lead both groups to make the efficient
decision about Gold membership. In other words, no premium can induce N

∗

to join Gold from

∗

1t and N to join Gold from 2t. This illustrates that the best premium for a t group is a second
best – full efficiency is plan sorting is unattainable with a single premium.
Third, the “first-best” premium for each of the two groups is not incremental marginal
cost, when demand diverges from benefit. Take group 1t. We want N

∗

from this group to join

Gold. Setting a premium for this group to be equal to x1t would not do it – too few would join
Gold at that premium because health care costs are anticipated imperfectly. We have to reduce
the incremental premium to below this level to “correct for” the underanticipation of health care
costs among members of a high-cost group.26 Recognizing imperfect foresight implies that a
Pigouvian correction for under or overanticipation of benefits needs to be built into the secondbest premium.

If we could set premium separately for group 1t (which of course we cannot), it would be p∗
x term.
x . The correction for imperfect foresight is the β x

26

x

β x

19

5. Results
We begin with two normative benchmarks: the (unattainable) first best in which everyone is in
the best plan for them, and the (attainable) second best in which the Gold incremental premiums
for each of the 12 premium categories are chosen so as to minimize welfare loss in sorting.
To implement these benchmarks we need to make choices about the parameters
describing benefits and demand. We choose parameter values for β, v and γ to lead to what we
judge to be a reasonable degree of adverse selection between the two plan types (described
shortly). In EF terms, that the incremental AC for the Gold plan is declining with lower
premiums (selection happens), and cuts the demand curve from below (there is an equilibrium,
no “death spiral.”). In other words, the market demand and cost curves look something like
Figure 1 above from the Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) paper.
5.1 Benchmark: First-Best Allocation
Table 2 describes the first-best sorting of individuals between Silver and Gold plans for a
baseline set of parameter values. We set β = 1.1. The idiosyncratic term v is uniform with three
ranges, one for each of the three age groups. For the young, v is [-$1,000, $1,000], for the
middle-aged group [-$2,000, $2,000] and for the older group [-$4,000, $4,000], ranges roughly
scaled to health care costs for the three age groups. On average, the additional services in Gold
are worth their cost (since β > 1) but not for everyone because of the idiosyncratic term. For the
first-best, we use rule (6) to allocate membership from each ht group to the Gold plan. All
persons in an ht group are the same except for their idiosyncratic v term. We can define a cutoff
value of v for each ht group that defines the person whose net benefit is the same in the two
plans. From (6):
v∗

1

β x

Persons in an ht group with v

v ∗ should be in Gold; others in Silver. When β > 1, v ∗ is

negative, indicating that more than half of members of all ht groups will be in Gold in the firstbest.
∗

The number of persons in an ht group who should go to the Gold plan, N , is simply the
number in the group times share whose valuation exceeds xht, the incremental cost, or
N

∗

N

∗

20

N

∗

has a maximum value of N

and a minimum of 0. Summing over h yields the values for

each t group in Table 2. Table 2 also shows the average costs for the enrollees in the two plans
for each premium group.
5.2 Benchmark: Second-Best Allocation
The second normative standard is a second-best in which demands, conditioned on
premiums in 12 categories, determine the allocation of people between Gold and Silver Plans.
One consideration in the second best is the incremental cost of Gold for a premium group.
“Incremental” refers to the cost of Gold above Silver. As (3) makes clear, as the incremental
premium changes, a mix of heterogeneous individuals within the t group change plans.
“Incremental cost” in this context is thus the weighted average of the incremental costs of
persons choosing Gold as a function of the premium. Because there is a mix of types on the
margin within a premium group, the second-best incremental premium will not be the “right”
premium for each of the h-groups involved.
A second consideration is the distinction between demand and benefit. Generally, with
imperfect foresight, individuals will not accurately predict their health care costs, and therefore
not accurately predict how much they would benefit from membership in the Gold plan. In our
simulations we assume γ = .2, implying that individuals put .2 weight on the actual costs of their
ht group with forming expectations and .8 weight on the sample mean, x.27 The second-best
incremental premium is defined by the intersection of the marginal benefit schedule for a t group
and marginal costs.
To find the second-best allocation and premium, we trace out demand, marginal benefit
and (averaged) incremental marginal cost curves for each premium group and find their
intersection, a process illustrated in Table 3 for the 31-50 year olds in the Northeast. Beginning
at the bottom of the table with a high premium of $1500, enrollment in Gold is 1,138 out of the
4,167 people in that premium group. The table also shows costs for both plans at this premium.
For those in the Gold plan at this premium the average cost is $3,869, and $2,725 for the balance
of the people in the Silver plan. Costs differ because for any person the Gold is 20% more
expensive, and because a different mix of people (h-types) is in the two plans. Note that as the

27

Some researchers (e.g., Newhouse et al., 1989) have argued that about 25% of health care costs are
predictable by individuals. We acknowledge, however, that we choose γ for practical reasons, to make
the degree of selection look “reasonable.”

21

premium falls, more people move to Gold, but also the Gold average cost falls. The most
expensive h-types within the premium group prefer the Gold at the high premium, but as the
premium falls, a more representative group is joining. As the last column, incremental marginal
cost indicates, the mix of h-types joining the Gold plan is constant over this range of premiums.28
(At premiums much higher or lower this would not be true.) “Incremental average cost” refers to
the difference in the average cost at the Gold and the Silver plan. This falls as premium falls. In
a market equilibrium, this incremental average cost needs to be covered by the incremental
premium (above a premium at the Silver plan that covers average cost) at the Gold plan.
The marginal benefit schedule is constructed as follows. As incremental premium falls,
we know (by demand which depends on x ) which individuals move to the Gold plan. These
individuals have a benefit (which depends on x

from the Gold plan. The marginal benefit

value in Table 3 is these benefits averaged over the people who move for a given premium
difference. Figure 4 plots demand, marginal benefit, incremental average and marginal cost from
Table 3. Because marginal benefit is below demand, to induce the correct enrollment, the
incremental premium charged to this group must be less than incremental marginal cost.
Table 4 shows the second-best enrollment and premiums for all 12 premium groups.
Enrollments are in all cases very close to the enrollments in the first-best. Seeing 1305 in Gold
in both the first and second best does not mean the second best is identical to the first best. The
1305 is rounded to the nearest whole person, but more importantly, there are some wrong
assignments both ways in the second best, whereas everyone is in the right plan for them in the
first-best scenario. Specifically, for the 19-30 year olds in the NE, 16 enrollees (1.3 percent of
Silver enrollment) are in Silver who should be in Gold and 16 in Gold who should be in Silver.
For the entire population, 359 are in Gold who should be in Silver and 358 are in Silver who
should be in Gold, amounting to slightly over 1 percent of the population.29
The last column in Table 4 shows the average welfare loss per person for each group and
overall associated with being in the “wrong” plan. In the first best, everyone in an ht group with
a value of v > v ∗ should is in Gold. By contrast, in the second best, where individuals respond
to a premium, although that premium is set at the most efficient level for the t group, it will not
be efficient for each of the h groups within the premium category. In the second-best, everyone
28
29

This special feature is a consequence of our assumptions.
These numbers are not shown in the Table, and are rounded to the nearest “whole person.”

22

with a v > v

will choose Gold where this cutoff for each ht group in the second-best

where
v

p

βx

Thus, within each ht group there is a range of individuals between v ∗ and v
are in the “wrong” plan. For some h groups v ∗ > v

who

and for others the reverse will be

true. To see how we calculate welfare loss for each h group, suppose for some group v ∗ >
v

implying that too few people from this group are in the Gold plan. The measure of

inefficiency for this h group is the probability that someone in the group is in the wrong plan
times the average lost benefit for the person wrongly located.
Avg Welfare Loss for ht group in Second-Best =

∗

∗

The first term of this product is the probability that a person is in the range of v where the person
is in the wrong plan; the second term is the average of the lowest (0) and highest (v ∗ v

value of the net benefit lost from being in the wrong plan.30
Averaged over the entire population this comes out to only $.70 per person, the minimum

welfare loss that can be attained given these premium groups. The welfare loss in the second
best also depends on the benefits in the two plan types and on the nature of individuals’
expectations about their costs. The adverse selection problem would be aggravated, and the
welfare loss higher, if individuals could forecast more accurately than we have assumed here in
these simulations.
The second-best allocation depends only on the incremental premium charged enrollees
for Gold. Silver and Gold plans must of course break even in an equilibrium. This consideration
introduces another set of factors that will determine how much more people are charged to join
Gold: the difference between the break-even premium for the Silver plan and for the Gold plan.
This will not, of course, in general, be the second best. We move now to consideration of a
series of market equilibria: no risk adjustment, conventional risk adjustment, and risk adjustment
to hit the second-best premiums. In all equilibria considered, premium for each category for the
Silver and Gold plans will be equal to average cost in that premium category.
5.3 Equilibrium with no Risk Adjustment

30

Thus, a kind of “Harberger triangle.”

23

In equilibrium, premium for the Silver plan must equal Silver Plan average costs,
premium for the Gold plan equals Gold plan average costs, and the difference between these, the
incremental premium that consumers face, must sort individuals such that the resulting plan
average costs are covered by the premiums. We find the equilibrium by tracing out demand and
cost curves.
The equilibrium is depicted graphically in Figure 5 for the 31-50 year olds in the
Northeast. Figure 5 augments Figure 4 with a lower quadrant showing the average costs for both
plans.31 The incremental average cost in the upper quadrant is seen to be the difference between
the average cost curves from the lower quadrant. The lower quadrants can also be used to depict
the equilibrium premiums in both the Gold and Silver Plans.
Results are summarized for all twelve premium categories in Table 5. Fewer enrollees
are in Gold because for all premium categories, premiums to cover average costs are “too high”
in relation to either the first or second best. Instead of more than half of people in Gold in the
second best, only 40 percent (26,044/64,667) are in Gold in the equilibrium without risk
adjustment. Note that as in the second-best, there will be enrollment mistakes in both directions,
though with equilibrium premiums too high, most of the mistakes will be putting too many
people in Silver. The welfare loss in this equilibrium is much greater than the second best. On
average, as the last column in Table 5 shows, the welfare loss is $32.25 per person.
Beginning with this first equilibrium, we can keep track of how well the payment system
– here just premiums – fits costs for Gold and Silver plans. By “fit” we mean the degree to
which variation in revenue per person tracks costs per person. To figure fit we generalize the
concept of statistical fit to account for both premiums and risk adjustment of plan payments.
For each individual, we construct a measure of total payments to the plan (i.e. plan revenues),
including the premium and risk adjustment. This value is then compared with the individual’s
costs to construct our fit measure.32 Specifically, let Ri be the total revenue a plan receives for
person i after risk adjustment, and xi be the total costs for person i. Total variation in Silver plan
31

In the textbook EF model, the “other plan” has zero costs and zero premium for any enrollee. When the
other plan is a real plan, its costs too will vary as enrollment changes in the Gold Plan.
32
There are other plausible measures of fit, such as the mean absolute difference between revenues and
costs. Not squaring this difference down weights the influence of high-cost outliers in the fit measure.
We chose the payment system R-squared to be easily comparable to statistics reported for risk adjustment,
and on the general principle in economics that the economic value of a loss goes up approximately with
the square of the difference between the actual and the optimal price.

24

costs is ∑ x

x

, where x is the mean plan cost and the summation is over individuals in

the Silver plan. Variation remaining after the payment system is ∑ x

R

. Thus, the R-

squared or “fit” of the payment system for Silver is
Payment system fit for Silver = 1

∑
∑

A similar expression characterizes fit in the Gold plan.
Plan revenues in the current simulation are simply the premiums covering average cost
for each premium group. Some “risk adjustment” is accomplished by premium categories.
Values for payment system fit are 0.019 for both Silver and Gold in the no risk adjustment case.
5.4 Equilibrium with Conventional Risk Adjustment
Conventional risk adjustment is based on the regression from Table B. Conventional risk
adjustment is estimated ex ante, before plans set premiums and before individuals choose plans.
The demand curve for Gold membership is unaffected by risk adjustment. Risk adjustment
affects the costs that must be covered by premiums at the two plans because the risk adjusted
revenues now vary according to the personal characteristics of the joiners. Therefore, the
incremental average cost that describes the difference in the premiums for Gold and Silver for
any premium group also changes. Risk adjustment takes from each plan (either Gold or Silver)
the average cost at the Silver plan, x , and returns to each plan the risk-adjusted payment rh
estimate from a regression on Silver plan costs (from Table B in Appendix). (This risk
adjustment system is self-financing but the amount “taken” from the plans does not affect the
equilibrium so long as the amount is constant for both plan types – it only affects the level of
premiums in the two plans.) We compute average cost at the Gold and Silver plans net of risk
adjustment transfers then the average incremental cost for the Gold Plan. Equilibrium is, as
before, where the incremental premium at the Gold Plan equals this risk-adjusted average
incremental cost.
Concurrent conventional risk adjustment imposes the market equilibrium compared to
that with no risk adjustment, as shown in Table 6. Equilibrium premiums are much reduced, and
many more people move to Gold. This is consistent with the objective of risk adjustment: by
transferring funds to more costly individuals, selection has less effect on the net average cost of
the plans. (If risk adjustment were perfect and fully picked up expected costs, the mix of joiners
would have no effect at all on plans’ average costs.) Incremental premiums for the young groups
25

are below the second best premiums, and for the older groups they are above. Risk adjustment
can deal with correcting premiums for selection; it cannot deal at all, at least directly, with
correcting for over or underanticipation of costs. The welfare loss per person in conventional
risk adjustment falls to $6.32 per person.
Furthermore, conventional risk adjustment improves the fit of the payment system for
both plans. For the Silver plans the payment system fit rises to .168 and to .164 for the Gold
plans.
5.5 Risk Adjustment to Achieve the Second Best
In our final set of simulations, we find risk adjustment weights incorporating constraints
to ensure that the equilibrium premium is the second-best incremental premium. Consider the
first premium group, the 19-30 year olds living in the Northeast. Call them premium group 1.
With conventional risk adjustment, Table 6 tells us that the equilibrium incremental premium is
too low, $298 instead of the second-best $499, and too many from this group are in the Gold plan
in the conventional risk adjustment equilibrium. The constraint that premium for the 19-30 year
olds in the NE is $499 in equilibrium comes from the expressions that the Silver and Gold plan
premiums for this group must be zero profit. For the Silver plan, premium for group 1 is the cost
for the group less the net risk adjustment transfer:
p

∑

∑
∑

x

∑

(9)

Expressing the Gold premium as the Silver premium +$499 (the desired incremental premium),
the breakeven condition for the Gold plan for group 1 is:
p

499

∑

∑
∑

x

∑

(10)

Substituting for the Silver premium and cancelling the overall average costs, we have:
499

∑

∑
∑

∑
∑

∑

∑
∑

(11)

The $499 has to cover the difference in the average costs between the two plans (the first two
terms in (11), less any higher risk adjustment transfers to Gold.
Having solved for the second best, we know average cost in the Silver and Gold plan in
the second best, and the enrollments in those plans in the second best. The only “variables” in
(11) are the risk-adjustment weights. Thus, (11) is linear in the rh weights, and forms the

26

constraint corresponding to the restriction that the incremental premium for the 19-30 year olds
is the second best in equilibrium.
After reproducing the conventional risk adjustment equilibrium results in the first pair of
columns, Table 7, in the second pair of columns, shows the equilibrium with a risk adjustment
system estimated by imposing the one constraint, (11) from above. Specifically, we estimate a
conventional concurrent risk adjustment model, identical to the one contained in Table B from
the Appendix B and described above, but with the constraint that the risk adjustment weights
satisfy (11). This regression, and the regressions with more constraints are also contained in
Table B. With new risk adjustment weights, there will be a new equilibrium for all premium
categories. Table 7 shows the full set of results. Equilibrium incremental premiums generally
move in the right direction (towards the second best) for all the young premium categories as the
result of imposing the single constraint for the young NE group. The welfare cost per person for
all four of the young groups fall as this one constraint comes into play. In aggregate, the sorting
between Gold and Silver becomes more efficient, with the per person welfare loss dropping from
$6.32 to $4.75 per person.33
Improvement in sorting efficiency comes at a cost in terms of “fit” of the payment system
to the Gold and Silver plan. With one constraint, the payment system fit in the Silver and Gold
plans fall from 0.168 and 0.164 with conventional risk adjustment to 0.155 and 0.149,
respectively. Fit statistics are summarized for our equilibrium cases in Figure 6.
Table 7 and Figure 6 also contain the results for risk adjustment systems in which we
include two and three constraints. Our two-constraint model imposes, in addition to (11) above,
a constraint that the premium for the 31-50 year olds in the NE must be equal to $535, the
second-best incremental premium for this group. The form of the constraint is analogous to (11).
Welfare loss from sorting falls for the middle groups and for the overall average for the
population to $3.24. Fit deteriorates for both the Silver and Gold Plans. Finally, we also impose
a constraint on the 51-64 year olds in the NE, making three constraints in total, bringing down
welfare loss to $2.17 per person but leading to payment system fits for the Silver and Gold plans
of 0.081 and 0.117, respectively.
In principle, we could impose more than three constraints on the second-best premium.
To attain the full second best, we could impose all 12 premium constraints. In fact we have done
33

Because we are imposing just one constraint, there is no guarantee that the average welfare loss falls.

27

this in results not reported. We found that the constrained risk adjustment regressions yielded
unreasonable coefficient estimates on the HCC indicators (i.e., too large or too small), and
furthermore, the plan fit measures became very poor. We believe the instability and
unreasonableness of the estimates would be relieved with a much larger sample size. In an
Exchange population, a relatively small share of the population has any positive HCC
indicator.34 Calibration of the tradeoff between sorting efficiency and plan fit should be next
done with the much larger data sets actually used for risk adjustment.

6. Discussion
Our goal in this paper is to introduce risk adjustment – a supply-side policy – into the analysis of
EF-type adverse selection stemming from a pricing problem on the demand side due to
consumers not facing the correct incremental price for the more generous plan. Risk adjustment
can be helpful because it affects the equilibrium incremental premium. We show how this
works, and how to incorporate the goal of efficient sorting between plan types into consideration
of setting risk adjustment weights.
Our paper contains theoretical extensions of the EF model and an empirical
implementation. The empirical analysis involves a number of assumptions which we
acknowledge here. Although we made an effort to capture important features of payment
systems in Exchanges, including the predominant risk adjustment methodology, our results can
only be regarded as illustrative, due to data limitations as well as many features of Exchanges
(such as more than two plan types, more detailed risk adjustment categories, reinsurance and risk
corridors, and others) that we could not incorporate in our simulations.
In this final section we would like to call attention to the major conceptual points in the
paper and make some comments about application of the ideas. At the most general level, we
want to stress that the connection between premiums and risk adjustment is one that a Regulator
should take into account. How plans are paid for various enrollees must affect equilibrium
market premiums, no matter what market structure governs plan competition. Premiums are
important for plan sorting and even consumer participation in Exchanges, and the role of risk
adjustment thus should take this connection into account.

34

Only about 20% of the people in our Exchange population have any HCC.

28

To anticipate the impact of risk adjustment on premiums accurately requires a conception
(a model) of how premiums are set and how risk adjustment affects costs a plan must cover with
the premium. Heterogeneity in a population is central to this issue. EF-type models already
incorporate some heterogeneity in demand and cost but the textbook EF model needs elaboration
for the task of incorporating risk adjustment. Principally, it is necessary to recognize payments
to plans depend on the risk score of their enrollees. Groups defined on another but related
dimension will pay different premiums for plans. These generalizations of the EF framework
when taken to data involve many steps which we take in the paper. The main conceptual points
to take away from these generalizations are however straightforward:


No single premium will sort a population efficiently between two plans. While this point
has been made in the health economics literature, the textbook EF diagram makes it look
like a single premium can eliminate the “welfare cost” of adverse selection.



As a corollary, when there is more than one group in a population, the area between the
demand curve in aggregate and the marginal cost curve in the EF diagram is not an
accurate measure of the welfare loss at all. With multiple groups, the marginal cost curve
in that picture is an average marginal cost.

There are two primary welfare frameworks for evaluating the functioning of private health
insurance markets, a utility-based framework and a demand-cost framework. Most papers in the
literature use one or the other. EF, for example, uses demand and cost. Our paper uses both,
starting with utility and deriving the demand and marginal benefit schedule. Doing so explicitly
is a reminder of the assumptions necessary to go from utility to demand. Major assumptions
have to do with what a consumer “knows” or can forecast, and the degree to which consumers
are fully rational. It is very unclear the degree to which demand (willingness to pay) can serve as
a welfare framework in health insurance. While ultimately, utility is the gold standard for
welfare in economics, demand and cost diagrams are the workhorses of applied welfare
economics. An important agenda item for health economics and policy is coming up with a
practical and valid method for normative analysis of health insurance markets.
It is worth recalling in this respect that the EF approach treats plan characteristics as
fixed, missing an important efficiency concern, dating from some of the first research on the
economics of insurance market equilibrium, about how selection influences the design of the
health insurance product itself (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). EF as well as the work we do
29

here does not incorporate equity considerations. The basic EF framework with one group and
one premium is not suited to healthy-sick or other cross-group comparisons. In the current paper
because we have age groups and risk adjustment, it would be possible to do more with equity.
Interestingly, our efficiency corrections tend to level age-group differences among equilibrium
premiums.
One of the practical applications of the methods developed here is to address questions
around determination of population groups with respect to premium categories. A great deal of
research has focused on the question of grouping people for purposes of risk adjustment. Riskadjustment statistical models are generally populated with (0,1) variables that correspond to risk
adjustment cells. Much less work has been directed to the question of what are the right
premium groups. We know one group is inefficient and two groups could improve the efficiency
of sorting, but the introduction of groups implies different premiums for the different groups that
may introduce fairness issues. In order to evaluate any efficiency-fairness tradeoff, we need to
have a sense of what the efficiency gains are for dividing a population more finely. The methods
here help to address the issue.
In addition to contributions that depend on welfare or evaluation of efficiency, we have
shown here how to work with the connection between premiums and risk adjustment. If a
Regulator is interested in premium targets (e.g., keeping premiums for young people below some
level), risk adjustment can be the tool to hit the targets by adding premium constraints to the risk
adjustment formulas.

30

References
Abaluck J. and Gruber J.(2011), “Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence from Plan
Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” American Economic Review: 101 (4): 11801210.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2008) “MEPS HC-092 1996-2004 Risk
Adjustment Scores, Public Use File,” Gaithersburg, MD.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2011). “MEPS HC-128: Medical Conditions
File.” Rockville, MD.
Aizcorbe A, Liebman E, Pack S, Cutler DM, Chernew ME, and AB Rosen. (2012) Measuring
Health Care Costs of Individuals with Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance in the US:
A Comparison of Survey and Claims Data. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 28: 43-51.
http://www.bea.gov/papers/pdf/Measuring%20health%20care%20costs%20of%20individ
uals%20with%20employer-sponsored%20health%20insurance.pdf
Akerloff G.A. (1970), “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488-500.
Bundorf, M. K, J. D. Levin and N. Mahoney. (2012) “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan
Choice," American Economic Review, 102 (7), 3214-3248..
Carlin C, and Town R. (2010) “Adverse Selection, Welfare and Optimal Pricing of Employer
Sponsored Health Plans,” Unpublished.
Congressional Budget Office, (2011). CBO’s Analysis of the Major Health Care Legislation
Enacted in March 2010. Testimony by Douglas W. Elmendorf before the Subcommittee
on Health, Committee on Energy and Commerce, US House of Representatives, March
30, 2011.
Cutler, D., Lincoln, G. and Zeckhauser, R. (2010) “Selection Stories: Understanding Movement
Across Health Plans,” Journal of Health Economics 29(6): 821-38.
Cutler, D. and Reber, S., (1998) “Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff Between
Competition and Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 433-466.
Dafny L., S, Ho K. and Varela M. (2013). “Let them Have Choice: Gains from Shifting away
from Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and Toward an Individual
Exchange,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 5(1): 32-34.

31

Department of Health and Human Services, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, “HHS
Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2014,” Federal Register, 2013. p. 1541015541.
Einav L. and Finkelstein, A. (2011), “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in
Pictures,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,25(1): 115-38.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein and M. Cullen (2010), “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using
Variation in Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 877-921.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein and Levin (2010), “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance
Markets,” Annual Review of Economics, 2:311-36.
Geruso M. (2012), “Selection in Employer Health Plans: Homogeneous Prices and
Heterogeneous Preferences”, Unpublished.
Glazer, J. and McGuire, T.G. (2000) “Optimal Risk Adjustment of Health Insurance Premiums:
An Application to Managed Care,” American Economic Review, 90(4): 1055-71.
Glazer, J. and McGuire, T.G. (2011) “Gold and Silver Plans: Accomodating Demand
Heterogeneity in Managed Competition, Journal of Health Economics 30(5): 1011-1019.
Handel, B. (2013), “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging
Hurts,” American Economic Review 103(7): 2643-2682.
Handel B., Hendel I. and Whinston M.D. (2013), “Equilibria in Health Exchanges:
Adverse Selection vs. Reclassification Risk,” NBER Working Paper 19399.
Keeler, E., Carter, G. and Newhouse, J. (1998), “A Model of the Impact of Reimbursement
Schemes on Health Plan Choice,” Journal of Health Economics, 17(3): 297-320.
Kolstad, J. and A. Kowalski (2014), “Mandate-Based Health Reform and Evidence from the
Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform,” NBER Working Paper 17933.
Lucarelli C, Prince J. and Simon K (2012). “The Welfare Impact of Reducing Choice in
Medicare Part D: A Comparison of Two Regulation Strategies,” International Economic
Review 53(4): 1155-1177.
Lustig J., (2008), "The Welfare Effects of Adverse Selection in Privatized Medicare,"
Unpublished.
McGuire, T. G., J. Glazer, J. P. Newhouse, S.-L. Normand, J. Shi, A.D. Sinaiko, and S. Zuvekas,
(2013) “Integrating Risk Adjustment and Enrollee Premiums in Health Plan Payment,”
Journal of Health Economics 32(6): 1263-1277.

32

Newhouse JP, Manning WG, Keeler EB, Sloss EM, "Adjusting capitation rates using objective
health measures and prior utilization," Health Care Financing Review, 1989; 10(3): 4154.
Pope, G.C., Kautter, J., Ingber, M.J., Freeman, S., Sekar, R., Newhart, C., (2011) “Evaluation of
the CMS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model,” Final Report, RTI Project Number
0209853.006. RTI International, March.
Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4):
629-649.
Sing M, Banthin JS, Selden TM, Cowan CA, Keehan SP, "Reconciling medical expenditure
estimates from the MEPS and NHEA, 2002," Health Care Finance Review, 2006; 28(1):
25-40.
Spinnewijn, J., (2013) “Heterogeneity, Demand for Insurance and Adverse Selection,”
unpublished, London School of Economics, June 2.
Trish E, Damico A, Claxton G, Levitt L, Garfield R. (2011) A Profile of Health Insurance
Exchange Enrollees. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2011; March.
Van de Ven, W.P.M.M., and R. P. Ellis, (2000) “Risk Adjustment in Competitive Health Plan
Markets,” in A. Culyer and J. Newhouse (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume
1, Elsevier, pp. 755-846.
Zhu, J.M., Layton, T.J., Sinaiko, A.D., McGuire T.G., “The Power of Reinsurance in Health
Insurance Exchanges to Improve the Fit of the Payment System and Reduce Incentives
for Adverse Selection,” forthcoming, Inquiry.
Zuvekas SH, Olin G, "An Examination of the Accuracy of Medicare Expenditures in the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey," Inquiry, 2009; 46(1): 92-108.

33

Table 1. Sample Demographic and Health Characteristics (N=64,667)
Age
19‐30
31‐50
51‐64
Male
Race
White, non‐Hispanic
Black, non‐Hispanic
Hispanic
Asian
Other
Education
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College degree
Employment status1
Continuously employed
Continuously unemployed
Household Income ($2010)
Mean
<$25,000
$25,000‐50,000
$50,000‐100,000
>$100,000
Geographic Region
Northeast
Mideast
South
West
Insurance Status
Uninsured
Non‐group
ESI with employee premium> 9% of income
Self‐employed
Small group ESI
Health Care Spending (Mean, $2010)
Self‐reported Health Status
Excellent
Very good
Good
Fair
Poor
Source: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), 2004‐2010.

30.0%
46.1%
23.7%
50.4%
50.3%
13.7%
27.9%
5.7%
2.2%
17.9%
34.0%
17.4%
29.4%
74.6%
11.7%
$32,660
48.7%
32.5%
15.0%
3.5%
14.0%
19.4%
38.2%
28.3%
55.6%
3.5%
7.7%
0.5%
32.5%
$2,648
28.0%
32.1%
28.5%
9.1%
2.0%

34

Table 2. First-Best Allocation to Silver and Gold Plans
Premium Categories
Average Costs
Age
Region
N
Silver
Gold
19‐30
Northeast
2,541
$1,273
$1,722
Midwest
3,720
$1,797
$2,371
South
7,298
$1,356
$1,820
West
5,893
$1,119
$1,518
31‐50
Northeast
4,167
$2,768
$3,538
Midwest
5,703
$2,648
$3,452
South
11,580
$2,112
$2,771
West
8,406
$2,047
$2,630
51‐64
Northeast
2,362
$4,474
$5,714
Midwest
3,131
$5,024
$6,383
South
5,826
$4,727
$5,990
West
4,040
$4,012
$5,045

Enrollment
Silver
Gold
1,236
1,305
1,790
1,930
3,544
3,754
2,876
3,017
2,024
2,143
2,773
2,930
5,662
5,918
4,114
4,292
1,154
1,208
1,525
1,606
2,842
2,984
1,978
2,062

Table 3. Finding the Second-best Premium for the 31-50 Year Olds in the Northeast
Incremental
Enrollment Average Costs Incremental Incremental Incremental
Premium_Chosen
in Gold
Average
Marginal
Marginal
Silver
Gold
Cost
Benefit
Cost
$500
2,180
$2,653 $3,660
$1,007
$537
$535
2,143
$2,657 $3,664
$1,007
$572
$572
$572
2,105
$2,661 $3,669
$1,008
$609
$572
$600
2,075
$2,664 $3,672
$1,008
$637
$572
$700
1,971
$2,673 $3,685
$1,012
$737
$572
$800
1,867
$2,681 $3,699
$1,017
$837
$572
$900
1,763
$2,689 $3,714
$1,025
$937
$572
$1,000
1,659
$2,696 $3,732
$1,036
$1,037
$572
$1,100
1,555
$2,703 $3,752
$1,049
$1,137
$572
$1,200
1,450
$2,709 $3,775
$1,066
$1,237
$572
$1,300
1,346
$2,715 $3,801
$1,087
$1,337
$572
$1,400
1,242
$2,720 $3,832
$1,112
$1,437
$572
$1,500
1,138
$2,725 $3,869
$1,144
$1,537
$572

35

Table 4. Second-Best Premiums and Allocation
Premium Categories
Enrollment
Age
Region
N
Silver
Gold
19‐30 Northeast
2,541
1236
1305
Midwest
3,720
1790
1930
South
7,298
3544
3754
West
5,893
2873
3020
31‐50 Northeast
4,167
2024
2143
Midwest
5,703
2773
2930
South
11,580
5663
5917
West
8,406
4113
4293
51‐64 Northeast
2,362
1154
1208
Midwest
3,131
1525
1606
South
5,826
2842
2984
West
4,040
1978
2062
All
64,667
31,517 33,150

Incremental Second Best Welfare
Marginal Cost
Premium
Loss
$499
$271
$0.57
$512
$378
$0.64
$501
$288
$0.58
$494
$238
$0.50
$535
$572
$0.65
$533
$553
$0.82
$520
$443
$0.71
$517
$424
$0.52
$577
$924
$1.03
$591
$1,035
$1.06
$583
$972
$0.96
$565
$822
$0.70
N/A
N/A
$0.70

Table 5. Equilibrium Premiums and Allocation without Risk Adjustment
Premium Categories
Enrollment
Premiums
Age
Region
N
Silver
Gold
Silver
Gold Incremental
19‐30 Northeast 2,541
1,465
1,076
$1,202 $1,881
$679
Midwest
3,720
2,467
1,253
$1,742 $2,617
$876
South
7,298
4,245
3,053
$1,287 $1,980
$693
West
5,893
3,165
2,728
$1,046 $1,639
$593
31‐50 Northeast 4,167
2,551
1,616
$2,699 $3,740
$1,041
Midwest
5,703
3,684
2,019
$2,571 $3,743
$1,172
South
11,580
6,899
4,681
$2,030 $2,978
$947
West
8,406
4,666
3,740
$1,979 $2,758
$780
51‐64 Northeast 2,362
1,479
883
$4,370 $6,049
$1,679
Midwest
3,131
2,010
1,121
$4,923 $6,753
$1,830
South
5,826
3,635
2,191
$4,629 $6,300
$1,672
West
4,040
2,357
1,683
$3,927 $5,240
$1,314
All
64,667
38,623 26,044
N/A
N/A
N/A

Welfare
Loss
$8.69
$33.81
$9.80
$2.91
$32.65
$51.90
$23.55
$9.14
$76.89
$97.06
$75.06
$35.76
$32.25

36

Table 6. Equilibrium Premiums and Allocation with Conventional Risk Adjustment
Premium Categories
Enrollment
Premiums
Welfare
Loss
Age
Region
N
Silver
Gold
Silver
Gold Incremental
19‐30 Northeast 2,541
981
1,560
$2,572 $2,870
$298
$10.58
Midwest
3,720
1,602
2,118
$2,944 $3,355
$411
$3.17
South
7,298
2,866
4,432
$2,595 $2,910
$315
$9.19
West
5,893
2,190
3,703
$2,452 $2,714
$262
$14.01
31‐50 Northeast 4,167
2,102
2,065
$3,074 $3,684
$610
$1.35
Midwest
5,703
2,870
2,833
$2,842 $3,444
$601
$1.40
South
11,580
5,553
6,027
$2,418 $2,900
$482
$0.89
West
8,406
3,979
4,427
$2,582 $3,034
$453
$1.03
51‐64 Northeast 2,362
1,276
1,086
$2,662 $3,652
$990
$11.67
Midwest
3,131
1,726
1,405
$2,954 $4,058
$1,105
$17.60
South
5,826
3,171
2,655
$2,673 $3,707
$1,034
$13.66
West
4,040
2,130
1,910
$2,617 $3,482
$865
$6.32
All
64,667
30,446 34,221
N/A
N/A
N/A
$6.32

37

Table 7. Premium and Welfare Loss with Risk Adjustment with and without Constraints
No Constraints
One Constraint
Two Constraints
Premium Categories
Incremental Welfare
Incremental Welfare
Incremental Welfare
Age
Region
Premium
Loss
Premium
Loss
Premium
Loss
19‐30
Northeast
$298
$10.58
$499
$0.57
$499
$0.57
Midwest
$411
$3.17
$611
$3.10
$590
$2.17
South
$315
$9.19
$475
$0.75
$444
$1.39
West
$262
$14.01
$411
$2.25
$384
$3.57
31‐50
Northeast
$610
$1.35
$670
$2.92
$535
$0.65
Midwest
$601
$1.40
$677
$3.42
$556
$0.89
South
$482
$0.89
$550
$0.83
$443
$1.44
West
$453
$1.03
$515
$0.52
$439
$1.28
51‐64
Northeast
$990
$11.67
$1,049
$14.93
$904
$7.70
Midwest
$1,105
$17.60
$1,165
$21.68
$1,034
$13.35
South
$1,034
$13.66
$1,080
$16.39
$953
$9.51
West
$865
$6.32
$902
$7.80
$813
$4.54
All
N/A
$6.32
N/A
$4.75
N/A
$3.24
Note: “One constraint” sets incremental premium for 19-30 in Northeast to $499;
“Two constraints” adds constraint that incremental premium for 31-50 in Northeast is $535;
“Three constraints” adds constraint that incremental premium for 51-64 in Northeast is $577.

Three Constraints
Incremental Welfare
Premium
Loss
$499
$0.57
$643
$4.95
$452
$1.17
$407
$2.43
$535
$0.65
$454
$1.59
$367
$3.62
$410
$1.96
$577
$1.03
$746
$2.57
$722
$2.16
$642
$1.07
N/A
$2.17

38

Figure 1. Efficiency Costs of Adverse Selection in Einav-Finkelstein Model

39

Figure 2. Welfare Loss with a Common Incremental Premium

40

Figure 3. Demand and Benefit among Two Groups with Same Premium

41

Figure 4. Second-best Allocation for 31-50 Year-olds, Northeast

42

Figure 5. EF Equilibrium with No Risk Adjustment, 31-50 Year-olds, Northeast

43

Figure 6. Payment System Fit and Sorting Efficiency Tradeoff

44

Table A. Changes on the algorithm from ICD-9 codes to CMS-HCCs
Five pregnancy related CCs are added:
ICD‐9 Codes
CCs
650 ‐ 659
200 Normal Delivery
640 ‐ 649
201 Complications mainly related to pregnancy
660 ‐ 669
202 Complications occurring mainly in the course of labor
670 ‐ 677
203 Complications of the puerperium
630 ‐ 639
204 Ectopic and molar pregnancy
Notes: The CCs are sorted as 200, 201, 202, 203 and 204 from least to most severe conditions.
Individuals are assigned to the most severe code for hierarchy adjustment if they have multiple
conditions.

HCC108 (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is broken into 2 CCs:
210 Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, except asthma
211 Asthma

HCC 176 (Artificial Openings for Feeding or Elimination) is broken into 3 CCs:
220 Diseases of esophagus
221 Disorders of function of stomach
222 Other disorders of intestine

45

Table B. Risk Adjustment Regression Results
Conventional
Risk
adjustment

F18_24
F25_34
F35_44
F45_54
F55_64
M18_24
M25_34
M35_44
M45_54
M55_64

HCC1
HCC2
HCC5
HCC7
HCC8
HCC9
HCC10
HCC19
HCC26

Conventional
RA plus 1
constraint

Conventional
RA plus 2
constraints

Conventional
RA plus 3
constraints

Conventional
RA plus
premium
categories

1,234
(120)
1,686
(96)
1,504
(96)
1,695
(95)
2,236
(120)
387
(111)
582
(90)
853
(93)
1,490
(99)
2,106
(122)

979
(120)
1,044
(94)
1,756
(97)
1,906
(96)
2,488
(121)
1,653
(104)
1,064
(90)
962
(94)
1,632
(99)
2,303
(123)

618
(121)
516
(94)
1,741
(98)
1,803
(96)
1,714
(119)
2,213
(103)
802
(90)
149
(91)
1,496
(100)
1,626
(122)

739
(125)
481
(97)
1,195
(101)
630
(98)
1,470
(123)
2,146
(107)
1,428
(93)
1,112
(93)
47
(101)
971
(126)

1,189
(192)
1,580
(186)
1,275
(223)
1,358
(228)
1,713
(271)
349
(184)
463
(183)
625
(222)
1,146
(230)
1,586
(272)

3,235
(445)
2,161
(495)
1,859
(311)
13,565
(885)
13,666
(1,186)
17,992
(870)
5,526
(242)
3,423
(146)
1,724
(1,226)

1,525
(445)
‐396
(492)
1,056
(312)
14,010
(892)
14,094
(1,195)
13,660
(865)
5,171
(243)
3,423
(147)
1,728
(1,235)

1,553
(449)
‐1,650
(495)
1,491
(314)
17,368
(894)
18,132
(1,199)
15,212
(871)
6,846
(240)
4,226
(146)
‐17
(1,244)

987
(464)
‐2,058
(512)
‐219
(324)
32,757
(893)
30,940
(1,225)
16,436
(901)
7,592
(248)
5,701
(149)
3,768
(1,285)

3,228
(445)
2,165
(495)
1,833
(311)
13,559
(885)
13,653
(1,186)
17,972
(869)
5,510
(242)
3,422
(146)
1,738
(1,225)
46

Table C. Risk Adjustment Regression Results_Continued
HCC27
6,104
6,665
11,523
(856)
(862)
(857)
HCC31
4,399
4,280
4,477
(610)
(615)
(620)
HCC32
10,740
6,514
5,654
(874)
(870)
(877)
HCC33
5,085
4,394
7,602
(752)
(757)
(758)
HCC37
3,188
3,064
4,221
(353)
(356)
(357)
HCC38
2,521
2,426
3,182
(309)
(312)
(314)
HCC44
4,382
1,836
1,445
(772)
(773)
(780)
HCC45
13,615
10,627
18,130
(1,157)
(1,162)
(1,150)
HCC52
4,125
1,814
1,552
(845)
(848)
(856)
HCC54
9,373
7,504
9,759
(1,039)
(1,045)
(1,052)
HCC55
4,691
1,619
2,839
(423)
(414)
(416)
HCC69
2,610
867
‐591
(1,160)
(1,167)
(1,177)
HCC71
5,693
6,608
8,959
(1,242)
(1,251)
(1,260)
HCC72
17,470
11,637
17,896
(1,005)
(995)
(986)
HCC73
2,308
2,912
3,039
(600)
(604)
(609)
HCC74
3,811
2,021
2,206
(762)
(765)
(772)
HCC75
4,761
4,211
3,744
(1,283)
(1,292)
(1,304)
HCC77
3,309
3,359
4,212
(618)
(623)
(628)
HCC79
4,219
4,457
6,112
(840)
(846)
(852)
HCC80
5,689
5,132
5,239
(362)
(364)
(367)
HCC82
12,477
12,748
13,539
(463)
(467)
(470)

13,455
(886)
2,706
(641)
9,902
(904)
1,892
(779)
3,237
(369)
3,510
(324)
8,343
(799)
18,234
(1,189)
‐285
(884)
10,135
(1,088)
‐2,409
(422)
‐34
(1,217)
7,238
(1,303)
23,631
(1,016)
6,759
(627)
2,137
(798)
12,631
(1,341)
5,694
(649)
3,250
(880)
9,801
(373)
21,898
(469)

6,092
(856)
4,415
(610)
10,746
(874)
5,053
(752)
3,181
(353)
2,498
(309)
4,384
(772)
13,596
(1,157)
4,101
(845)
9,408
(1,039)
4,666
(423)
2,629
(1,160)
5,628
(1,242)
17,483
(1,005)
2,268
(600)
3,783
(762)
4,665
(1,283)
3,302
(618)
4,193
(840)
5,689
(362)
12,459
(463)
47

Table C. Risk Adjustment Regression Results_Continued
HCC83
3,175
3,575
3,935
(640)
(645)
(650)
HCC92
3,943
3,638
4,446
(418)
(421)
(424)
HCC96
10,126
9,283
10,383
(601)
(605)
(609)
HCC104
5,493
5,401
7,983
(315)
(317)
(310)
HCC105
12,741
10,681
16,124
(639)
(640)
(625)
HCC119
3,332
2,721
3,132
(404)
(407)
(410)
HCC130
11,775
8,768
6,748
(1,059)
(1,062)
(1,069)
HCC131
19,239
17,584
20,490
(870)
(875)
(878)
HCC148
5,553
5,115
6,969
(677)
(682)
(686)
HCC155
3,652
610
‐90
(581)
(576)
(581)
HCC157
2,426
2,648
3,360
(291)
(293)
(294)
HCC158
10,164
8,106
10,103
(1,133)
(1,140)
(1,148)
HCC164
9,777
7,578
10,176
(647)
(647)
(648)
HCC174
7,067
7,526
9,599
(1,482)
(1,493)
(1,504)
HCC177
3,154
3,404
3,877
(975)
(982)
(990)
HCC200
6,328
‐368
‐2,848
(754)
(728)
(730)
HCC201
5,686
3,693
4,600
(689)
(691)
(696)
HCC202
11,055
‐1,929
‐6,509
(901)
(804)
(799)
HCC203
4,815
6,179
12,491
(1,588)
(1,600)
(1,602)
HCC204
1,658
‐839
‐2,059
(674)
(674)
(679)
HCC210
4,423
4,772
5,789
(347)
(350)
(351)

10,243
(665)
6,567
(437)
18,664
(617)
6,390
(320)
16,048
(646)
2,878
(424)
28,180
(1,055)
25,724
(905)
3,552
(707)
‐377
(601)
4,350
(304)
9,323
(1,187)
17,833
(660)
26,982
(1,532)
12,066
(1,016)
‐4,376
(755)
991
(718)
‐9,379
(825)
2,168
(1,649)
‐1,987
(702)
11,528
(352)

3,169
(640)
3,921
(418)
10,141
(601)
5,486
(315)
12,727
(639)
3,323
(404)
11,752
(1,058)
19,213
(870)
5,542
(677)
3,638
(581)
2,403
(291)
10,171
(1,133)
9,767
(646)
7,045
(1,482)
3,145
(974)
6,354
(754)
5,671
(689)
11,038
(901)
4,808
(1,588)
1,680
(674)
4,407
(347)
48

Table C. Risk Adjustment Regression Results_Continued
HCC211
1,742
1,121
2,025
(204)
(205)
(205)
HCC220
3,442
3,251
4,612
(177)
(178)
(175)
HCC221
2,729
1,766
1,854
(300)
(301)
(303)
HCC222
5,297
4,662
6,597
(665)
(669)
(673)
small_hcc
5,968
6,565
19,033
(951)
(958)
(891)
Restriction
‐3E+08
‐5E+08
(Young_Northeast)
(1E+07)
(1E+07)
Restriction
6E+08
(Mid_Northeast)
(2E+07)
Restriction
(Old_Northeast)

221
(210)
4,261
(181)
2,571
(314)
8,292
(695)
‐1,637
(864)
‐5E+08
(1E+07)
‐4E+08
(2E+07)
9.4E+08
(1E+07)

Young_Midwest
Young_South
Young_West
Mid_Northeast
Mid_Midwest
Mid_South
Mid_West
Old_Northeast
Old_Midwest
Old_South
Old_West

R‐Square
0.236
0.224
0.211
0.156
Source: MEPS, 2004‐2010, N=64,667.
All dollar estimates reported in $2010, and standard errors are shown in parentheses.

1,705
(204)
3,429
(177)
2,733
(300)
5,275
(664)
5,939
(951)

375
(208)
24
(186)
‐119
(192)
673
(234)
439
(223)
12
(210)
173
(214)
479
(289)
770
(259)
489
(259)
430
(267)
0.236

49

