                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ANATOMY OF A CREDIT CRUNCH:
                           FROM CAPITAL TO LABOR MARKETS

                                       Francisco J. Buera
                                       Roberto Fattal-Jaef
                                        Yongseok Shin

                                       Working Paper 19997
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19997


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Francisco J. Buera, Roberto Fattal-Jaef, and Yongseok Shin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Anatomy of a Credit Crunch: From Capital to Labor Markets
Francisco J. Buera, Roberto Fattal-Jaef, and Yongseok Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 19997
March 2014
JEL No. E24,E44,L25

                                              ABSTRACT

Why are financial crises associated with a sustained rise in unemployment? We develop a tractable
model with frictions in both credit and labor markets to study the aggregate and micro-level implications
of a credit crunch--i.e., a tightening of collateral constraints. When we simulate a credit crunch calibrated
to match the observed decline in the ratio of debt to non-financial assets of the United States business
sector following the 2007-8 crisis, our model generates a sharp decline in output--explained by a drop
in aggregate total factor productivity and investment--and a protracted increase in unemployment.
We then explore the micro-level impact by tracking the employment dynamics for firms of different
sizes and ages. The credit crunch causes a much larger reduction in the net employment growth rate
of small, young establishments relative to that of large, old producers, consistent with the recent empirical
findings in the literature.


Francisco J. Buera                                    Yongseok Shin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                       Department of Economics
230 South La Salle Street                             Washington University in St. Louis
Chicago, IL 60604                                     One Brookings Drive
and NBER                                              St. Louis, MO 63130
fjbuera@econ.ucla.edu                                 and NBER
                                                      yshin@wustl.edu
Roberto Fattal-Jaef
Development Research Group
The World Bank
1818 H St. N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
rfattaljaef@worldbank.org
1    Introduction
Financial crises are associated with severe economic contractions and lasting deteriorations
in labor market conditions. The experiences of the Great Depression and the 2007-8
financial crisis are dramatic examples. The evidence in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) provides
a broader picture of such phenomena. Despite the close connection between financial crises
and sustained rises in unemployment, few models incorporate both credit market and labor
market frictions. The goal of our paper is to build one.
  In our model, depending on their wealth and entrepreneurial productivity, with the
former being endogenously determined by forward-looking saving decisions, individuals
choose to be entrepreneurs or (prospective) workers in each period. Entrepreneurs rent
capital subject to a collateral constraint that limits the amount of capital input as a
function of their financial wealth, which is how we model financial frictions. There is
a centralized, competitive labor market where entrepreneurs hire available workers. The
arrival of unemployed workers into this centralized hiring market is where the labor market
frictions are. The friction is assumed to be in the form of a simple matching function that
dictates how many currently unemployed workers enter the hiring market.
    We use a quantitative version of our theory to trace out the effects of a credit crunch—
i.e., a sudden tightening of the collateral constraint on capital input. In the model, a credit
crunch leads to a sharp decline in output—explained by a large drop in aggregate total
factor productivity (TFP) and a relatively small decline in capital stock—and a sustained
increase in unemployment.
   The tightening collateral constraint reallocates capital from entrepreneurs with low net
worth toward unconstrained entrepreneurs who expand their production in response to
lower factor prices. The reallocation of capital is accompanied by the reallocation of com-
plementary labor across entrepreneurs. Essentially, production factors are reallocated away
from productive but constrained entrepreneurs toward those who are relatively unproduc-
tive but unconstrained. As a result, the aggregate TFP suffers.
    At the same time, labor reallocation, especially the scaling down of constrained en-
trepreneurs’ labor input due to deleveraging, entails an excess job destruction. Although
unconstrained entrepreneurs expand in response to lower wages, laid-off workers must re-
enter the hiring market subject to the matching friction and hence the unemployment rate
abates only gradually. As the tightening of the collateral constraint recedes in the subse-
quent periods, capital and labor are reallocated back toward productive entrepreneurs with
low net worth. This process generates a second phase of excess job destruction, which is


                                              2
again gradually mediated by the frictional labor market and further prolongs the higher-
than-normal unemployment rates.
    We also explore the behavior of the economy in response to an aggregate TFP shock.
We find that the implications for the dynamics of unemployment with the TFP shock are
starkly different from those with the credit shock. With the TFP shock, the unemployment
rate does not change at all in our model. The reason is that a decline in the aggregate
TFP affects the capital and labor demands of all firms symmetrically, and flexible wages
and interest rates fully offset the contractionary effect of the lower TFP on employment.
On the other hand, an economy-wide credit shock has differential effects across firms de-
pending on entrepreneurs’ productivity and wealth, and such heterogeneous responses of
individual firms make it impossible for a low wage alone to maintain firm-level or aggregate
employment. In a nutshell, it is the reallocative nature of credit shocks that is essential for
realistic unemployment dynamics in the model.
    In two simple extensions, we also consider how the main mechanisms of the model
interact with (i) downward rigidity in wages and (ii) variable capital utilization at the
aggregate level.
    The remainder of our quantitative analysis explores the implications of the credit crunch
for employment dynamics at a more disaggregate level. A large empirical literature has doc-
umented that credit shocks affect firms of different sizes differently. The working hypothesis
of these studies is that small businesses are more heavily reliant on credit to finance their
production and capital expenditures, and are hence more susceptible to recessions caused
by negative credit shocks. Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) found evidence supporting this
claim and, more recently, Fort et al. (2012) extended the analysis to highlight the role of
firms’ age as well as size: During a credit crunch, the employment growth rate of small,
young establishments declines by more relative to that of large, old establishments.
    Our model predictions are in line with the findings of these empirical studies. We show
quantitatively that net employment growth rates fall by more for small, young firms relative
to large, old firms. This result reflects the reallocation of labor and capital from constrained
to unconstrained entrepreneurs: In the initial stationary equilibrium of the model, we dis-
cover that more than 90 percent of small, young firms are financially constrained, compared
to less than 10 percent of old, large firms. This information is affirmed by the distribution
of marginal returns to capital across firms in the model, which shows an excess return of
10 percent for the former group of firms relative to the latter, a significant deviation from
the equalization of rates of return across firms under the frictionless allocation.
   In this context, our paper provides a theoretical underpinning for the working hypothesis

                                               3
of the empirical literature and explains how the aggregate behavior of the economy is shaped
by the heterogeneous responses to credit shocks at the firm level.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a review of the literature below
and describe the model in Section 2. We present the results of our quantitative analysis
in Section 3. We first explain how parameter values and time series for the collateral
constraint are calibrated (Section 3.1). We then analyze the macroeconomic implications
of a credit crunch and compare them to those of a negative TFP shock, followed by the
two extensions with wage rigidity and a notion of capital utilization (Section 3.2). We also
examine the impact of the credit crunch at the individual firm level and report how it varies
across firms of different ages and sizes (Section 3.3). We conclude in Section 4.

Related Literature Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. Our mod-
eling of financial frictions closely follows the work of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), in which
credit is limited by a collateral constraint arising from a limited enforceability problem be-
tween creditors and debtors. However, we abstract from feedback effects going from asset
prices to collateral constraints. Jermann and Quadrini (2009) adopt the same modeling
strategy for financial frictions to study the role of credit as a driver of business cycles. The
most salient difference between our work and theirs is that we introduce credit shocks in an
economy where entrepreneurs are heterogeneous and, hence, the tightness of credit at any
given point in time is different across producers. We show that this heterogeneity gener-
ates novel implications for how credit shocks affect the behavior of the aggregate economy,
over and beyond rich microeconomic implications that can be compared with the firm-level
data.
   Producer heterogeneity is also a feature of Khan and Thomas (2013), Buera and Moll
(2012), and Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones (2012). Our contribution relative to their work
is that we bring unemployment to the front and center of the analysis and study the
interaction between credit and labor market frictions. We accomplish such an interaction by
incorporating matching frictions and a notion of Walrasian labor markets—as in Veracierto
(2009)—into Buera and Shin (2013) model of occupational choices, production, saving, and
financial frictions.
   Our exploration of the micro-level implications of a credit crunch is motivated by a
number of empirical studies in the literature. Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) was the first
to document the differential dynamics of small vs. large firms during recession dates
associated with monetary contractions. This finding has been validated by Chari et al.
(2013), although they also find the reverse to be true during recessions not associated

                                               4
with monetary contractions. Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2012) study the unconditional
cyclical behavior of small and large firms and document that it is the large businesses whose
employment declines the most during periods of economic contractions.
    More recently, Fort et al. (2012) re-visit the cyclical behavior of firms and highlight the
role of age, together with size, in predicting the responsiveness of firms to business cycles.
With respect to the small vs. large debate, their results favor the previous evidence that
small firms’ employment growth rates decline more during recessions than large firms’.
However, they emphasize that a joint consideration of age and size yields the clearest
pattern of firms’ response to business cycles: Net employment growth rates of small, young
firms decline by substantially more than those of large, old firms during recessions.
    Our paper is related to this empirical literature in two ways. First, we take the data as
a test for the firm-level implications of our model that underlie the macro-level dynamics.
Second, we use the model to better understand why age and size would explain how different
firms react to credit shocks. We provide a theoretical foundation for the conjecture in the
empirical literature that small, young firms face the most difficulty gaining access to credit
in times of tight overall credit availability.


2    Model
We model an economy populated by a continuum of individuals, who are heterogeneous
with respect to their wealth, entrepreneurial productivity, and access to employment oppor-
tunity. In each period, an individual with an employment opportunity chooses whether to
work for a wage or to operate an individual-specific technology (entrepreneurship). Those
without an employment opportunity choose between searching for a job and operating their
individual-specific technology.
   Access to capital is determined by entrepreneurs’ wealth through a simple collateral
constraint, motivated by the imperfect enforceability of capital rental contracts. One en-
trepreneur can operate only one production unit (establishment) in a given period. En-
trepreneurial ideas are inalienable, and there is no market for managers or entrepreneurial
talent.
    We assume that there is a centralized labor market where hiring entrepreneurs compete
for available workers. The arrival of unemployed workers to the centralized hiring market
is modeled with a simple matching function. We restrict wage contracts to be the same
across workers and entrepreneurs. In the benchmark exercise, we assume that workers are
paid in each period the wage that clears the current hiring market and entrepreneurs may


                                              5
terminate the employment relationship at any time.

Heterogeneity and Demographics Individuals live indefinitely and are heterogeneous
in their wealth a, entrepreneurial productivity z ∈ Z, and employment opportunity. Their
wealth is chosen endogenously by forward-looking saving decisions and their entrepreneurial
productivity follows a stochastic process. In particular, an individual retains his en-
trepreneurial productivity from one period to the next with probability ψ. With probability
1−ψ, he loses the current productivity and has to draw a new entrepreneurial productivity.
The new draw is from a time-invariant distribution with a cumulative density µ(z) and is
independent of his previous productivity level.
   Throughout the paper, we maintain the assumption that unemployed workers receive
unemployment benefits that are equal to the market wage in each period, and that leisure
does not enter the utility function. As a result, individuals are indifferent between being
employed and unemployed. However, the unemployment rate is an important variable for
the equilibrium definition and the aggregate dynamics of the model.
   The population size of the economy is normalized to one, and there is no population
growth.

Preferences Individual preferences are described by the following expected utility func-
tion over sequences of consumption, ct :

                 "∞              #
                  X
                          t                      ct1−σ
     U (c) = E           β u (ct ) ,   u (ct ) =
                   t=0
                                                 1−σ

where β is the discount factor and σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. The expec-
tation is taken over the realizations of the entrepreneurial productivity z.

Technology and Occupational Choice At the beginning of each period, an individual
chooses whether to operate his own business or not. If not, he either works for the market
wage wt , if he has an employment opportunity, or searches for a job while receiving unem-
ployment benefits, if unemployed. An entrepreneur with talent z produces using capital k
and labor l according to:

     zf (k, l) = zk α lθ ,

where α and θ are the elasticities of output with respect to capital and labor with α+θ < 1,
implying diminishing returns to scale in variable factors at the establishment level.

                                                   6
Taxes and Unemployment Benefits We assume that unemployed workers receive
a transfer equal to the period wage, which is financed with a lump-sum tax τt on all
individuals. Given this assumption, from an individual’s point of view, there is no difference
between being a wage earner and being an unemployed worker. This allows us to formulate
the individual problem (Section 2.1) as if they are in one of two mutually exclusive states:
a worker (employed/unemployed) or an entrepreneur.

Financial Markets Productive capital is the only asset in the economy. There is a
perfectly-competitive financial intermediary that receives deposits and rents out capital to
entrepreneurs. The return on deposited assets—i.e. the interest rate in the economy—is
rt . The zero-profit condition of the intermediary implies that the rental price of capital is
rt + δ, where δ is the depreciation rate.
   We assume that entrepreneurs’ capital rental k is limited by a collateral constraint
k ≤ λa, where a ≥ 0 is individual financial wealth and λ measures the degree of credit
frictions, with λ = +∞ corresponding to perfect credit markets and λ = 1 to financial
autarky where all capital has to be self-financed by entrepreneurs. The same λ applies to
everyone in a given economy.
   Our specification captures the common prediction from models of limited contract en-
forcement: The amount of credit is limited by an individual’s wealth. At the same time,
its parsimoniousness—the fact that financial frictions are captured by one single param-
eter, λ—enables us to analyze the quantitative effects of financial frictions on aggregate
transitional dynamics without losing tractability.1

Labor Markets Entrepreneurs hire workers in a centralized and competitive hiring mar-
ket. We restrict labor contracts that entrepreneurs can offer to have the following proper-
ties: (1) all workers must be paid the wage that clears the hiring market in each period and
(2) employers may terminate the employment relationship at any time. In particular, all
entrepreneurs, irrespective of their current state, are restricted to offer the same labor con-
   1
    Our collateral constraint can be derived from the following limited enforcement problem. Consider
an individual with financial wealth a ≥ 0 deposited in the financial intermediary at the beginning of a
period. Assume that he rents k units of capital and then he can abscond with fraction 1/λ of the rented
capital. The only punishment is that he will lose his financial wealth a deposited in the intermediary. In
particular, he will not be excluded from any economic activity in the future. In fact, he is allowed to
instantaneously deposit the stolen capital k/λ and continue on as a worker or an entrepreneur. Note that λ
in this context measures the degree of capital rental contract enforcement, with λ = +∞ corresponding to
perfect enforcement and λ = 1 to no enforcement. In the equilibrium, the financial intermediary will rent
capital only to the extent that no individual will renege on the rental contract, which implies a collateral
constraint k/λ ≤ a or k ≤ λa.


                                                     7
tract. A worker whose employment is terminated becomes unemployed and must re-enter
the hiring market before finding another job.
    We make the labor market frictional by introducing a matching friction that inter-
feres with the (re-)entry of unemployed workers into the centralized hiring market. More
specifically, we assume that instead of matching unemployed workers directly with firms, a
matching function determines the fraction of the currently unemployed that can enter the
centralized hiring market. For those in the centralized hiring market, wages adjust to make
supply meet demand.2
   More formally, letting Mt denote the number of unemployed workers that enter the
hiring market in period t, our assumptions about the matching function can be written as:

       Mt = γ (Ut + JDt )                                                                           (1)

where Ut is the number of unemployed workers at the end of the previous period and JDt
stands for the job destruction at the beginning of the current period. To be more specific,
             Z
     JDt = max {l−1 − lt (a, z) , 0} Gt (da, dl−1, dz)

where lt is labor demand of an individual (positive only for entrepreneurs and a function
of one’s financial wealth, a, and entrepreneurial productivity, z) and Gt is the joint cumu-
lative distribution function of wealth (a), previous period employment (l−1 ), and current
entrepreneurial productivity (z).
   It is critical for the dynamic stability of the Ut series that a fraction of the laid-off
workers can enter the hiring market and be employed within the period, as implied by the
JDt term appearing in the right-hand side of equation (1).
  Given the matching function and the lay-off decisions of entrepreneurs, the evolution of
unemployment is governed by the following law of motion:

       Ut+1 = Ut − Mt + JDt                                                                         (2)

2.1     Individuals’ Problem
At the beginning of a period, an individual’s state is summarized by his financial wealth a
and entrepreneurial productivity z. To be precise, the state of an individual also includes
his access to an employment opportunity, e ∈ {0, 1}. However, because we assume that
   2
    Our modeling of the labor market closely follows Alvarez and Veracierto (2001). Our model can also
be interpreted as a simplified version of the Walrasian equilibrium theory of establishment dynamics and
matching frictions in Veracierto (2009).

                                                   8
unemployed workers receive a transfer equal to the market wage, this information is irrel-
evant for an individual’s problem. The value for him at this stage, vt (a, z), is the larger of
the value of being an employed/unemployed worker, vtW (a, z), and the value of being an
entrepreneur, vtE (a, z):

      vt (a, z) = max vtW (a, z) , vtE (a, z)
                       
                                                                                    (3)

   As an employed or unemployed worker, an individual chooses consumption c and next
period’s asset a′ to maximize his continuation value, subject to the period budget constraint.

      vtW (a, z) = max
                     ′
                       u (c) + βE [vt+1 (a′ , z ′ )]                                                   (4)
                      c,a

      s.t. c + a′ = wt + (1 + rt ) a − τt

   Alternatively, individuals can choose to be entrepreneurs. The value function of being
an entrepreneur is as follows.

      vtE (a, z) = max′ u (c) + βE [vt+1 (a′ , z ′ )]                                                  (5)
                    c,k,l,a

      s.t. c + a′ = zk α lθ − wt l − (rt + δ) k + (1 + rt ) a − τt
             k ≤ λt a                                                           (Collateral constraint)

The occupation choice of an individual is denoted by ot (a, z) ∈ {W, E}. The labor and
capital demands of an entrepreneur are denoted by lt (a, z) and kt (a, z), both of which take
on the value of zero for employed/unemployed workers.

2.2     Competitive Equilibrium
Given an initial distribution of individual wealth, previous period’s labor input, and en-
trepreneurial productivity G0 (a, l−1 , z) and a sequence of collateral constraint parameters
{λt }∞                                                          ∞
     t=0 , a competitive equilibrium comprises prices {wt , rt }t=0 , the number of unemployed
workers {Ut }∞                                                                              ∞
             t=0 , allocations {ct (a, z) , at+1 (a, z) , kt (a, z) , lt (a, z) , ot (a, z)}t=0 , and lump-
sum taxes {τt }∞
               t=0 such that:

   1. Given prices {wt , rt }∞
                             t=0 , the allocations are solutions to the individual problems (3),
      (4), and (5) for all t ≥ 0;

   2. The number of unemployed workers follows the equilibrium law of motion (2);

   3. The government budget is balanced for all t ≥ 0

             τt = wt Ut+1 ;

                                                    9
    4. Capital markets clear for all t ≥ 0:
                 Z                            Z
            Kt ≡ kt (a, z) Gt (da, dl−1, dz) = aGt (da, dl−1 , dz) ,                                (6)

    5. Hiring markets clear for all t ≥ 0:
             Z
               max{lt (a, z) − l−1 , 0}Gt (da, dl−1, dz) = γ (Ut + JDt ) ,                          (7)

       where lt (a, z) − l−1 is the net change in labor demand as an entrepreneur between
       time t and t − 1 for an individual whose time t state is a, l−1 and z;

    6. The joint distribution of wealth, previous period’s labor input, and entrepreneurial
       productivity {Gt (a, l−1 , z)}∞t=0 evolves according to the following equilibrium map-
       ping.
                                   Z
             Gt+1 (a, l−1 , z) = ψ                              Gt (dã, d˜l−1 , z)
                                    at+1 (ã,z)≤a,lt (ã,z)≤l−1
                                                                 Z                                    
                                            + (1 − ψ) µ (z)                         Gt dã, d˜l−1, dz̃
                                                             at+1 (ã,z̃)≤a,lt (ã,z̃)≤l−1


The definition of a competitive equilibrium is standard with the exception of the labor
market clearing condition. Combining the market clearing condition for new hires (7) and
the law of motion for the number of unemployed workers (2), we obtain:
                  Z
      Ut − Ut+1 = [lt (at , zt ) − l−1 ] Gt (da, dl−1, dz) .

That is, the hiring market clearing condition and the law of motion for unemployment
together imply that the overall labor market clears in all periods, once we start out with
      Z
        l−1 G0 (da, dl−1 , dz) = 1 − U0 .


3      Quantitative Exploration
We now build a quantitative version of our framework and investigate the interaction
between a credit crunch—modeled as an unexpected, one-time tightening of the collateral
constraint—and labor market frictions. We will explore both the aggregate and the micro-
level implications. To hit the economy with a credit crunch of a plausible magnitude,
we calibrate the time-series of the collateral constraint parameter to the contraction in
aggregate business credit observed during the 2007-8 financial crisis.

                                                  10
3.1    Calibration
Our model is parameterized so that the stationary equilibrium matches relevant aggregate
and establishment-level moments in the United States (US) economy. We assume a time
period in the model to be one year.
   Following the standard practices, we set the coefficient of relative risk aversion σ to 1.5,
                                                        α
the annual depreciation rate δ to 0.06, and the ratio (α+θ) to 0.33 (to match the aggregate
capital income share). In terms of the parameter governing the hiring market matching
function, we set the parameter γ = 0.667 so as to obtain an unemployment rate of 5 percent
in the stationary equilibrium.
   Entrepreneurial productivity is assumed to follow a Pareto distribution, with cumulative
density given by µ (z) = 1 − z −η for z ≥ 1. Each period, an individual retains his z
with probability ψ, while a new entrepreneurial productivity should be drawn with the
complementary probability 1 − ψ.
   The remaining parameters to be calibrated are α+θ, η, ψ, β and the collateral constraint
λ of the initial stationary equilibrium. To do so, we target the following moments in the
US data: employment share of the top decile of establishments, the share of earnings
generated by the top 5 percent of the population, the annual exit rate of establishments,
the real interest rate, and the ratio of external finance to total non-financial assets of the
non-financial business sector.

                                                           US Data Model        Parameter
 Top 10% Employment                                          0.69      0.69      η = 5.25
 Top 5% Earnings Share                                       0.30      0.30    α + θ = 0.79
 Establishment Exit Rate (Annual)                            0.10      0.10      ψ = 0.89
 Real Interest Rate (Annual)                                 0.02      0.02      β = 0.93
 Credit Market Instruments to Non-Financial Assets           0.70      0.70      λ = 7.5

                                    Table 1: Calibration

  Table 1 shows the moments in the US data and their counterparts in the calibrated
model. The decile of the largest establishments (in terms of employment) accounts for
69 percent of aggregate employment in 2000. The earnings share of the top 5 percentiles
is 30 percent in 1998. The annual establishment exit rate is 10 percent in the Business
Dynamics Statistics from the US Census. We assume that the annual interest rate is 2
percent. Lastly, we target the ratio of credit market instruments to total non-financial
fixed assets in the non-financial business sector of 0.7, a level attained one year before the
2008 financial crisis.

                                              11
   Although all parameters are jointly pinned down in the model equilibrium, we can
identify which objects in the data are mostly related to which parameters. For instance,
the tail parameter of the Pareto distribution of entrepreneurial productivity, holding other
values constant, controls the fraction of employment accounted for by the decile of largest
establishments. Similarly, α + θ can be mapped into the earnings share of the top 5 percent
of the population, who, as in the data, are mostly entrepreneurs in the model. There is
also a direct link from the persistence of the ability process ψ to the probability that an
entrepreneur exits from production and hence the annual establishment exit rate in the
data. The discount factor, unsurprisingly, is closely tied to the target interest rate. The
collateral constraint parameter λ is primarily responsible for the ratio of external finance
to capital,
      R
        max {kt (a, z) − a, 0} Gt (da, dl−1 , dz)
                                                  ,
                         Kt
which is the model equivalent of the ratio of credit market instruments to total non-financial
assets in the non-financial business sector in the Flow of Funds data.

3.2     Aggregate Dynamics of a Credit Crunch
We simulate the aggregate dynamics of the model following a tightening of the collateral
constraint—i.e., a lower λt . We choose the λt series to generate a decline in the ratio
of external finance to capital stock in the model that is comparable in magnitude to the
observed decline in the stock of credit market liabilities to non-financial assets of the non-
financial business sector in the US from the fourth quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of
2010.3 We assume that, following its initial plunge, λt gradually recovers and eventually
converges to its pre-crisis level.4 The initial drop in λt is a completely unexpected event—
up to that point everyone in the economy has expected λt to be constant over time—but,
   3
      The stock of credit market instruments corresponds to line 18 in the L.101 table of the Flow of Funds.
It includes the stock of bank loans of the corporate and non-corporate sectors, and the stock of commercial
papers, municipal securities and corporate bonds of the corporate sector. The stock of non-financial assets
is measured in historical prices to avoid valuation effects, which is absent in our theory. The stock of
non-financial assets is given by the sum of the stock of the historical-cost net stock of private fixed assets
of the non-financial corporate sector, sole proprietorships, and partnerships from Table 6.3 of the National
Income and Product Account (NIPA). To have the correct level as of 2007, we multiply the historical-cost
stock of non-financial assets of each year by the ratio of the current-cost stock of non-financial assets in
2007 to the historical-cost stock of non-financial assets in 2007.
    4
      The sequence of collateral constraints that we calibrate is, with t = 1 corresponding to 2007,
{λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , λ4 } = {7.5, 4.5, 3.0, 3.5} and λt = 0.75λt−1 + 0.25 × 7.5 for t ≥ 5. The value of λ is 7.5 in
the initial stationary equilibrium (t = 0). In 2007, everyone learns about this new (deterministic) path of
λt , which has not been anticipated at all.


                                                     12
once this shock hits the economy, its deterministic path afterwards is known perfectly.


              0.1
                                                                             data
            0.08                                                             model

            0.06

            0.04

            0.02

                0

           −0.02

           −0.04

           −0.06

           −0.08

            −0.1
              2000     2002     2004    2006     2008    2010     2012    2014     2016



Fig. 1: Ratio of External Finance to Capital Stock. This figure shows the evolution of
the ratio of external finance to capital stock in the data (dotted line) and the model (solid line).
We report the percentage deviations from a HP-filtered series for the US data and the percentage
deviations from its steady state value for the model. See footnote 3 for a description of the
construction of the external finance to capital stock ratio in the data.

   Figure 1 shows the evolution of the ratio of external finance to capital stock in the data
(dotted line) and the model (solid line) since 2000. For the US data (quarterly series) we
report the percentage deviations from the trend of the HP-filtered series with smoothing
parameter 1,600. For the model (annual series) we plot the percentage deviations from the
stationary equilibrium value. The vertical line in the middle is the third quarter of 2008.
In the model, this is the first period with a lower than normal λ, although the shock to
the λt series arrives and becomes perfectly known in 2007—see footnote 4. Following the
first quarter of 2008, there is a sharp decline in the ratio of credit market liabilities to non-
financial assets in the data, in the order of 8 percentage points, with the series bottoming
out during 2010. In the model, we generate a contraction of comparable magnitude—a
drop in the external finance to capital ratio of about 8 percentage points by 2009—and a


                                                13
smooth recovery to its original steady state. The fact that the two series are parallel from
2008 to 2009 is our measure of the model experiment being similar to the real-world credit
crunch.


                          output                                         TFP
       0.05                                          0.05

           0                                            0
                     data
     −0.05           model
                                                    −0.05
                     fixed w
       −0.1                                          −0.1
         2000       2005       2010       2015         2000       2005       2010      2015
                    investment rate                               unemployment
       0.05                                          0.15

                                                      0.1
           0
                                                     0.05

     −0.05                                              0
        2000        2005       2010       2015         2000       2005       2010      2015


Fig. 2: Aggregate Implication of a Credit Crunch. This figure shows the evolution output,
TFP, investment and unemployment rates in the data (dotted line) and the models with flexible
(solid line) and fixed wages (dashed line). For the US data we report the percentage deviations
from the trend of the HP filtered series, with a smoothing parameter of 1,600, for the case of
output and TFP, and the simple difference with respect to the value in the second quarter of 2008
for the case of the investment rate. See footnote 5 for a description of the sources of the data.


   In the model, the tightening of the collateral constraint leads to a sharp decline in
output—explained by a large drop in TFP and a smaller decline in capital stock—and a
protracted increase in unemployment. The dynamic of these series in the model (solid lines)
and the corresponding series around the 2008 financial crisis (dotted lines) are illustrated
in Figure 2. For output and TFP, we report percentage deviations from the steady state for
the model and from the HP-trend for the US data. For investment rate, we show differences

                                               14
from the steady state for the model and from the value in the second quarter of 2008 for
the US data. For unemployment rate, we simply plot the raw numbers from the model and
the data.5
    The credit crunch results in a reallocation of capital from entrepreneurs with little
collateral, relative to their unconstrained level of capital input, toward unconstrained en-
trepreneurs. Undercapitalized entrepreneurs have to reduce their capital input as a direct
consequence of the tightening collateral constraint (i.e., lower lambdat ). As for uncon-
strained entrepreneurs, they increase their capital input in response to the general equilib-
rium effect of lower factor prices. This reallocation of credit and capital is accompanied by
the reallocation of complementary labor across entrepreneurs in the same direction, subject
to the matching frictions in the hiring market. In this process, production factors are on
average reallocated from productive but constrained entrepreneurs to those who are uncon-
strained but relatively unproductive. One important outcome is the decline in aggregate
TFP shown in the top right panel of Figure 2.
    The labor reallocation, especially the downsizing of constrained entrepreneurs due to
deleveraging, entails an excess of job destruction. While unconstrained entrepreneurs now
hire more workers in response to lower wages, laid-off workers must re-enter the hiring
market subject to the matching frictions and hence the unemployment rate comes back
down only gradually. In the subsequent periods, as the tightening of the collateral constraint
is undone, capital and labor are reallocated back to productive entrepreneurs with little
collateral. This process generates a second phase of higher-than-normal job destruction,
which is again gradually mediated by the frictional hiring market and further prolongs the
higher-than-normal unemployment rates.
   In the left panel of Figure 3, we illustrate the reallocation of credit across entrepreneurs
with different levels of collateral or financial wealth. We plot the evolution of external
finance to capital ratios of entrepreneurs whose wealth is below (solid line) and above
(dashed line) the median—among entrepreneurs—wealth in each period. Entrepreneurs
with low wealth are more likely to have binding collateral constraints and finance a larger
    5
      We use output, TFP and investment series for the US business sector. The output series corresponds
to the real gross value-added of the business sector from Table 1.3.6 of the NIPA. The TFP series is
constructed using an estimate of the capital stock of businesses and an index of the hours employed by the
US business sector in series PRS84006033 of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We estimate the capital
stock of the US business sector by accumulating the gross domestic investment series for the business
sector in Table 5.1 of the NIPA, deflated by the price indexes for private fixed investment in Table 5.3.4.
In this process, we use as the initial value the current-cost net stock of private fixed assets for the US
businesses in 1960 from Table 6.1 and estimate a depreciation rate using the information in the Table 6.4.
The unemployment rate is the rate for the total population 16 years old and over in series LNS14000000
of the BLS.


                                                    15
fraction of their capital externally. As a result, they are hit more directly and harder by the
credit crunch. Both their capital stock and, more prominently, their external finance are
sharply reduced during the credit crunch. The external finance to capital ratio goes down.
To the contrary, wealthy entrepreneurs tend to have slack collateral constraint. During
the credit crunch, they employ more capital and use more external finance than before in
response to lower factor prices. Their capital input expands by more than the external
finance, leading to a small decline in the external finance to capital ratio.6

                 model economy, by wealth                    U.S. data, by sector and instrument


                                                                                       corp. bonds

          1.2                                              1.2

                                                                                         corporate
            1                                                1

                                                                                         noncorp.
          0.8           low a                              0.8
                        high a
                                                                                       corp. banks
          0.6                                              0.6
           2000        2005        2010       2015          2000        2005        2010       2015


       Fig. 3: External Finance to Capital Stock in the Model and the US Data

   How does the effect of the credit crunch in our model compare with the data during
and after the 2007-8 financial crisis? Figure 2 (dotted lines) and the right panel of Figure
3 show the relevant data.
    The model generates a decline in output of 5 percent, quite comparable to the 7-percent
decline in output relative to trend observed during the recession that started at the end of
2007. The magnitude of the decline in aggregate TFP (4 percent) in the model is about
the same as that in the data. However, the contraction in investment and the surge in
unemployment in the model are only about half as large as what is in the data.
   The model time series and the data exhibit very different dynamics. The output and
TFP series in the model hit the trough together with the data, but the model series rebound
much more slowly. As for investment rate and unemployment, the model series reach the
   6
    The capital used by wealthy entrepreneurs, who in the initial stationary equilibrium account for 90
percent of the aggregate capital, increases by 7.4 percent, while their external finance increases by 6 percent.


                                                      16
extreme values later than the data.
   In the right panel of Figure 3, we plot the evolution of the ratio of credit market
liabilities to non-financial assets for the non-corporate and the corporate sectors, together
with disaggregated data for the corporate sector’s bank vs. bond liabilities. Starting
in the fourth quarter of 2008, there is a sharp contraction in the stock of credit market
liabilities of the non-corporate sector, together with a milder one for the corporate sector.
Furthermore, at a more disaggregated level, while the corporate sector as a whole suffered
a sharp reduction in their bank-related liabilities, it was partly offset by a surge in the
issuance of corporate bonds, at least for those corporations that had access to the corporate
bond market. To the extent that we can view corporations, and in particular those that
have access to the corporate bond market, as relatively less financially-constrained, the
dynamics of external credit in the data at this level are consistent with the dynamics of
external finance for rich vs. poor entrepreneurs in the model.

3.2.1    Implication of Rigid Wages

While the model can account for a large fraction of the magnitude of the output and TFP
decline, it underpredicts the rise in unemployment rate following the 2007-8 recession. A
simple extension of our model, in line with the arguments in Shimer (2012), is to introduced
(downward) wage rigidities to the model. The effect of a credit crunch in the model with
fixed wages is illustrated by the dash-dot lines in Figure 2.7
   A tightening of the collateral constraint in an environment with rigid wages leads to
an even larger decline in output—driven by a sharper rise in unemployment than in the
benchmark flexible-wage exercise. The rise in unemployment is explained by a higher flow
of workers into unemployment and a relatively more protracted reallocation of these workers
back into employment: A higher wage (than in the flexible wage case) inherently entails
more job destruction and less hiring. The flows of workers in and out of employment, as a
fraction of employment at the beginning of each period, are illustrated in Figure 4.8

3.2.2    Variable Capital Utilization

A central implication of the model is that TFP, as measured by the Solow residual, drops
during the credit crunch. As shown in Figure 2, this is broadly consistent with the data in
   7
     The meaningful wage rigidity is the downward rigidity, since the wage would fall below its steady state
level following the credit crunch if it were flexible.
   8
     The data series are annualized flow rates from the monthly flow data of the BLS research series. See
http://www.bls.gov/cps/cps_flows.htm. We construct yearly flow rates by compounding the monthly
transition matrices. We report the resulting series as deviations from their overall average.


                                                    17
                     empl. to non−empl. / empl.                             non−empl. to empl / empl.
          0.06                                                   0.06

          0.05           data                                    0.05
                         model
          0.04                                                   0.04
                         fixed w
          0.03                                                   0.03

          0.02                                                   0.02

          0.01                                                   0.01

              0                                                      0

        −0.01                                                   −0.01

        −0.02                                                   −0.02
           2000           2005         2010         2015           2000          2005         2010         2015


Fig. 4: Flows In and Out of Employment. The left panel shows the annual flow from
employment to non-employment (unemployment plus out of labor force) in the data (dotted line)
and the employment to unemployment flow in the models with flexible and fixed wages (solid
and dash lines, respectively), all relative to the employment level at the beginning of each period.
The right panel shows the corresponding flows from non-employment to employment relative to
total employment. For the US data we plot the de-meaned series. For the model we show the
differences from the steady state values. Footnote 8 describes the construction of these series.


the beginning of the 2007-8 recession, although the recovery in the model is too protracted.
Alternative measures of TFP that control for capital utilization data exhibit a smaller drop,
e.g., Fernald (2012). We now provide a simple extension of the benchmark model that can
address capital utilization-adjusted TFP.
   Unlike the benchmark model where all capital is deposited with the financial
intermediary—who then rents it out to entrepreneurs—this extension gives individu-
als the option to leave capital idle and have it depreciate at a rate δ, which is assumed to
be less than δ. This option will be exercised whenever the market-clearing interest rate
would fall below −δ, in which case the equilibrium interest rate in this extended model
becomes rt = −δ. (With rt = −δ, individuals are indifferent between depositing the asset
with the financial intermediary and leaving it idle.) Essentially, we now have a floor on the
interest rate, rt ≥ −δ, which also implies a floor −δ + δ > 0 on the rental rate of capital.9
   9
    To be exact, the benchmark model also has an implicit floor on the interest rate, rt ≥ −δ, since capital
rental rate cannot be negative.


                                                    18
    With a large enough credit crunch that reduces the demand for capital by entrepreneurs
to the point where this interest rate floor becomes binding, there will be surplus capital
left idle in the economy. Since the surplus capital would have had a very low marginal
product (less than −δ + δ), taking it out of production will, once we correctly account for
the unemployed capital in the economy, deliver a higher capital utilization-adjusted TFP
than the TFP of the benchmark economy.
   To illustrate this possibility, we simulate the same credit crunch as in the benchmark
model but now allow individuals to leave capital idle without incurring depreciation—i.e.,
we assume δ = 0. In this case, about 6 percent of the capital stock is left idle in the
second period of the crunch (2008), the only period in which the market-clearing interest
rate would have been negative (-1.7 percent). As a result, the capital utilization-adjusted
TFP drops by 1 percentage point less than the Solow residual in the benchmark: 3 percent
instead of 4 percent.

3.2.3    Comparing Credit Crunch with Exogenous TFP Shock

The analysis of the previous section reveals how damaging a negative credit market shock
could be to the labor market. Our goal in this section is to contrast the impact of the
credit crunch to that of a more standard source of business cycle fluctuations: a negative
shock to the aggregate TFP. To implement this experiment, we start the economy at its
stationary equilibrium and hit it with an unanticipated drop and recovery in the aggregate
TFP.10 This exogenous TFP series is constructed to mimc the endogenous TFP dynamics
from the credit crunch (solid line, top right panel, Figure 2).
    Figure 5 depicts the dynamics of aggregate quantities in response to the credit crunch
(dashed lines, reproduced from Figure 2) and to the exogenous aggregate TFP shock (solid
lines). Despite the identical TFP dynamics of the two experiments (engineered to be
that way), the credit shock exercise shows a sharper and more protracted contraction
in output. Investment rates (bottom left panel) seem comparable in both cases.11 The
bottom right panel shows that most of the differential response in output is attributable to
unemployment: Unemployment is invariant to the TFP shock but increases by more than
50 percent at its peak with the credit crunch.
   The defining characteristic of the credit shock that differentiates it from an exogenous
  10
     Again, in 2007, everyone wakes up to a completely unanticipated shock to the future path of the
exogenous aggregate TFP, which is deterministic and perfectly known at that point.
  11
     Buera and Moll (2012) show that the investment dynamics following a credit crunch and a TFP shock
exactly coincide in a related class of heterogeneous entrepreneur model.



                                                 19
                         output                                     TFP
        0.05                                        0.05



           0                                          0
                     credit
                     TFP
       −0.05                                   −0.05
          2000      2005      2010      2015      2000       2005      2010     2015
                    investment rate                          unemployment
        0.05                                         0.1



           0                                        0.05



       −0.05                                           0
          2000      2005      2010      2015          2000   2005      2010     2015


    Fig. 5: Aggregate Implications of Credit Crunch vs. Exogenous TFP Shock


decline in TFP is its reallocative nature. Even though all entrepreneurs face the same
tighter collateral constraint (i.e., lower λt ) during the credit crunch, only a subset of them—
those who are productive but have little financial wealth as collateral—becomes more
acutely constrained in their choices of labor and capital inputs. In contrast, an exogenous
aggregate TFP shock induces a contraction in the employment of all firms symmetrically,
holding factor prices constant. As a result, lower factor prices can completely offset the
impact of the negative aggregate TFP shock to maintain the firm-level factor inputs, but
not that of the credit crunch. Once there is job destruction by now more financially
constrained entrepreneurs, laid off workers first become unemployed and then can only
re-enter the hiring market subject to matching frictions, pushing up the unemployment
rate.
    The factor prices—wages and interest rates—also respond differently to the two shocks.
The responses of interest rates are more starkly different between the two cases (right panel,
Figure 6). The credit crunch has a direct negative effect on many entrepreneurs’ capital
demand, forcing affected frims to scale down operations to the level allowed by the tighter


                                               20
                           wage                                    interest rate
       0.01                                         0.03

           0                                        0.02

      −0.01                                         0.01

      −0.02                                            0

      −0.03                                       −0.01
                      credit
      −0.04           TFP                         −0.02

      −0.05                                       −0.03
         2000       2005       2010      2015        2000        2005      2010       2015


     Fig. 6: Factor Price Dynamics: Credit Crunch vs. Exogenous TFP Shock


collateral constraint. To bring the capital rental market back to an equilibrium, the interest
rate has to fall. Because only a subset of entrepreneurs, who are unconstrained and more
likely to be unproductive, can increase their capital demand in response to lower rental rates
(the others are at a corner due to the tighter collateral constraint), the market clearing
interest rate must fall by more (dashed line) than when all entrepreneurs can symmetrically
respond to lower rental rates (i.e., the aggregate TFP shock case, solid line).
    However, the same explanation does not carry over to the comparison of wage dynamics
between the two experiments. In fact, wages fall by more with the exogenous TFP shock
(solid line, left panel) than with the credit crunch (dashed line). We first point out that
the collateral constraint does not apply directly to labor demand and as a result no active
entrepreneur is at a corner when it comes to labor input choice. Unlike capital rental rates,
all active entrepreneurs do respond to lower wages by increasing their labor input. However,
if this were the only consideration, the wage should be still (slightly) lower with credit
crunch than with the TFP shock, because the reallocation of capital toward unconstrained,
unproductive entrepreneurs necessitates that the wage fall further to clear the labor market.
Then, why do wages fall by less with the credit crunch in spite of the above consideration?
The answer is unemployment. While the number of unemployed workers remain unchanged
with the TFP shock, it increases significantly with the credit crunch. With fewer workers
arriving in the competitive hiring market, the wage does not have to fall as much to clear


                                             21
the labor market.12

3.3     Micro-Level Implications of a Credit Crunch
In this section we switch the focus of our analysis to the firm-level implications of the
credit crunch. A large empirical literature documents that financial crises affect firms
differently depending on their sizes. The working hypothesis there is that small business
are more reliant on credit to finance their production and capital expenditures than large
firms and hence should be more vulnerable during recessions driven by credit contractions.
Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) found evidence supporting this claim and more recently Fort
et al. (2012) extended the analysis to highlight the role of firms’ age, as well as size,
in understanding their cyclical behavior: During credit-driven recessions, the employment
growth of small, young firms declines by more relative to that of large, old firms. Our goal in
this section is to provide a theoretical underpinning to the empirical literature and better
understand how the aggregate behavior of the economy is shaped by the heterogeneous
responses at the firm level.

3.3.1    Classifications and Implementation

The dimensions of firm heterogeneity in the model are the productivity and wealth of
entrepreneurs, which determine their labor and capital demand, accumulation of wealth,
and the extent to which collateral constraints bind. The equilibrium of the model consists
of a distribution of entrepreneurs along these two dimensions, which in turn determines
the distribution of firms in terms of their size (defined as the number of employees) and
age (defined as years of continuous operation, which is closely tied to the persistence of the
entrepreneurial productivity process).
   To examine the firm-level implications of the model, we simulate a sample of one million
individuals. We first compute the invariant distribution of firms in terms of age and size.
We then run the simulation for the credit crunch transition, keeping track of the evolution
of the firm age-size distribution.13
    Our classification of firms into small vs. large and young vs. old is as follows. For
the size category, we first compute the median employment number lm,t for each period
such that all firms that employ lm,t or fewer workers account for exactly half of the total
  12
     A telltale sign of this effect is the high wage in 2012 in the credit crunch transition, which coincides
with the peak of the unemployment shown in the bottom right panel of Figure 5 (dashed line).
  13
     Our computations in the previous sections do not involve simulation methods: We work directly with
the distribution Gt . We opt for simulation in this section to more easily keep track of firms’ ages.


                                                     22
employment in the economy. We classify a firm as small if its employment at the beginning
of the period is less than or equal to lm,t and as large if it is above lm,t .14 With respect to
age, we follow Fort et al. (2012) and consider firms aged 5 years or less as young and the
rest as old.
    Lastly, our method of aggregating job flows across firms within each age-size category
is similar to that of Davis et al. (1998). We define the aggregate job creation rate (JCs,t )
and destruction rate (JDs,t ) for a given age-size category s in period t as:
                  X max {lt+1 (i) − lt (i) , 0}
        JCs,t =
                  i∈s
                          0.5 [Lt+1 (s) + Lt (s)]
                  X max {lt (i) − lt+1 (i) , 0}
        JDs,t =
                  i∈s
                          0.5 [Lt+1 (s) + Lt (s)]
        Nets,t = JCs,t − JDs,t ,

where lt (i) is the employment of firm i and Lt (s) is the total employment of firms belonging
to category s in period t. This methodology aggregates gross and net flows while keeping
constant the set of firms that belong to each category between periods t and t + 1, thus
eschewing the “re-classification bias” discussed in Davis et al. (1998).

3.3.2     Disaggregate-Level Results: Stationary Equilibrium

We start by documenting the properties of each age-size group of firms in the stationary
equilibrium. Table 2 reports the fraction of unconstrained firms (i.e., entrepreneurs) in each
group, each group’s share of aggregate employment, and the fraction of firms belonging to
each group, along with some average characteristics of firms in each group.

                   Fraction        Share of    Fraction                            Average      Net
                                                             Average   Average
                     Not            Total         of                               Rate of    Employmt.
                                                              TFP      Wealth
                  Constrained     Employmt.     Firms                              Return      Growth
 Small-Young            0.057        0.133          0.405     0.60        1.8        0.122       0.42
 Large-Young            0.111        0.045          0.004     1.15        42.5       0.074       0.25
  Small-Old             0.421        0.315          0.549     0.56        5.3        0.028       -0.07
  Large-Old             0.934        0.507          0.042     1.16       157.0       0.022       -0.09

                  Table 2: Properties of Firm Age-Size Distribution in Steady State

    Some numbers in the table are a direct consequence of our calibration strategy. For
instance, it should not come as a surprise that a small number of large firms account for a
  14
    In our model stationary equilibrium, lm is 119. In the 2007 US data on establishment size distribution
(Business Dynamics Statistics), lm falls in the 56–99 employment bin. If the unit of analysis were firms,
lm in the US data would fall in the 500–999 employment bin.

                                                        23
disproportionately large fraction of aggregate employment in the model, consistent with the
skewness of the empirical firm size distribution in the US: It is one of the target moments
in our calibration (Section 3.1).
    Other statistics in the table are predictions of the model that have not been specif-
ically targeted. Consider the first column of the table, where we report the fraction of
unconstrained firms in each age-size category in the model. According to our theory, the
likelihood of becoming financially constrained is a function of the underlying state vari-
ables of the firm: entrepreneurial productivity and wealth. Holding other things equal, the
unconstrained profit-maximizing capital input of those with higher productivity is higher
and hence they are more likely to be constrained by the collateral constraint. Also, all else
equal, the collateral constraint will more likely bind for those with low wealth/collateral.
The table shows that age and size are good predictors of such likelihood: The fraction
of unconstrained entrepreneurs is lowest for the small-young group and highest for the
large-old group. There exists, then, a mapping from the ability-wealth space onto the firm
age-size space that provides a justification for the conjecture that small, young firms are
more sensitive than large, old ones to aggregate credit shocks.
    The average entrepreneurial productivity and wealth across the age-size groups help
clarify why such a mapping exists. In the fourth column, we see that the average en-
trepreneurial productivity is correlated with size but not with age: Entrepreneurial pro-
ductivity is higher for large firms than for small firms but, conditional on size, they are
about the same between age groups. Thus, if firms’ credit conditions and production
decisions were dependent only on entrepreneurial productivity, age would be irrelevant.
However, wealth does matter for firms’ credit conditions and production decisions and is
correlated with age conditional on size. As the fifth column shows, in either size category,
entrepreneurs running older firms are wealthier on average than those running younger
ones: An old business implies that the managing entrepreneur has had enough time to
accumulate wealth/collateral and overcome the collateral constraint.
   The sixth column shows a tight connection between credit conditions and the average
rate of return on capital. In a frictionless economy where all firms can operate at their
respective unconstrained profit-maximizing scale, rates of return on capital—i.e., marginal
products of capital net of depreciation—are equalized across all firms to the real interest
rate. A binding collateral constraint, on the other hand, drives a wedge between the
two rates: The rate of return on capital for constrained entrepreneurs are higher than
the equilibrium interest rate in the economy. This is why we observe a difference of 10
percentage points between the small, young group and the large, old group, consistent with

                                             24
the larger fraction of constrained entrepreneurs in the former compared to the latter group.

3.3.3     Disaggregate-Level Results: Credit Crunch

We now explore the dynamics of net employment growth rates during the credit crunch for
the four age-size groups. They are plotted in Figure 7. The vertical axis is differences in
net employment growth rates from the respective steady state levels (last column, Table
2). Period 1 on the horizontal axis is 2008.


              0.15


               0.1


              0.05


                0


             −0.05


              −0.1

                                                     Young−Small
             −0.15                                   Young−Large
                                                     Old−Small
              −0.2                                   Old−Large


             −0.25
                     0               5                    10                    15




        Fig. 7: Net Employment Growth by Firm Age-Size during Credit Crunch

   The behavior of employment growth rates are consistent with the information conveyed
in Table 2. Young firms, both small and large, have higher rates of return on capital and
are more likely to be financially constrained to begin with. They experience the sharpest
decrease in net employment growth rates during the credit crunch. This finding suggests
that the direction of reallocation flows from constrained to unconstrained entrepreneurs
during the credit crunch can be represented by reallocation across age-size groups. Since
it is difficult to determine in the available data whether a firm is financially constrained or
not, the fact that there is a clean mapping from the entrepreneurial productivity-wealth
space onto the firm age-size space allows us to interpret the dynamics of employment growth

                                               25
rates across firm-age size groups in the data using our theory.


4    Conclusions
In this paper we propose a heterogeneous-agent model that integrates credit and labor mar-
ket frictions to study macro- and microeconomic implications of a credit crunch. We find
that a salient ramification of a sudden drop in available credit is reallocation of production
factors: Firms that become more financially constrained reduce their labor and capital
demand and the surplus production factors get reallocated to unconstrained producers via
the general equilibrium effect of lower factor prices. However, frictions in the labor market
interfere with the labor reallocation. It takes time for the economy to absorb idled workers
and, as a result, unemployment rates increase and remain high for a prolonged period.
Moreover, the reallocation of production factors generated by the credit shock leads to an
endogenous reduction in aggregate TFP, as high productivity but low wealth entrepreneurs
downsize and low productivity but high wealth ones expand. Together with a contraction
in investment, these effects push the macroeconomy into a recession.
    Another finding of the paper is that credit and aggregate productivity shocks have
different implications on both macro- and microeconomic variables. Even in the presence
of matching frictions in the hiring market, the unemployment rate remains unchanged with
the negative TFP shock, as the adjustment in wages and interest rates fully offset the
decline in firms’ factor demand. They key is that the aggregate TFP shock affects all
firms’ incentives to reduce labor demand symmetrically, which is not the case when the
shock is credit-driven and hence has differential effects on different firms.
   Another contribution of our work is that we provide a theory for the empirical finding
that firms of different ages and sizes respond differently to credit-driven business cycles.
We show that the combination of firm age and size is a good proxy for the combination
of entrepreneurial productivity and net worth that ultimately determines the likelihood of
being constrained and, hence, firms’ employment changes in response to credit shocks.
    Our theory emphasizes the importance of credit markets for efficient reallocation of
resources across heterogenous producers. From the perspective of our theory, financial
crises are episodes where such reallocation of resources is distorted. The immediate impact
is that capital is reallocated away from productive but constrained producers who must
downsize their production toward unconstrained producers. Over a little longer horizon,
the increased credit friction implies that less capital flows into young, growing producers
and, commensurately, less capital flows out of old, declining producers. The overall impact


                                             26
over the course of the credit crunch on the volume of capital reallocation depends on the
relative strengths of these effects. Our calibrated model predicts an increase in gross capital
reallocation during the credit crunch. This may appear to be at odds with the finding
in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) that gross capital reallocation is procyclical. However,
in relating our paper to theirs, one needs to realize that (i) they measure reallocation
of capital ownership rather than reallocation of actual capital use and (ii) they do not
separately identify recessions driven by credit shocks vs. other sources. With these caveats
in mind, we think that a fruitful avenue of empirical research would be to construct better
measures of capital reallocation and study how they correlate with different sources of
aggregate fluctuations, e.g., credit vs. TFP shocks. We also conjecture that extensions of
our model with capital adjustment costs can be useful for addressing these observations,
as shown by Cui (2013). We leave a detailed analysis of this extension to future research.




                                              27
References
Alvarez, F. and M. Veracierto (2001): “Severance payments in an economy with
 frictions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 477–498.

Buera, F. J. and B. Moll (2012): “Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch,”
 Manuscript, Princeton University.

Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2013): “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History:
 A Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 221–272.

Chari, V., L. J. Christiano, and P. Kehoe (2013): “The Gertler-Girlchrist Evidence
  on Small and Large Firm Sales,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.

Cui, W. (2013): “Delayed Capital Reallocation,” Manuscript, University College London.

Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1998): Job Creation and Destruction,
 MIT Press.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and A. A. Rampini (2006): “Capital reallocation and liquidity,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 369–399.

Fernald, J. (2012): “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Produc-
 tivity,” Working Paper 2012-19, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Fort, T., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2012): “How do Firms Re-
  spond to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,” Manuscript, University
  of Maryland.

Gertler, M. and S. Gilchrist (1994): “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the
 Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 309–40.

Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2009): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”
  Working Paper 15338, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Khan, A. and J. K. Thomas (2013): “Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an
 Economy with Production Heterogeneity,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 1055–1107.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
 105, 211–48.


                                          28
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay (2012): “The Contribution of Large and Small
 Employers to Job Creation in Times of High and Low Unemployment,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 102, 2509–2539.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2009): “The Aftermath of Financial Crises,”
 American Economic Review, 99, 466–72.

Shimer, R. (2012): “Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries,” Manuscript, University of
  Chicago.

Shourideh, A. and A. Zetlin-Jones (2012): “External Financing and the Role of
  Financial Frictions over the Business Cycle: Measurement and Theory,” Manuscript,
  Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University.

Veracierto, M. (2009): “Establishments Dynamics, Vacancies and Unemployment: A
  Neoclassical Synthesis,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.




                                          29
