                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          LESS CASH, LESS CRIME:
          EVIDENCE FROM THE ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER PROGRAM

                                            Richard Wright
                                              Erdal Tekin
                                            Volkan Topalli
                                          Chandler McClellan
                                          Timothy Dickinson
                                           Richard Rosenfeld

                                         Working Paper 19996
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19996


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2014




We would like to thank the seminar participants at the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) for useful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Richard Wright, Erdal Tekin, Volkan Topalli, Chandler McClellan, Timothy Dickinson,
and Richard Rosenfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Less Cash, Less Crime: Evidence from the Electronic Benefit Transfer Program
Richard Wright, Erdal Tekin, Volkan Topalli, Chandler McClellan, Timothy Dickinson, and
Richard Rosenfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 19996
March 2014
JEL No. H53,I38,J22,K42

                                             ABSTRACT
It has been long recognized that cash plays a critical role in fueling street crime due to its liquidity
and transactional anonymity. In poor neighborhoods where street offenses are concentrated, a significant
source of circulating cash stems from public assistance or welfare payments. In the 1990s, the Federal
government mandated individual states to convert the delivery of their welfare benefits from paper
checks to an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) system, whereby recipients received and expended
their funds through debit cards. In this paper, we examine whether the reduction in the circulation
of cash on the streets associated with EBT implementation had an effect on crime. To address this
question, we exploit the variation in the timing of the EBT implementation across Missouri counties.
Our results indicate that the EBT program had a negative and significant effect on the overall crime
rate as well as burglary, assault, and larceny. According to our point estimates, the overall crime rate
decreased by 9.8 percent in response to the EBT program. We also find a negative effect on arrests,
especially those associated with non-drug offenses. EBT implementation had no effect on rape, a crime
that is unlikely to be motivated by the acquisition of cash. Interestingly, the significant drop in crime
in the United States over several decades has coincided with a period of steady decline in the proportion
of financial transactions involving cash. In that sense, our findings serve as a fresh contribution to
the important debate surrounding the factors underpinning the great American crime decline.

Richard Wright                                              Chandler McClellan
Department of Criminology                                   National Bureau of Economic Research
 and Criminal Justice                                       1050 Massachusetts Ave.
University of Missouri-St.Louis                             Cambridge, MA 02138
328C Lucas Hall                                             chandler.mcclellan@gmail.com
St. Louis, MO 63121-4400
surfer@umsl.edu                                             Timothy Dickinson
                                                            Department of Criminology
Erdal Tekin                                                   and Criminal Justice
Department of Economics                                     University of Missouri-St.Louis
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                       328D Lucas Hall
Georgia State University                                    St. Louis, MO 63121-4400
P.O. Box 3992                                               timothydickinson@mail.umsl.edu
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER                                                    Richard Rosenfeld
tekin@gsu.edu                                               Department of Criminology
                                                              and Criminal Justice
Volkan Topalli                                              University of Missouri-St.Louis
Department of Criminal Justice and Criminology              537 Lucas Hall
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                       St. Louis, MO 63121-4400
Georgia State University                                    richard_rosenfeld@umsl.edu
1225 Urban Life Building
Atlanta GA 30302
vtopalli@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

        The crime decline in the United States has been well documented (Levitt, 2004;

Blumstein and Wallman, 2006). Crime increased sharply in the mid-1980s and continued

to climb until the early 1990s, after which it dropped to levels not seen since the 1960s. A

wide variety of explanations for the crime drop have been offered, including increased

federal funding for community policing and better policing strategies (Corman and

Mocan, 2001; Zhao, Schieder, and Thurman, 2002), changing demographics (Levitt,

1999), improving economic conditions (Raphael and Winter-Ebmer, 2001; Rosenfeld and

Fornango, 2007), a potential mitigating effect of immigration (Wadsworth, 2010), the

advent of new security technologies (Farrell et al, 2011), and unprecedented levels of

imprisonment (Levitt, 1996; Donohue and Siegelman, 1998; Liedka, Piehl, and Useem,

2006). Although there is little consensus regarding the overall importance of any single

factor, it is generally agreed that a significant fraction of the decline has yet to be

identified empirically, with some arguing that it likely is the result of a complex

interaction of factors (see Blumstein and Wallman, 2006; Zimring, 2008).

        Income-generating offenses such as larceny, burglary and robbery have fallen

along with other forms of street crime since the 1990s (Federal Bureau of Investigation,

2013). Much of this offending is focused on the acquisition of cash – as opposed to

alternative forms of monetary transfer such as debit or credit cards – because its liquidity

and transactional anonymity are critical to the functioning of the underground economy

(Varjavand, 2011). Criminologists long have known that most predatory street crime is

motivated by a perceived need for cash, and that much of that cash is spent on hedonistic

activities, especially illicit drug use (see Wright and Decker, 1994, 1997; Shover, 1996).




                                               3
Economists also have emphasized the role that cash plays in fueling street crime,

recognizing that neighborhood drug dealers, prostitutes, and pawn brokers are not

inclined to accept other forms of payment for their services (see, e.g., Foley, 2011;

Armey, Lipow, and Web, 2012). Although few quantitative studies have explored this

relationship in detail, a series of field-based qualitative projects has carefully specified

the mechanisms through which a desperate need for cash motivates street crime (see, e.g.,

Wright, Topalli, and Jacques, 2013; Wright and Topalli, 2011; Topalli, Wright, and

Fornango, 2002; Wright and Decker, 1994). Using a grounded theory approach

developed through interviews with and observations of active street criminals, these

studies have introduced an etiological model that explains both the importance of cash to

offenders and its role in perpetuating their criminal activity. That model outlines the way

in which background risk factors such as being born into a life of pervasive poverty can

loosen individuals’ bonds to conventional society and thereby lead some of them to

participate in the oppositional culture of the streets. “Streetlife” is characterized by

conspicuous consumption, fatalism, and a general disdain for mainstream values (see

Anderson, 1999; Brezina, Tekin, and Topalli, 2009; Shover, 1996), which find their

expression in the pursuit of illicit action, especially, but not exclusively, during intense

periods of heavy drug and alcohol use (Wright and Decker, 1994; 1997). The pursuit of

illicit action, in turn, quickly exhausts offenders’ financial resources, leading to the

commission of crime in order to acquire more cash to keep the party going (see Figure 1).

                                         Figure 1 about here

       The proposition that flows logically from this model is that cash is a necessary

functional component of the etiological cycle that drives many sorts of predatory street




                                               4
crime. If that is so, then any reduction in the amount of cash in circulation should produce

concomitant reductions in acquisitive street crimes (e.g., theft) and the secondary

offenses committed in response to them (e.g., retaliatory assault). To wit, there is

significant evidence that the US economy is in fact moving away from cash as a

transactional medium.

       The proportion of financial transactions utilizing cash has steadily decreased due

to the increased use of credit cards, which entered the United States market in the 1950s

(followed two decades later by the advent of ATM and debit cards), as well as the more

recent increase in mobile transactions (see Erling, 2013). Furthermore, over three-

quarters of all non-cash payments in the United States in 2009 were made electronically

and this represents 9 percent increase from 2006 (Federal Reserve System, 2011). In fact,

cash transactions in the United States have been on the decline for a much longer period

of time. Fifty years ago, cash was used in 80 percent of domestic payments. Today, that

number is closer to 50 percent. Cash transactions should continue to decline as

dependence on online banking and commerce increase. According to Littman and Oliver

(2012), since 1990 debit transactions have increased by 2,700 percent while cash volume

has grown at an annual rate of only 4 percent. Checks – once the primary method of

benefits transfer to the poor – have declined in use by more than 50 percent. Importantly,

the movement away from cash is not limited to the United States, as other countries,

notably Sweden, are purposefully abandoning cash altogether (Tomlinson, 2012). The

question remains, however: has this shift in the way commerce is transacted had any

effect on street crime?




                                              5
         In poor neighborhoods where street offenses are concentrated, a significant source

of circulating cash stems from public assistance or “welfare” payments. Prior to the late

1990s, welfare and food assistance programs, now referred to as Temporary Assistance

for Needy Families (TANF) and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

respectively, issued payments in the form of paper checks, which required a significant

proportion of recipients with no access to conventional bank accounts (see Leyshon and

Thrift, 1994, 1995) to cash them at independent check cashing establishments. This

resulted in a situation whereby large amounts of cash were available to welfare recipients

at one point in time each month (Ford and Beveridge, 2004).

         One possible explanation for how check-based welfare payments precipitate street

crime is that this encourages recipients to expend their resources prematurely, leading

them to turn to crime to supplement their income for the remainder of the month (Foley,

2011). This assumes, however, that a sizeable proportion of welfare recipients will turn to

crime, which is unlikely (see Zhang, 1997; Hannon and DeFronzo, 1998; Fishback,

Johnson, and Kantor, 2010). A more plausible explanation is that welfare recipients who

have just cashed their checks represent especially attractive targets for predatory

offenders desperate for cash to sustain their pursuit of illicit action (Wright and Decker,

1997).

         A significant shift in welfare payment schemes has been introduced across the

United States over the last two decades, with paper checks being replaced by the

Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) program, a digital, debit card-based system. Mandated

by the Federal government, but enacted at the state level, the changeover from paper to

EBT was implemented variably within states, most often on a county-by-county basis.




                                              6
        In this paper, we hypothesize that the introduction of such a system will reduce

the amount of cash circulated on the streets and thus disrupt the etiological cycle of

criminality described above, resulting in a reduction in rates of both predatory and

retaliatory street crimes. This paper provides the first empirical examination of this

hypothesis. To do this, we assemble monthly data on various types of crimes from all of

the counties in the state of Missouri between 1990 and 2011. Then we exploit the

variation in the timing of EBT program implementation across counties over time to

examine the impact on various crimes of reduced circulation of cash caused by the EBT

program. To the extent that there is no other plausible channel though which EBT

implementation can cause an independent effect on crime, any association between EBT

implementation and crime can then be attributed to removal of cash.

        Our results indicate that the EBT program implementation is associated with a

significant decrease in the overall crime rate and the specific offenses of burglary, assault,

and larceny in Missouri. Furthermore, we also find a reduction in arrests, those from non-

drug offenses in particular, in response to the EBT program implementation. Finally, we

find suggestive evidence that EBT reduced robbery but had no effect on rape, which is

consistent with the notion that crimes unlikely to be motivated by the immediate

acquisition of cash are also less likely to be influenced by EBT program implementation,

at least in the short-term.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we provide

background information on the history of the EBT program in the United States and the

state of Missouri. We describe our data in Section III and the estimation approach in




                                              7
Section IV. The results are summarized in Section V and a discussion is provided in

Section VI.



II. Background

       Beginning in the early 1980s, the federal government gradually shifted toward the

use of EBT as a means for disbursing government benefits to recipients. A number of

EBT demonstration programs were implemented during the decade, culminating in

congressional passage of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988 and the Mickey Leland

Memorial Domestic Hunger Relief Act of 1990 (Food and Nutrition Service, 2013).

During the 1990s, political support for EBT increased as a result of an ideological shift

reflected in the Conference Report on the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993

and the 1993 National Performance Review, which urged states to establish these systems

(see, Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, 1999; Office of

the Vice President, 1993). Welfare reform legislation signed in 1996 required every state

to develop systems to electronically issue food stamp program benefits by 2002.

       Missouri lawmakers responded to these calls by enacting Missouri Revised

Statute § 208.182 in 1994 (see Missouri Statutes, 2013), which stipulated the

establishment of EBT pilot programs in Missouri counties with a population of 600,000

or more (thus including St. Louis County, which contains the city of St. Louis and

Jackson County, which contains Kansas City). These pilot programs were initiated in

mid-1997, shortly after the federal government restructured welfare with the Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act. During the testing of EBT,

Missouri recipients of food stamps and temporary assistance residing in pilot locations




                                             8
received EBT cards in place of traditional paper checks funds were placed on the cards

according to recipients’ month of birth and the first letter of their surname; a practice

continuing to the present day1. The switch to EBT was received positively by both

retailers and recipients; it increased the speed and efficiency of transactions and the

resemblance of the actual EBT cards to credit and debit cards reduced the stigma of

making a purchase with distinctive checks (Missouri Department of Social Services,

2013a).

         Missouri recipients of EBT are given detailed instructions on the use of their

cards, including how and where they may be used, when monthly benefits are disbursed,

and the fees and surcharges associated with withdrawing cash from automated teller

machines (ATM) and point-of-sale (POS) terminals (Missouri Department of Social

Services, 2013a). Although recipients of temporary assistance in Missouri were strongly

urged by the Department of Social Services (DSS) to establish bank accounts during the

initial years of the restructured program, the majority of individuals continue to receive

temporary assistance via EBT cards (Missouri Department of Social Services, 2013b).

This is consistent with national trends indicating that a significantly high proportion of

the poor are “unbanked” or “underbanked” (FDIC, 2011; see, also, Rhine and Greene,

2012).

         Figure 2 illustrates the EBT program implementation map of Missouri. As shown

in the figure, the EBT program was implemented in eight phases in different sets of

localities between June 1997 and May 1998. The variation in the implementation dates of




1
 Personal correspondence with Kay Martellaro, EBT/Food Distribution Unit Manager, Family Support
Division, Missouri Department of Social Services.


                                                 9
EBT program across counties and over the period of 12 months is key to our

identification of the impact of the program on crime.

                                         Figure 2 about here



III. Crime Data

        The crime data for Missouri come from the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR)

Program of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The UCR represents "a nationwide,

cooperative statistical effort of nearly 18,000 city, university and college, county, state,

tribal, and federal law enforcement agencies voluntarily reporting data on crimes brought

to their attention.”2 Under the UCR system, law enforcement agencies submit crime data

either through a state UCR program or directly to the FBI’s UCR program on a monthly

basis. This consists mainly of crimes reported to the police by the general public, but may

also include offenses that police officers discover or learn about through other sources.

        For this investigation, we assembled county level monthly data on the following

crimes: total crime, burglary, robbery, larceny, motor vehicle theft.3 Weighted means are

presented for our sample variables in Table 1. We present descriptive statistics for each

crime rate for the full sample in column 1 and then separately for the observations with

and without EBT. The rate of monthly total crime is about 468 per 100,000 persons per

county. Larceny constitutes a large share of overall crime followed by assault and

burglary. Robbery and motor vehicle theft are the least prevalent crimes in our data, with

averages of 13 and 28 per month, and are heavily concentrated in urban areas. When we


2
  See http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr.
3
  We also analyze rape in robustness analyses. Homicide is included in the measure of total crime but is
excluded from the individual crimes we examine because homicides are too sparse for reliable analysis at
the county level.


                                                   10
compare the average crime rates between EBT and non-EBT observations, we see that

the rate is lower in observations with EBT program for all types of crime, which suggests

that there may be a reduction in crime associated with EBT implementation.

       It is important to acknowledge that monthly crime data from the UCR have been

shown to suffer from reporting errors of varying degrees depending on the particular state

(Maltz and Targonski, 2002; Marcotte and Markowitz, 2011). For example, some

jurisdictions only report crimes to the FBI on an annual basis, while others report

meaningful data every month. Inconsistent reporting does not appear to be a problem for

Missouri, however, as none of its counties show zero crime for eleven months with a

spike in crime in the month of December (a common occurrence with less diligent states).

We illustrate the proportion of each crime reported in each month in Table 2. As shown

in the table, the patterns for each crime appear be to be as expected, with peaks in

summer months and lowest reporting in February due to fewer days. More importantly,

there is no evidence of over-reporting in December.

                                         Table 2 about here

       While the preceding discussion is comforting in terms of the reliability of our

crime data, it is probable that there is at least some error in reported crime from month to

month. This should not, however, constitute a concern for our analysis. First, it is likely

that any reporting error from month to month is random. Since crime is our outcome

measure, any random measurement error in the reporting of crime would reduce the

efficiency of our estimates but would not cause any bias. Second, any permanent

differences across jurisdictions that might be responsible for systematic misreporting on

the part of any particular jurisdiction or jurisdictions due to reasons such as




                                             11
administrative inefficiency, insufficient funding, or lack of appropriate staff should be

captured by county fixed effects. Similarly, if misreporting occurs for all counties due to

a statewide factor such as budget problems, that should be captured by month-by-year

fixed effects. Finally, we also estimate our models controlling for county specific linear

time trends, which should account for any county-level time-varying factors causing

misreporting that have been trending linearly.

         As a focus of our analysis Missouri provides a variety of advantages, chief among

them is the fact that its crime rates trend closely to those for the nation as a whole. In

Figures 3A and 3B, we illustrate the patterns in total crime rate and rates of Part 1 crimes

for the state of Missouri and the nation, respectively. 4 Crime rates fell sharply in both

Missouri and the United States during the analysis period. This pattern is present for both

the overall crime rate and each of the Part I offenses. Moreover, the trends in crimes in

Missouri appear to be quite similar to those of the United States averages.

                                         Figures 3A and 3B about here



IV. Estimation Method

         Our goal is to estimate the change in the rate of crime caused by the

implementation of the EBT program. One key empirical challenge to accomplishing this

goal stems from the possibility that factors leading people to carry cash may also be

correlated with crime. For example, if people decide not to carry too much cash with

them as a reaction to increased crime, then any observed negative relationship between

4
  The UCR indexes two main categories of crime. Part I crimes, our focus in this study, include two
categories: Violent crimes include forcible rape, aggravated assault, murder, and robbery. Property crimes
include arson, burglary, larceny-theft, and motor vehicle theft. Part II crimes are less serious and involve
such offenses as loitering, embezzlement, forgery and counterfeiting, disorderly conduct, prostitution,
vandalism, vagrancy, and weapons offenses.


                                                     12
the two would be over-stated. Our approach to guarding against this problem is to exploit

a policy change that has no direct association with crime itself, but that leads to a

reduction in the circulation of cash on streets. Then, any reduction in crime associated

with implementation of the policy can be attributed to the reduction in the circulation of

cash. The validity of this approach hinges on whether any of the factors driving the policy

change are correlated with street crime. There is no evidence to suggest that crime

reduction was ever mentioned as a reason or justification for implementing the EBT

program in Missouri or elsewhere. Rather, EBT policy was instituted to reduce program

fraud, ensure ease of use of food benefits by program participants, and reduce the stigma

associated with using food stamps (e.g., U.S. General Accounting Office, 1994).

Therefore, any variation in the circulation of cash generated by the EBT implementation

should be exogenous to crime.

       A simple before-and-after approach may still be problematic, however, unless the

timing and pattern of EBT program implementation across counties was effectively

random with regard to both observable and unobservable characteristics of these counties.

This assumption is unlikely in this case for several reasons. While all Missouri counties

adopted the EBT program eventually, it can be argued that counties that launched the

program earlier might have differed from those counties that launched it later. For

example, it might have been easier to implement a new policy in smaller and less

populated counties with lower bureaucratic burden. Alternatively, larger, urban counties

may be more readily equipped with the technology and the staff expertise to implement

the EBT program. In fact, St. Louis County (City of St. Louis) and Jackson County




                                             13
(Kansas City) both of which maintain a population of 600,000+ were among the first

counties to implement a pilot EBT program5.

        Since various jurisdictions began the implementation of the EBT program in

different months between 1997 and 1998, this variation gives us the leverage to employ a

difference-in-difference method. This method basically amounts to estimating the

difference in average crime rates in the jurisdictions with an EBT program before and

after the implementation net of the difference in average crime rates in those jurisdictions

without an EBT program. The method assumes that, in the absence of the implementation

of EBT policy, crime rates would have trended similarly between treatment and non-

treatment counties. We argue that this is a plausible assumption as EBT implementation

is likely to be exogenous to crime. This assumption is not directly testable, although

valuable insights can be gained by comparing the crime trends for each set of treatment

jurisdictions in the period prior to any EBT implementation. Note that we do not have a

set of control counties that had never been treated since all counties eventually

implemented an EBT program. In different months between 1997 and 1998, however,

each set of treatment counties served as a control for one another. Thus, if the crime

trends for each set of treatment counties evolve similarly over time, this can be

interpreted as suggestive evidence in support of our empirical strategy. In Figure 4, we

illustrate the trends in our crime measures between January 1990 and May 1997. As




5
  At the same time, we are confident that the implementation pattern for EBT in Missouri was not
systematic or purposeful in any other way that might relate to crime. We exchanged emails with an official
at the Economic Research Service (ERS) at the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), who served as an
evaluator of the system-wide EBT implementation in several states, in an attempt to identify EBT
implementation dates at the county level for other states. He acknowledged that neither he nor anyone else
involved in the implementation had recognized the potential for tracking county implementation dates for
the purposes of research. We thank John Kirlin for providing us that information.


                                                    14
shown in the figure, the trends largely appear to parallel each other, with the possible

exception of robbery for the period of 1992-93.


                                     Figure 4 about here


       To motivate our empirical strategy further, we provide additional visual evidence

regarding the effect of EBT implementation on crime rates in Missouri. In Figures 5A

and 5B, we illustrate the trends in the average rates of our crime variables before and

after EBT implementation up to 24 months, weighted by county population. The vertical

line represents the month and the year in which the EBT program became effective in

each of the treatment counties. Since EBT program came into effect at different points in

time, the graph is centered in the month and year of implementation (time 0) and tracks

crime rates in the months leading up to and after this time for 24 months. As shown in

Figure 5A, there appears to be a reversal in the trend for the rate of total crime right at the

time of EBT implementation. The patterns are largely similar in Figure 5B, where we

repeat this exercise for individual crime outcomes separately. In addition to our five

crime outcomes, we also show the trends for rape, which does not appear to exhibit a

reversal of trend at or around the time of EBT program implementation. Because rape is

typically unrelated to the immediate acquisition of cash, this is not unexpected.

                                   Figures 5A and 5B about here

       While the patterns presented in Figures 5A and 5B are suggestive of a causal

relationship between EBT program implementation and crime, a stronger test of our

hypotheses would take advantage of both within- and between-county differences in the

crime rates between blocks of counties with and without EBT implementation in each

month in each year. Note that the levels of crime may very well be different across


                                              15
treatment and control counties. This does not present a problem for our identification

because the underlying levels of outcomes are not critically important in this empirical

setup. We also allow the crime rates to trend differently across counties by accounting for

county specific linear trends in our empirical analysis. The difference-in-difference

model employed in our analysis can be formalized as follows:

        Crimecmy = f (αEBTcmy + βc + λmy + Trendcmy + εcmy)                     (1)

        One key feature of our crime data is that it is a non-negative count with a large

number of zeros. Therefore, it is more appropriate to employ a count model for the

estimation of equation (1). Both a Poisson regression and a negative binomial regression

are well suited to address count data. A potential drawback with the Poisson regression is

that it forces the conditional variance to be equal to the mean. Negative binomial

regression, on the other hand, does not impose such an assumption. A test for over-

dispersion yields a statistically significant positive over-dispersion, i.e. conditional

variances are larger than means, for all of our outcomes. We therefore use a fixed effects

negative binomial model and assume that f follows a negative binomial distribution. 6 The

unit of observation in equation (1) is at the county-year-month group level. Crimecmy is

the count for one of our crime outcomes in county c in month m in calendar year y. The

EBTcmy is our key treatment variable, which equals one if county c has an EBT policy in

effect in month m in calendar year y, and 0 otherwise. The βc is a vector of county fixed

effects, which serve to account for any permanent differences across counties that may

affect crime. The λmy are month*year fixed effects that serve to control for seasonality in

crime as well as any changes in crimes that are common to all counties. Equation (1) also

6
  Despite rejecting the equality of variance and mean assumption, we also estimated our models using a
fixed effects Poisson model. The estimates obtained from these models are similar to those from the fixed
effects negative binomial models and are available from the authors upon request.


                                                    16
includes county-specific monthly time trends, Trendcmy, to account for the possibility that

variation in the EBT policy implementation might be non-random and could be correlated

with unobserved factors that vary by county and month*year, and that might affect crime.

We also control for county population in equation (1). Finally, the εcm is an idiosyncratic

error term. We guard against the possibility of the error term being correlated within

counties by clustering standard errors at the county level (Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan, 2004). Furthermore, we weight the regressions by annual county

population. The coefficient of interest in Equation (1) is α, the impact of EBT policy on

crime rates.



V. Empirical Results

       Our main results from the estimation of equation (1) are presented in Table 3.

Each cell in the table presents the effect size of the EBT program implementation and its

standard error on each of the six crime outcomes, including total crime, burglary, robbery,

assault, larceny, and motor vehicle theft. We present the estimates obtained from three

different specifications. In column (1), we show the results from a specification that

controls for county fixed effects. Column (2) controls for both county fixed effects and

month by year fixed effects. Finally, column (3) presents the results from our most

comprehensive specification, which also accounts for county-specific linear trends. By

adding various sets of controls into the models sequentially, we get a sense of the

importance of unobserved differences across counties as well as statewide trends and the

seasonality in various types of crimes.

                                    Table 3 about here




                                             17
       As shown in column (1), there appears to be a negative association between EBT

implementation and robbery, burglary, and motor vehicle theft. The results presented in

column (2), however, clearly indicate the importance of accounting for statewide trends

and seasonality in crime. While the estimate on robbery switches its sign and is no longer

statistically significant, the other five models point to a negative association between

EBT implementation and crime. For example, EBT implementation is associated with a

16.6 percent reduction in total crime rate per 100,000 persons. The magnitudes of the

effects for individual crime outcomes are also sizeable, suggesting declines of 22.7

percent for assault, 13 percent for burglary, and 16.3 percent for larceny. While the effect

is negative for motor vehicle theft, it is relatively small in magnitude and statistically

indistinguishable from zero. When we also allow for the crime rates to trend differently

across counties as shown in column (3), the general pattern obtained in column (2)

remains the same, except that the effect sizes become smaller. For example, EBT

implementation causes the total crime rate to decrease by 9.8 percent. Similarly, burglary,

assault, and larceny decrease by 7.9 percent, 12.5 percent, and 9.6 percent, respectively.

       The estimates for robbery and auto-theft are both positive, but neither is large or

statistically significant. As shown in Table 1, the means for both of these outcomes,

especially that for robbery, are very small. Moreover, the number of county-month-year

observations with a value of zero is also much higher for these variables. Specifically,

18,936 observations are zero for robbery and 12,120 observations are zero for auto-theft.

Accordingly, the identifying variation is much lower for these two outcomes, which

contributes to insignificant estimates.




                                              18
        To put the significant results into perspective, we next calculate the number of

crimes that are reduced as a result of the EBT program implementation. Given that the

total crime rate per 100,000 persons was 482.62 in the counties in the month prior to the

implementation of EBT program, an effect size of 9.8 percent implies that approximately

47 fewer crimes per 100,000 persons would be committed per county per month as a

result of the program. Since the average population in these counties was 62,870, the

reduction in the number of crimes would be about 30. The corresponding figures for

burglary, assault, and larceny would be 3.7, 5.9, and 14.2 per month, respectively.

        If the EBT program implementation had a negative impact on the number of

crimes committed, then a related question is whether there has been a decrease in the

number of arrests that coincided with the crime decline. Estimating arrest models is a

particularly useful specification check because, if our hypothesis for the effect of EBT

program implementation is correct, then we should to see expect fewer crimes being

committed, which in turn should result in fewer arrests. Instead, if we find an increase in

arrests, then one could suspect that EBT implementation might have coincided with a

period of more intensive policing. To answer this question, we assembled data on arrest

records for Missouri counties at the monthly level between 1990 and 2011, which are

also available from the UCR. Then we estimated models similar to equation (1) using

arrests as the outcome measure. We estimated these models separately for total arrests,

arrests for non-drug related offenses, and arrest for drug-related offenses. The results

from these models are presented in Table 4.7

                                          Table 4 about here


7The sample sizes in the arrest models are smaller than those in the crime models because not all counties
submitted arrest data in every month.


                                                    19
        An initial look at Table 4 reveals that, similar to crime models, controlling for

seasonality in and county-specific linear trends makes an important difference on the

estimate of the effect of EBT program on arrests. Focusing on the results from the most

comprehensive specification displayed in column (3), there is a negative relationship

between the EBT program implementation and arrests for non-drug related offenses.

These offenses decreased by 9.2 percent in response to the EBT program. By contrast, the

estimate on the effect of EBT program implementation on drug-related offenses is small

and statistically insignificant. Note that the effect on total arrests is negative and 8.9

percent, although the estimate barely misses statistical significance (p-value=0.101). The

number of arrests across all offenses averaged 213.5 per 100,000 persons per county in

the month prior to EBT implementation. An effect size of 8.9 percent translates into

approximately 12 (0.089*213.5*62,870/100,000) fewer arrests per month per county as a

result of the EBT program implementation. Similarly, the average number of arrests for

non-drug offenses is 195.67 per 100,000 per month for the same period, which implies a

reduction of arrests from these types of offenses by about 11

(0.092*195.67*62,870/100,000). Thus, almost all of the reduction in arrests associated

with the implementation of EBT program is accounted for by arrests from non-drug

related offenses.

        The results summarized above are supportive of our hypothesis that EBT program

implementation caused crime rates to decrease for the overall crime rate as well as a

number of individual crimes including burglary, assault, and larceny. Furthermore, the

results for arrests reaffirm this hypothesis. It was expected that similar patterns would be

observed for robbery as for the other acquisitive offenses, but the effect of the EBT




                                              20
program on this offence is estimated without much precision. As noted earlier, robbery

has a small mean and many counties in the sample evidence zero offenses in this category.

This is not wholly unexpected, as robbery is concentrated in densely populated, urban

areas (Kneebone and Raphael, 2011). In fact, most of the variance associated with this

offense is observed in two Missouri counties: Jackson County where Kansas City is

located and the city of St. Louis.8 These cities dominate two of our eight sets of treatment

counties. The remaining six are overwhelmingly rural with few or no robberies.

Accordingly, little identifying variation comes from these six sets of treatment counties,

resulting in an estimate on robbery that is neither sizeable nor statistically significant. We

therefore modified our difference-in-difference analysis by designating only St. Louis

City and Jackson County as treatment counties and the rest as control counties. Note that

doing so eliminates any weight in the estimates associated with the variation in six sets of

rural counties. This analysis produced the expected negative robbery estimates in each of

the three specifications in Table 3. Furthermore, the estimates are statistically significant

in the specifications in columns 1 and 2. While the estimate in column 3 is negative, it

was still imprecisely estimated in conventional levels, most likely due to relatively

restricted variation in the robbery measure.

Displacement

           A possible challenge to the results presented thus far is that a reduction in the

circulation of cash on the streets might induce some criminals to travel to neighboring

counties without an EBT program to conduct illegal acts. This would suggest that crime

would just be displaced from a treatment county to a neighboring control county,

resulting in no net change in overall crime in the state. While such rational behavior on
8
    The city of St. Louis is its own county distinct from St. Louis County.


                                                       21
the part of criminals is theoretically plausible, available evidence from the criminological

literature suggests that most offenders tend to operate within their own geographical

activity or awareness spaces, which usually do not extend beyond several blocks

(Brantingham and Brantingham, 1981, 1984). Nevertheless, we implement three

robustness analyses to address this concern.

       In the first analysis, we estimate our models excluding counties that are located on

either side of the borderline for EBT implementation. Therefore, any crime committed by

criminals who travel to a non-EBT county is excluded from our analysis. Under the

assumption that criminals might be able to travel to a neighboring county, but no further

than that, this analysis should produce the effect of EBT implementation on crime net of

any cross-border crimes. These results are presented in Table 5. Due to large reductions

in sample sizes, these results are estimated with less precision; only the estimate on

burglary remains statistically significant. However, all of the estimates with the exception

of one on motor vehicle theft are negative. In sum, the patterns of effects obtained in

Table 5 are consistent with our overall conclusion that EBT lowers crime rates despite

larger standard errors.

                                        Table 5 about here

       Next, we estimate all of our models controlling for an indicator variable for

whether a neighboring county has an EBT program effective in each of our county-year-

month observations. As presented in Table 6, controlling for this variable does not cause

an appreciable change to our conclusion that EBT program implementation results in

lower crime rates overall. Focusing on column (3) of Table 6, EBT program

implementation causes the overall crime rate to go down by 10.2 percent. Similarly,




                                               22
assault and larceny decrease by 13.7 percent and 11.3 percent, respectively. The estimate

on burglary is still negative, but no longer significant at conventional levels (p-value =

0.22). Moreover, the estimate on the binary indicator of whether any of the neighboring

counties had EBT is negative in four of the six models and never statistically significant.

                                        Table 6 about here

       In our third analysis, we redefined our treatment indicator such that it takes on the

value of one if any of the neighboring counties has an EBT program in effect and zero

otherwise. Again, the idea is that if there is a displacement effect associated with EBT

implementation then one should obtain a positive association between this indicator and

crime. As shown in Table 7, we do not find any evidence supporting this argument. There

is no particular pattern in the sign of the indicator of EBT implementation in a

neighboring county. Furthermore, the effect sizes are very small and none of them is

estimated with statistical significance. To sum, the evidence obtained from the three

robustness analyses reveals no indication of any migratory behavior by potential

criminals across county borders in response to EBT implementation.

                                     Table 7 about here

Program Participation

       It is important to note that the timing of EBT implementation in Missouri

coincides with a period of declines in the caseloads for Supplemental Nutrition

Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)

program (see Figure 6). Participants in these two programs together constitute the overall

client base for the EBT program. It could be argued that the decline in crime associated

with EBT implementation might be attributable to the fact that the period of interest was




                                             23
a time with a decreasing number of EBT card recipients, who are also the potential

victims of street crime. While this may first appear like a plausible explanation, the

identification of an EBT program effect in our empirical models does not come from a

before-and-after comparison in the program implementation. Rather, we compare the

change in crime associated with EBT between treatment and control counties. If

caseloads of SNAP and TANF exhibited similar trends across counties, then our results

should not be affected by this development. Furthermore, some of the variation in the

declining caseloads for these two programs should be captured by county specific linear

time trends. Nevertheless, we obtained data on the SNAP and TANF caseloads for

individual Missouri counties between 1990 and 2011 and control for these two variables

in our models along with the usual fixed effects, county specific linear trends, and county

population. We present these results in Table 8. As illustrated in column (3), controlling

for SNAP and TANF caseloads has little impact on the estimate of the effect of the EBT

program. Similar to Table 3, the estimates on EBT for total crime, burglary, assault, and

larceny are all negative and statistically significant, while the estimates on the other two

crimes are positive, but small in size and imprecisely estimated.

                              Figure 6 and Table 8 about here

Rape

       In an additional sensitivity analysis, we turn our attention to a type of criminal act

which is unlikely to be associated with an immediate financial motivation, and therefore

unlikely to be affected by EBT program implementation. One particularly good candidate

for such placebo analysis, as explained above, is the crime of rape. Confirming our

prediction, the estimation of equation (1) with rape as the outcome variable produced a




                                             24
statistically insignificant coefficient on the indicator of EBT program implementation.

Next we repeated this analysis for arrests for rape and non-rape related sex offenses (e.g.,

prostitution, sex trafficking). Again, the estimate on the effect of EBT program

implementation was not statistically significant in either of the cases. Implementation of

the EBT program is associated with a 17 percent decline in reported in rapes, but that

result is not statistically different from zero (p-value=0.28). Additionally, adoption of

EBT is correlated with a 6.6 percent decline in arrests for rape, though again this estimate

is imprecisely estimated (p-value=0.74).

Cash Reduction

        Finally, we implement a back of the envelope calculation of the degree to which

removal of cash on the streets is related to reduction of crime. In particular, we are

interested in getting an estimate of ∂Crime/∂Cash. This term can be calculated as the ratio

of ∂Crime/∂EBT and ∂Cash/∂EBT. Note that we already obtained an estimate of the

former earlier. To get an approximate estimate for the latter, we calculate the total

payments for SNAP and TANF in Missouri in 1997 in the treatment counties.9 This

amount is $671.2 million, which can be interpreted as the maximum amount of cash that

needs to be removed from circulation in order to produce a decrease of 9.8 percent in the

total crime rate. Note that this figure is an upper limit since many TANF recipients can

technically carry cash on them by withdrawing welfare payments from banks or ATM

machines using their EBT cards. In any event, by removing something less than $55.9

million in cash from circulation each month, we estimate that EBT achieved a nearly 10

percent decrease in the crime rate.

9
 Ideally, we would like to use the total payments in the particular month prior to EBT program
implementation. However, we only have data on the average monthly payments for each program in each
year.


                                                 25
VI. Discussion

        We have shown that the move from check-based welfare payments to EBT in

Missouri is associated with a substantial drop in street crime, with significant effects for

burglary, larceny, and assault, and some indication of a non-zero effect for robbery.

These findings were robust to a number of alternate sources of variation in the data we

tested. For example, they remain consistent when replicating the analysis using arrests

instead of reported crimes. We also found that the effect of EBT was consistent across

counties and that offending was not displaced from those counties that implemented EBT

to those that had not yet done so. If that had been the case, the obvious policy implication

would be that EBT implementation would only create a sustained reduction in crime if its

application were universal (i.e., that all counties in a state would have to remove cash

from the system simultaneously). Otherwise, crime decreases would be localized to

counties that implemented EBT and would be offset by crime increases in neighboring

counties where cash had not been removed. Our finding is consistent with criminological

literature indicating that offenders tend to operate within their own geographical

awareness space (Brantingham and Brantingham, 1981, 1984). More importantly it

supports our contention that the removal of cash through EBT has negative effects on

street crime that are enduring.

        The most likely explanation for our overall findings is that moving from a check-

based system to EBT effectively reduced the amount of cash on the streets available to be

taken or used for illegal purposes. Because cash is critical to the pursuit of illicit action,

this served as a brake on the etiological cycle that drives street crime, slowing it such that




                                              26
the rate of offending was lessened, not only for predatory offenses like burglary and

larceny, but also for assaultive disputes fueled by the heavy drug and alcohol use

associated with participation in streetlife. Additionally, a reduction in cash may have had

a distal effect on criminal assault, much of which is retaliatory in nature and flows

directly from the predatory victimization of fellow offenders by those caught up in the

etiological cycle (Jacobs, Topalli, and Wright, 2000; Topalli, Wright, and Fornango,

2002). Less cash meant that fewer such crimes were committed, so the rate of retaliation

should have fallen accordingly.

       Our results underline the critical role played by cash in the etiology of street crime,

especially considering that they are based on a far from complete removal of cash from

the local economy. Even though welfare recipients still can withdraw a limited amount of

cash each day with their cards, the reduction in cash on the streets ushered in by the

introduction of EBT had widespread and significant effects on multiple types of offenses.

It stands to reason that a more complete reduction in cash would have even stronger

effects on street crime. This could be accomplished by restricting the use of EBT benefits

to digital transactions only. Doing so would effectively dry up a significant source of the

supply of cash available to victims and offenders in poor neighborhoods leading to

concomitant decreases in street crime.

       On its face, this may appear to be a highly desirable outcome. It is no secret that

street crime disproportionately affects those living in poor neighborhoods. Yet, there are

a number of potential unintended consequences of removing cash from such communities.

Recall that the crux of our argument is that cash is a nearly indispensable transactional

medium for illicit activity. But such activities are not limited to drug-use, prostitution, or




                                              27
trading in stolen goods. They also include legitimate services provided without official

sanction (e.g., so-called shade tree automotive repair shops, unregistered daycare

facilities) and those provided by individuals of questionable or outright illegal status (e.g.,

convicts or undocumented immigrants). In the absence of cash, these services and the

people who perform them would effectively be shut out of both legitimate and

illegitimate markets, with potentially serious knock-on effects for poor consumers and

local economies.

       EBT was not implemented as a crime-fighting tool, and the supplanting of cash by

various forms of digital monetary transfer had been taking place for many years before

EBT was established. Assuming these trends continue, the volume of cash available for

transactions should continue to decrease as cash becomes less and less useful, whether or

not access to cash via EBT is further restricted. Because this larger pattern in the

reduction of cash transactions affects both the affluent and the poor, it should have a

similar but even larger effect on street crime and the black market economy than EBT

implementation. More affluent communities will be relatively unaffected. Poor

communities should benefit from less street crime. The policy challenge, however, is to

safeguard these benefits while minimizing the costs to the poor of the coming cashless

economy.




                                             28
                                        References

Armey, L. E., Lipow, J. & Webb, N. J. (2012). The impact of rlectronic financial
      payments on crime. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2137266 or
      http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust
       differences-in-differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
       249-275.

Blumstein, A., & Wallman, J. (Eds.) (2006). The crime drop in America. New York,
      NY:Cambridge University Press.

Brantingham, P. J., & Brantingham, P. L. (1981). Environmental criminology. Beverly
       Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

Brantingham, P. J., & Brantingham, P. L. (1984). Patterns in crime. New York, NY:
       Macmillan Press.

Brezina, T., Tenkin, E., & Topalli, V. (2009). “Might not be a tomorrow”: A
       multimethods approach to anticipated early death and youth crime. Criminology,
       47, 1091-1129.

Corman, H., & Mocan, N. (2005). Carrots, Sticks, and Broken Windows*. Journal of
      Law and Economics, 48(1), 235-266.

Donohue, J., & Siegleman, P. (1998). Allocating resources among prisons and social
      programs in the battle against crime. The Journal of Legal Studies, 27(1).

Erling, G. (2013). Cash is dead, long live cash. Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems,
        7(1), 43-49.

Farrell, G., Tseloni, A., Mailley, J., & Tilley, N. (2011). The crime drop and the security
        hypothesis. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 48, 147-175.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012). National survey of unbanked and
       underbanked households: Executive summary. Retrieved from
       http://www.fdic.gov/householdsurvey/2012_unbankedreport_execsumm.pdf

Fishback, P. V., Johnson, R. S., & Kantor, S. (2010). Striking at the roots of crime: The
       impact of welfare spending on crime during the great depression. Journal of Law
       and Economics, 53(4), 715-740.

Foley, C. F. (2011). Welfare payments and crime. The Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 93(1), 97-112.




                                            29
Food and Nutrition Service, United States Department of Agriculture. (2013). A short
       history of SNAP. Retrieved from
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Legislation/about.htm

Ford, J. M., & Beveridge, A. A. (2004). “Bad” neighborhoods, fast food,“sleazy”
        businesses, and drug dealers: Relations between the location of licit and illicit
        businesses in the urban environment. Journal of Drug Issues, 34(1), 51-76.

Hannon, L., & DeFronzo, J. (1998). The truly disadvantaged, public assistance, and crime.
      Social Problems, 383-392.

Jacobs, B. A., Topalli, V., & Wright, R. (2000). Managing retaliation: drug robbery and
       informal sanction threats. Criminology, 38(1), 171-198.

Kneebone, E., & Raphael, S. (2011). City and suburban crime trends in metropolitan
      America. Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program.

Liedka, R. V., Piehl, A. M., & Useem, B. (2006). The crime-control effect of
       incarceration: Does scale matter? Criminology & Public Policy, 5(2), 245-276.

Levitt, S. D. (1996). The effect of prison population size on crime rates: Evidence from
        prison overcrowding litigation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 319-
        351.

Levitt, S. D. (1999). The limited role of changing age structure in explaining aggregate
        crime rates. Criminology, 37(3), 581-598.

Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain
        the decline and six that do not. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 163-190.

Leyshon, A., & Thrift, N. (1994). Access to financial services and financial infrastructure
      withdrawal: Problems and policies. Area, 26(3), 268-275.

Leyshon, A., & Thrift, N. (1995). Geographies of financial exclusion: financial
      abandonment in Britain and the United States. Transactions of the Institute of
      British Geographers, 20(3), 312-341.

Littman, D. & Oliver, N. (2012). Meeting the demand for cash. Forefront, 20-23.
       Retrieved from:
       http://www.clevelandfed.org/Forefront/2012/winter/pdf/ff_2012_spring_13.pdf

Maltz, M. D., & Targonski, J. (2002). A note on the use of county-level UCR data.
       Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 18, 297-318.

Marcotte, D. E., & Markowitz, S. (2011). A cure for crime? Psychopharmaceuticals and
      crime trends. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(1), 29-56.




                                             30
Missouri Department of Social Services, Family Support Division, Electronic Benefits
      Transfer. (2013a). Information for EBT cardholders. Retrieved from:
      http://dss.mo.gov/fsd/fstamp/ebt/cardholder.htm

Missouri Department of Social Services, Family Support Division, Electronic Benefits
      Transfer. (2013b). Benefit availability dates. Retrieved from
      http://dss.mo.gov/fsd/fstamp/ebt/ebtdates.htm

Mo. Rev. Stat. § 208. 182 (2013). Retrieved from:
      http://www.moga.mo.gov/statutes/C200-299/2080000182.HTM

Office of the Vice-President (1993). Reeingineering through information technology:
       Accompanying report of the national performance review. Retrieved from:
       http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/npr/library/reports/it.html

Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, 64 Fed. Reg. 28763
       (May, 27,1999) (to be codified at 7 C. F. R. pts. 274).

Raphael, S., & Winter‐Ebmer, R. (2001). Identifying the Effect of Unemployment on
      Crime. Journal of Law and Economics, 44(1), 259-283.

Rhine, S. L., & Greene, W. H. (2012). Factors that contribute to becoming unbanked.
       Journal of Consumer Affairs, 45, 21-45.

Rosenfeld, R. & Fornango, R. (2007). The impact of economic conditions on robbery and
      property crime: The role of consumer sentiment. Criminology, 45, 735-769.

Shover, N. (1996). Great pretenders: Pursuits and careers of persistent thieves. Boulder,
       CO: Westview Press.

Federal Reserve System (2011). The 2010 Federal Reserve Payments Study: Noncash
       payment trends in the United States: 2006-2009.

Tomlinson S., (2012, March 20th). Sweden could be first country to go cashless as even
      churches are taking cards for offerings. The Daily Mail. Retrieved from
      http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2117643/Sweden-Country-cashless-
      churches-accepting-cards-offerings.html

Topalli, V., Wright, R., & Fornango, R. (2002). Drug dealers, robbery and retaliation.
       Vulnerability, deterrence and the contagion of violence. British Journal of
       Criminology, 42(2), 337-351.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1994). Food assistance: Reducing fraud and abuse in
       the food stamp program with electronic benefit transfer technologies. Retrieved
       from: http://www.gao.gov/products/T-RCED-94-125 .

Varjavand, R. (2011). Growing underground economy: The evidence, the measures, and



                                           31
       the consequences. Journal of International Management Studies, 11(3), 133-142.

Wadsworth, T. (2010). Is immigration responsible for the crime drop? An assessment of
     the influence of immigration on changes in violent crime between 1990 and 2000.
     Social Science Quarterly, 91(2), 531-553.

Wright, R., & Decker, S. (1994). Burglars on the job: Streetlife and residential break-ins.
       Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press.

Wright, R., & Decker, S. (1997). Armed robbers in action. Boston, MA: Northeastern
       University Press.

Wright, R. & Topalli, V. (2103). Choosing street crime. In F. T. Cullen & P. Wilcox
       (Eds.), Oxford handbook of criminological theory (p. 461). New York, NY:
       Oxford University Press.

Wright, R., Topalli, V., & Jacques, S. (2014). Crime in Motion: Predation, Retaliation,
       and the Spread of Urban Violence. In On Retaliation: Toward an
       Interdisciplinary Understanding of a Basic Human Condition. New York:
       Berghahn Books.

Zhang, J. (1997). The effect of welfare programs on criminal behavior: A theoretical and
       empirical analysis. Economic Inquiry, 35(1), 120-137

Zhao, J., Scheider, M. C., & Thurman, Q. (2002). Funding community policing to reduce
       crime: Have COPS grants made a difference? Criminology & Public Policy, 2(1),
       7-32.

Zimring, F. E. (2006). The great American crime decline. Oxford University Press




                                            32
Figure 1: The Etiological Cycle of Street Crime




                                        33
Figure 2: EBT Program Implementation Map for Missouri Counties




                                     34
Figure 3A: Trends in Total Crime for Missouri and the United States



                                      Total Crime Rates 1990-2011




                                                                                   6500
                550




                                                                                                           6000
   Total Crime per 100k - MO




                                                                                    Total Crime per 100k - US
                     500




                                                                                          5000    5500
       450




                                                                                   4500
                                                                                   4000
                400




                               1990   1995             2000    2005         2010
                                                        Year

                                             Missouri Crime    U.S. Crime


Note: Rates refer to crimes per 100,000 population.




                                                        35
Figure 3B: Trends in Part I Crimes for Missouri and the United States




Note: Rates refer to crimes per 100,000 population.




                                           36
Figure 4: Pre-treatment Period Trends in Crime




Note: Rates refer to crimes per 100,000 population.




                                           37
Figure 5A: Trends in Total Crime Rate Before and After EBT Program
Implementation

                                      Total Crime Rate
   550
   500
   450
   400




               -20             -10             0            10       20
                              Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation

         Note: Rates refer to crimes per 100,000 population.




                                            38
Figure 5B: Trends in Crime Rates Before and After EBT Program Implementation

                      Assault Rate                                             Burglary Rate
 140




                                                       90
 130




                                                       80
 120




                                                       70
 110




                                                       60
 100




                                                       50
       -20    -10             0            10     20        -20         -10             0            10      20
             Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation                        Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation




                     Larceny Rate                                       Motor Vehicle Theft Rate
 300




                                                       50
 280




                                                       45
 260




                                                       40
 240




                                                       35
 220




                                                       30




       -20    -10             0            10     20        -20         -10             0            10      20
             Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation                        Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation




                       Rape Rate                                                 Robbery Rate
                                                       18
 3




                                                       16
 2.5




                                                       14
 2




                                                       12
 1.5




                                                       10




       -20    -10             0            10     20
             Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation             -20          -10             0            10          20
                                                                        Months Pre/Post EBT Implementation




Note: Rates refer to crimes per 100,000 population.




                                                                  39
Figure 6: Trends for TANF and SNAP Caseloads in Missouri

   8000
   6000
   4000
   2000
   0




          1990        1995            2000               2005             2010
                                        year

                       SNAP Participation            TANF Participation


Note: Figures refer to average county-month caseloads.




                                            40
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable                      Full Sample                  EBT=1                    EBT=0
Total crime rate                  467.82                   447.52                   508.14
                                 (358.27)                 (315.42)                 (428.07)
Robbery rate                       13.24                    10.59                    18.51
                                  (23.92)                  (17.71)                  (32.31)
Assault rate                      115.36                   114.03                   117.98
                                    (90)                   (73.88)                  (115.5)
Burglary rate                      69.14                    62.68                    81.97
                                  (58.01)                  (47.37)                  (73.11)
Larceny rate                      229.74                   223.26                   242.60
                                 (152.26)                  (145.4)                  (164.3)
Auto theft rate                    27.62                    24.49                    33.86
                                  (41.27)                  (36.93)                  (48.16)
SNAP caseload                    5,966.41                 6,066.37                  5,748.7
                                (14,631.4)              (14,402.25)              (15,117.06)
TANF caseload                    1,424.11                   906.5                  2,552.18
                                (5,346.23)               (3,339.52)               (8,044.73)
County Population               53,745.72                52,144.75                57,234.83
                              (127,542.20)              (124,008.2)             (134,865.60)
Notes: Rates are per 100,000 persons. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Sample sizes for
the full sample are 26,268 for total crime, assault, TANF, and population, 26,259 for robbery,
26,267 for burglary and larceny, 26,256 for auto theft, and 26,256 for SNAP.




                                               41
Table 2: Distribution of Crimes across Months
Month          Total crime   Robbery    Assault   Burglary     Larceny     Auto-theft
January           7.58         8.20      7.29       7.94         7.46         8.36
February          6.82         6.82      6.92       6.72         6.75         7.08
March             7.96         7.59      8.21       7.70         7.97         7.70
April             8.01         7.46      8.53       7.59         8.01         7.35
May               8.55         7.94      9.19       8.20         8.50         7.71
June              8.67         8.03      8.90       8.27         8.79         8.22
July              9.26         8.73      9.26       9.10         9.33         9.25
August            9.34         9.02      9.07       9.28         9.51         9.37
September         8.87         9.01      9.02       9.06         8.75         8.79
October           8.80         9.22      8.68       8.98         8.79         8.79
November          8.05         8.74      7.54       8.56         8.02         8.59
December          8.09         9.25      7.38       8.61         8.12         8.79
Note: Each cell represents the proportion of crime reported in a particular month.




                                         42
Table 3: The Effect of EBT Program Implementation on Crime in Missouri
Crime                                  EBT              EBT             EBT
Total Crime                            0.026        -0.166***        -0.098***
                                      (0.063)         (0.042)          (0.036)
Robbery                             -0.294***          0.026            0.028
                                      (0.105)         (0.086)          (0.040)
Assault                                0.138        -0.227***        -0.125***
                                      (0.097)         (0.052)          (0.041)
Burglary                            -0.198***       -0.130***          -0.079*
                                      (0.047)         (0.050)          (0.042)
Larceny                                0.007        -0.163***         -0.096**
                                      (0.056)         (0.050)          (0.045)
Auto Theft                           -0.113*           -0.061           0.028
                                      (0.063)         (0.049)          (0.039)
County Fixed Effects                    Yes             Yes              Yes
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects             No              Yes              Yes
County Specific Linear Trends                    No                     No                     Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Each cell presents
the coefficient on the indicator for EBT Implementation. All models are weighted by the average
county population. *, **, and *** indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10,
0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively. The numbers of observations are 26,268 for total crime and
assault, 26,259 for robbery, 26,267 for burglary and larceny, and 26,257 for auto theft.




                                                  43
Table 4: The Effect of EBT Program Implementation on Arrests in Missouri
Arrest                               EBT             EBT               EBT
Total Arrests                     0.262***         -0.100*            -0.089
                                    (0.044)        (0.057)           (0.054)
Non-drug Arrests                  0.219***         -0.100*           -0.092*
                                    (0.042)        (0.057)           (0.054)
Drug Arrests                      0.582***          -0.009            -0.012
                                    (0.065)        (0.094)           (0.103)
County Fixed Effects                  Yes            Yes               Yes
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects           No             Yes               Yes
County Specific Linear Trends         No              No               Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Each cell presents the
coefficient on the indicator for EBT Implementation. All models are weighted by the average county
population. *, **, and *** indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01
levels, respectively. The numbers of observations are 224,636 for total arrests, 24,585 for non-drug related
arrests, and 20,419 for drug related arrests.




                                                     44
Table 5: The Effect of EBT Program Implementation on Crime in Missouri –
Border Counties Excluded
Crime                                 EBT            EBT              EBT
Total Crime                          -0.053        -0.104*           -0.046
                                    (0.095)        (0.059)          (0.041)
Robbery                           -0.490***          0.001           -0.020
                                    (0.064)        (0.066)          (0.063)
Assault                              -0.066       -0.222**           -0.106
                                    (0.154)        (0.100)          (0.076)
Burglary                          -0.242***       -0.114**         -0.082**
                                    (0.070)        (0.054)          (0.041)
Larceny                              -0.016         -0.063           -0.001
                                    (0.053)        (0.060)          (0.053)
Auto Theft                           -0.145          0.009            0.046
                                    (0.102)        (0.085)          (0.045)
County Fixed Effects                  Yes             Yes              Yes
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects            No             Yes              Yes
County Specific Linear Trends          No             No               Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Each cell presents the
coefficient on the indicator for EBT Implementation. All models are weighted by the average county
population. *, **, and *** indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01
levels, respectively. The numbers of observations are 11,676 for total crime, assault, and burglary, 11,674
for robbery, 11,675 for larceny, and 11,671 for auto theft.




                                                      45
   Table 6: The Effect of EBT Program Implementation on Crime in Missouri –
   Controlling for EBT Implementation in a Neighboring County
Crime                                  EBT         Neighbor          EBT          Neighbor          EBT         Neighbor
Total Crime                             -0.104***        -0.020       -0.193***        -0.092**      -0.102***       -0.020
                                          (0.037)        (0.033)        (0.042)         (0.045)        (0.037)      (0.033)
Robbery                                 -0.295***      -0.412***         0.002           -0.167         0.022        -0.075
                                          (0.105)        (0.113)        (0.091)         (0.135)        (0.039)      (0.120)
Assault                                    0.137         -0.036       -0.266***         -0.139*      -0.137***       -0.041
                                          (0.098)        (0.089)        (0.054)         (0.079)        (0.047)      (0.069)
Burglary                                -0.198***        -0.042        -0.113**          0.058         -0.060        0.067
                                          (0.047)        (0.079)        (0.056)         (0.092)        (0.049)      (0.066)
Larceny                                    0.010         -0.066       -0.203***        -0.139**       -0.113**       -0.057
                                          (0.056)        (0.056)        (0.048)         (0.055)        (0.045)      (0.046)
Auto Theft                               -0.112*          0.085         -0.046           0.058          0.052        0.106
                                          (0.064)        (0.104)        (0.048)         (0.099)        (0.037)      (0.102)
County Fixed Effects                        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects                 No             No             Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
County Specific Linear Trends               No             No             No               No            Yes          Yes
   Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Each cell presents the coefficient on the
   indicator for EBT Implementation. All models are weighted by the average county population. *, **, and *** indicate
   that the estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively. The numbers of observations
   are 26,268 for total crime and assault, 26,259 for robbery, 26,267 for burglary and larceny, and 26,257 for auto theft.




                                                                46
Table 7: The Effect of EBT Program Implementation in Any Neighboring County
on Crime in Missouri
Crime                                 EBT            EBT              EBT
Total Crime                         -0.061*         -0.007            0.026
                                    (0.034)        (0.051)          (0.037)
Robbery                            -0.228**         -0.168           -0.083
                                    (0.094)        (0.133)          (0.118)
Assault                            -0.135**         -0.023            0.018
                                    (0.057)        (0.077)          (0.061)
Burglary                              0.085         0.107             0.090
                                    (0.087)        (0.079)          (0.055)
Larceny                              -0.073         -0.048           -0.005
                                    (0.049)        (0.068)          (0.053)
Auto Theft                           0.166*         0.077             0.084
                                    (0.094)        (0.097)          (0.097)
County Fixed Effects                   Yes           Yes               Yes
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects            No            Yes               Yes
County Specific Linear Trends          No             No               Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Each cell presents the
coefficient on the indicator for EBT Implementation. All models are weighted by the average county
population. *, **, and *** indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01
levels, respectively. The numbers of observations are 26,268 for total crime and assault, 26,259 for robbery,
26,267 for burglary and larceny, and 26,257 for auto theft.




                                                     47
Table 8: The Effect of EBT Program Implementation on Crime in Missouri –
Controlling for SNAP and TANF Caseloads
Crime                                 EBT             EBT             EBT
Total Crime                        0.132**        -0.129***        -0.086**
                                    (0.055)         (0.042)         (0.034)
Robbery                            -0.167**          0.083            0.025
                                    (0.084)         (0.063)         (0.041)
Assault                           0.285***        -0.167***        -0.104**
                                    (0.085)         (0.054)         (0.044)
Burglary                          -0.158***        -0.106**          -0.066
                                    (0.061)         (0.050)         (0.041)
Larceny                            0.109**        -0.138***        -0.091**
                                    (0.048)         (0.048)         (0.041)
Auto Theft                           -0.045          -0.045           0.010
                                    (0.079)         (0.043)         (0.039)
County Fixed Effects                  Yes             Yes              Yes
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects            No             Yes              Yes
County Specific Linear Trends          No              No              Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Each cell presents the
coefficient on the indicator for EBT Implementation. All models are weighted by the average county
population. *, **, and *** indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01
levels, respectively. The numbers of observations are 26,268 for total crime and assault, 26,259 for robbery,
26,267 for burglary and larceny, and 26,257 for auto theft.




                                                     48
