NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVASIVE SHAREHOLDER MEETINGS
David Yermack
Yuanzhi Li
Working Paper 19991
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19991
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We appreciate helpful comments from Xi Li, Eric Roiter, Erin Smith, Ekkehard Wenger, and seminar
participants at New York University. We thank Tumi Adebiyi for excellent research assistance. Part
of this research was completed while Yermack was a visiting professor at Erasmus University Rotterdam.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by David Yermack and Yuanzhi Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Evasive Shareholder Meetings
David Yermack and Yuanzhi Li
NBER Working Paper No. 19991
March 2014, Updated June 2014
JEL No. G34,K22
ABSTRACT
We study the location and timing of annual shareholder meetings. When companies move their annual
meetings a great distance from headquarters, they tend to announce disappointing earnings results
and experience pronounced stock market underperformance in the months after the meeting. Companies
appear to schedule meetings in remote locations when the managers have private, adverse information
about future performance and wish to discourage scrutiny by shareholders, activists, and the media.
However, shareholders do not appear to decode this signal, since the disclosure of meeting locations
leads to little immediate stock price reaction. We find that voter participation drops when meetings
are held at unusual hours, even though most voting is done electronically during a period of weeks
before the meeting convenes.
David Yermack
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
Yuanzhi Li
Temple University
Fox School of Business, Finance
Alter Hall 426
1801 Liacouras Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19122
yuanzhi.li@temple.edu

Evasive Shareholder Meetings

1.

Introduction
Corporate shareholder meetings are often portrayed as torpid affairs, consisting of

uncontested elections and saccharine reports by managers who speak in hushed monotones. If a
serious dispute exists about the composition of the board or other agenda items, the conflict is
played out over weeks of negotiations and proxy voting prior to the meeting itself. During this
pre-meeting period, shareholders electronically delegate their votes to one side or another or,
more recently, might officially abstain or vote against management’s nominees (Del Guercio,
Seery, and Woidtke, 2008). Long before meeting day, the outcomes of most questions are known
to both sides except in a small minority of cases (Cunat, Gine, and Guadalupe, 2012), so most
meetings have low attendance and generate little news.
We propose a new method of examining the information content of shareholder meetings,
by studying the implications of management’s choices about where and when to hold them.
Managers may want to deter meeting attendance by shareholders, the news media, and other
groups for at least two distinct reasons. First, some meetings become the focus of theatrical
protests and other publicity campaigns that are designed to generate unfavorable news coverage,
and managers may want to increase the cost of these activities by scheduling meetings off-hours
at faraway locations. Second, meetings almost always include an unscripted open microphone

1

period during which shareholders (and sometimes others) have an opportunity to put questions to
the management team. If the managers have unfavorable news that they wish to keep quiet, they
would want to discourage attendance by those most likely to ask probing questions. Our research
find abundant support for this second hidden information hypothesis.
We create a panel dataset that contains the locations, days of the week, and start times of
nearly 10,000 annual meetings between 2006-10. We find a systematic pattern of poor company
performance in the aftermath of annual meetings that are moved a great distance away from
headquarters. Companies are more likely to announce unfavorable quarterly earnings in the
aftermath of long-distance meetings, and these firms’ stock prices significantly underperform
market benchmarks over the six months following the meeting date. The results prove robust to
a variety of alternative methods for identifying remote meetings, and the relationship between
meeting distance and stock returns holds both for special meetings, which occur only
infrequently, and also for annual meetings which occur every year at every company. We also
find that details about the day and time off meetings have some impact on voter turnout and, to a
lesser extent, the support received for certain ballot questions.
The impetus for our study is a recent encounter by one of the authors with a well-known
European shareholder activist who attends many annual meetings.1 He asserted to us that he can
reliably forecast poor future performance for companies when managers behave evasively during
their shareholder meetings. This behavior might include answering questions incompletely,
cutting short opportunities for shareholders to speak, refusing to recognize certain speakers, or
1

Ekkehard Wenger is a member of the Association for the Advancement of Shareholder Democracy (Verein
zur Förderung der Aktionärsdemokratie) in Germany and a professor of business administration, banking, and credit
services at the University of Würzburg. For an English language profile of Wenger see The Economist, “The Outsider,”
June 3, 1995.

2

excluding controversial items from the agenda. We test this conjecture by using the geography
of meetings as a proxy for the evasiveness of management. While we cannot gauge managers’
behavior at annual meetings by reading transcripts or observing their demeanor, we can easily
examine their choices of meeting venues.2
Scheduling a meeting far from headquarters provides a straightforward opportunity for
managers to discourage attendance. Research shows that firms tend to have high ownership in
their local communities (Coval and Moskowitz, 1999) and that local analysts tend to forecast
stock performance better than distant analysts (Malloy, 2005; Hong, Kubik, and Stein, 2005). A
long-distance shareholder meeting would inevitably reduce participation from both of these
cohorts as well as the local business press, who may be the most knowledgeable people about the
company. Of course, many board members tend to be local as well (Knyazeva, Knyazeva and
Masulis, 2013), and a far-away shareholder meeting also creates inconvenience for them.
We find little evidence that meetings are moved to distant locations when a firm has had
a bad year, or when public information suggests that firms should expect confrontation; in fact,
analysis of the agendas for the meetings in our sample suggests that companies are more likely to
meet near headquarters when they expect hostile shareholder proposals or board elections that
may be subject to protest voting. This may occur because the company is more comfortable
arranging security, working with law enforcement, and controlling access to the meeting site in
its own jurisdiction. Companies may also be relatively unconcerned with the publicity value of
controversial agenda items, since these are known by everyone in advance and often have easily

2

While we are not aware of any academic research into meeting locations, we have found one example from the
popular media providing anecdotal evidence about this hypothesis. See Associated Press, “Companies take their
shareholder meetings on the road when things get ugly,” Syracuse Post-Standard, May 25, 2011.

3

predictable outcomes.
Instead, we find that managers schedule long-distance meetings when the firm is
experiencing adverse operating performance that is not already known to the market. Company
stocks perform very poorly in the aftermath of remote meetings, and part of this result stems
from disappointing quarterly earnings announcements following these meetings. By moving the
meeting far away, the managers might forestall shareholder or news media questioning that could
lead to the early disclosure of adverse news. Managers’ tendency to delay bad news has been
documented by studies such as Kothari, Shu and Wysocki (2009).
To date, most research into shareholder meetings has focused upon voting outcomes for
director elections and other agenda items (see Yermack, 2010, for a survey). Two recent studies
examine companies’ release of information and stock price performance around meeting dates.
Dimitrov and Jain (2011) find that companies tend to report favorable news in the period leading
up to the meeting date, which results in an increasing stock price as the meeting approaches. The
pattern then reverses after the meeting occurs, with the round-trip effect especially pronounced
for companies with poor prior performance. Together these results imply that firms succeed in
delaying bad news until after the meeting date, an interpretation consistent with our results.
Supporting evidence appears in Banko et al. (2013), which finds that firms manipulate quarterly
earnings with positive abnormal accruals in the two quarters prior to the annual meeting,
followed by negative abnormal accruals in the subsequent quarter. These two studies identify
aspects of governance such as institutional ownership and management entrenchment as
predictors of this information distortion, but neither paper considers whether aspects of the
meeting such as location, day, or time, coincide with managers’ behavior.
4

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains background
information about the regulatory requirements for shareholder meetings and the potential
motivation for moving a meeting to a distant location. Section 3 describes our dataset in detail.
Section 4 includes statistical analysis of meeting outcomes and the associations between meeting
locations and subsequent company performance and stock market returns. Section 5 concludes
the paper.

2.

Shareholder meetings
Shareholder meetings have played an indispensable role in corporate governance for

hundreds of years. De Jongh (2011) writes about the shareholder meetings in the English East
India Company dating from 1599. At these meetings, shareholders elected board members,
received reports, and issued binding instructions to the managers. Corporate annual meetings
today seem remarkably similar, providing a venue for companies to conduct formal business such
as the election of directors, adoption of charter amendments, and approval of major transactions.
They also play a cultural role in a corporation, giving shareholders an opportunity to meet
managers face-to-face at least once a year, in order to receive information and ask questions. The
main hypothesis in our paper is that, under certain conditions, firms will use geographic and
scheduling strategies to minimize the opportunity for these encounters, while still going through
the motions of complying with a centuries-old corporate norm.
No regulation requires managers or board members to appear in person at the annual
meeting, but such attendance is all but mandatory under established corporate practices, and
many companies have adopted bylaws or governance codes that require the board and top
5

managers to attend. Only one company in recent memory, The Home Depot Inc., openly bucked
this practice, convening an annual meeting in May 2006 with only Chairman and CEO Robert
Nardelli in attendance and the rest of the board absent. The meeting was widely condemned in
the press,3 and for Nardelli it proved to be his last as CEO, as he was ousted by his fellow
directors the following January. Similarly, the open mic question time is not required by
regulation, but by universal tradition it is included in virtually every shareholder meeting.
Companies sometimes try to place restrictions on the question period and have been known to
use other tactics to discourage potential speakers. For example, Wal-Mart Stores limited the
entire question period to 15 minutes at its four-hour 2013 annual meeting, when it also obtained a
temporary restraining order against labor unions and others in an attempt to pre-empt picketing at
the meeting site.4 Bank of America at its 2012 annual meeting displayed a running timer on a
video screen to limit each questioner to two minutes, after which a chime sounded and the
microphone went dead. The company also brought several dozen police officers and security
guards into the auditorium while hundreds of people protested its lending practices outside.5
For publicly traded companies, annual meetings are mandatory under a variety of
overlapping state and federal laws and stock exchange listing regulations. Sometimes the
requirements are indirect; for instance federal law requires the firm to schedule shareholder votes

3

The Wall Street Journal ran a story with this quote from a pension fund official: “I’ve been doing this for 20
years, and it was the most anti-shareholder meeting I have seen.” See Chad Terhune, “Home Depot’s Critics Tear into
Firm’s Practices, Conduct,” The Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2006.
4

Alejandro Lazo, “Wal-Mart blocks protesters, announces $15 billion share buyback,” The Los Angeles Times,
June 7, 2013.
5

Adam O’Daniel, “Activists ‘mic-check’ Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan at annual meeting,” Charlotte
Business Journal, May 9, 2012.

6

on such issues as executive compensation and advisory resolutions, and for convenience these
usually occur at the annual meeting that would have already been convened to comply with stock
exchange regulations for electing directors. Forty-eight of the 50 states’ corporate law codes
require a firm to hold annual meetings, but even in the two states that don’t – Minnesota and
North Dakota – a public company must schedule a meeting anyhow to comply with stock
exchange and federal regulations. Further provisions of state and federal law require shareholder
votes to approve transactions such as mergers and acquisitions and new equity issues, and these
may occur at the annual meeting or, if time is of the essence, at a special or extraordinary
meeting of shareholders. The Securities and Exchange Commission and the two major stock
exchanges closely regulate the procedures for notifying shareholders of meetings, and their
regulations also govern the process by which management and outsiders may solicit proxies from
shareholders who do not wish to attend the meeting. In practice, the large majority of votes are
cast by proxy. The tabulation of proxy votes is usually outsourced to a private firm (Kahan and
Rock, 2008), and the proxy vote totals will be augmented by votes cast directly by shareholders
who choose to attend the meeting. The mechanics and legitimacy of certain voting strategies
such as “empty voting” have drawn great regulatory scrutiny in recent years (Hu and Black,
2006), although in principle these strategies should be unaffected by the scheduling issues
studied in our paper.
Companies have great freedom to select the location, day of the week, and start time of
their annual meetings. While a variety of regulations require that meetings must take place, the
rules are largely silent about the logistical details. A company’s bylaws may sometimes specify a
recurring date or location for shareholder meetings each year, but usually the bylaws give the
7

board of directors flexibility in choosing the site. As a typical example, Section 1.01 of the
Bylaws of JPMorgan Chase & Co. states that the annual meeting shall occur “. . . at such time
and place, if any, within or without the State of Delaware, as may be specified in the notice
thereof, as shall be fixed by the Board of Directors of the Corporation.” Many state laws provide
a default policy under which shareholder meetings are presumed to take place at company
headquarters unless the bylaws or board of directors decide otherwise. The rules for convening
special meetings are quite similar, and just as flexible, as those for annual meetings. Abundant
research shows that managers behave strategically when formulating the agendas for meetings
(Bethel and Gillan, 2002), and that shareholders also act strategically in forming coalitions and
deciding how to vote on certain ballot questions (Maug and Rydquist, 2009). The location and
timing of meetings may interact with these strategic choices by managers and major shareholders,
although we do not pursue these possibilities in this paper.
While meeting attendance can be small even for major corporations, cadres of activist
investors and gadflies will often appear in the audience, many of them moving from one
company meeting to another to promote agendas related to corporate governance and social
policies or simply to heckle management. If the managers have bad news that they hope to keep
quiet, avoiding discussion of the topic at a shareholder meeting may therefore be difficult,
especially if the meeting occurs at a time and place convenient to these provocateurs. Certain
members of this community, such as the Gilbert brothers, Evelyn Davis, and Wilma Soss, have
acquired standout reputations and become known on sight to CEOs, who sometimes take actions

8

to disarm them.6 Some of these activists take advantage of the SEC’s rules that permit them to
place questions on the annual meeting agenda, but others are more interested in asking questions
directly to management during the open mic period. During this period, gadflies often make
provocative statements about executive compensation, the company’s environmental or
employment policies, or political issues that involve the corporation. Encounters in this setting
can become perilous for management teams that are not well prepared. For instance,
McDonald’s Corp.’s 2013 annual meeting received worldwide media coverage after a 9-year-old
girl took the microphone and told the company’s CEO, “it would be nice if you stopped trying to
trick kids into wanting to eat your food all the time.” The CEO’s spontaneous response, that “we
don’t sell junk food,” was ridiculed by commentators.7

3.

Data description
We obtain our sample of shareholder meeting locations, dates, and times by downloading

data from the Key Developments section of Standard & Poor’s CapitalIQ database. In the Key
Development Situation field, CapitalIQ typically provides text copied directly from the headers
of shareholder proxy statements that announce shareholder meetings. We use text functions to
unpack these header fields and extract the relevant detail about each meeting, and we download

6

An entertaining live blog of the 2010 Goldman Sachs Group Inc. annual meeting, including repeated
encounters between Davis and CEO Lloyd Blankfein, can be found at
http://blogs.wsj.com/deals/2010/05/07/live-blogging-goldman-sachs-shareholder-meeting/. Calling for Blankfein’s
resignation, Davis states, “A once great company is going to shame . . . Goldman Sachs has become a nest of nepotism.”
She then asks Blankfein to resign, saying “You’re not as smart as you look,” to which the CEO replies, “That’s the nicest
thing you ever said to me.” Both comments draw laughter, as well as news coverage.
7

See, for example, Lisa Suhay, “‘We don’t sell junk food:’ McDonald’s CEO’s comment sparks backlash
against 9-year-old,” The Christian Science Monitor, May 30, 2013.

9

each firm’s headquarters address as well. CapitalIQ provides extremely broad coverage of
public, private, and international companies as well as investment funds, and we apply some
basic screens to the data: we retain only companies that are incorporated and headquartered in the
United States and listed on either of the major stock exchanges; the latter restriction permits us to
match our sample firms to stock returns data from the CRSP database. We delete investment
companies, closed-end funds, and similar entities. We clean the CapitalIQ data by deleting
duplicate observations, editing incomplete or clearly erroneous data, and checking outliers and
obvious mistakes such as meetings that are reported to take place in the middle of the night.
Much of our analysis uses the distance between headquarters and the meeting location as an
important variable, and we calculate these distances using postal ZIP codes.
We merge the information about shareholder meetings from CapitalIQ with agenda and
voting data from the ISS Voting Analytics Corporate Voting Database, using a five-year sample
period that includes all meetings held between January 1, 2006, and December 31, 2010. Voting
Analytics covers Russell 3000 firms, and this merge reduces our CapitalIQ sample by about 40%
(most of these firms would also have dropped out due to our separate matching with CRSP stock
return data). We end our sample in 2010 for two reasons: we have access to a cleaned version of
the Voting Analytics database ending in 2010 provided to us by Smith (2013), and in 2011 the
agendas for U.S. shareholder meetings changed significantly with the advent of mandatory sayon-pay advisory voting on executive compensation as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. Say-onpay votes have considerably increased the intensity of pre-meeting engagement between
managers and shareholders, and we expect that many companies would have begun reconsidering
the organizational details of their shareholder meetings from 2011 and continued to do so up to
10

now. This evolving process should provide the basis for separate research once enough time
series of post-2011 observations has accumulated.
Our final sample for analysis includes 9,616 annual meetings held by 2,342 public
companies between 2006-2010. Most companies appear in the sample five times, but some have
fewer observations because they went public or were delisted during the sample period, and one
firm has six annual meetings in five years due to a quirk in its corporate calendar. We augment
our sample of annual meetings by also collecting information for 268 special or extraordinary
shareholder meetings held by the same 2,342 firms between 2006-10. Figure 1 shows the
distribution of our sample of annual meetings in calendar time. The large of meetings take place
in a five-week period every year that begins in the last week of April and continues until the end
of May, and this season represents a time of peak activity for shareholder activists, proxy
advisors, and others connected to the voting process. Figure 2 displays the distribution of annual
meetings according to days of the week and starting times. A large majority of meetings begin at
10:00 a.m. local time, and most are held on either Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, but some
do take place either very early or very late in the day, and a few occur on weekends or adjacent to
legal holidays. For example, Actuant Corp., a $1.4 billion machinery company, held its 2007
annual meeting at 8:00 a.m. on January 16, the day following the Martin Luther King holiday.
The venue was a riverside inn in Napa, CA, more than 2,400 miles from its Milwaukee
headquarters.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics about the sample, and it shows that most
shareholder meetings occur close to headquarters, with 71% taking place within five miles of the
home office and another 16% occurring between 5 and 50 miles away. For special meetings, the
11

tendency to meet near headquarters is slightly stronger. However, some meetings take place a
great distance away, as the sample includes more than 800 annual meetings and 18 special
meetings that are held more than 250 miles from headquarters. In addition to the distance from
headquarters, we also tabulate the distance from the meeting location to the nearest FAA large
hub airport, and Table 1 indicates that 29% of all annual meetings take place more than an hour’s
drive (50 miles) from a major airport. In addition 34 annual meetings and 1 special meeting take
place outside the United States, often when firms have major overseas operations,8 and 18 annual
meetings take advantage of a recent reform and do not meet in any physical location, instead
convening online in virtual space.
As an example of a meeting held at a remote location, TRW Automotive Holdings, an
auto parts manufacturer with a market capitalization of about $4 billion, convened its May 14,
2007, annual meeting at the Renaissance Casa de Palmas Hotel in McAllen TX, at the Southern
tip of the continental United States near the Mexican border. The meeting took place almost
1,400 miles from the company’s headquarters outside Detroit, and more than 300 miles from the
nearest major airport, Houston. In the previous year, its 2006 shareholder meeting had taken
place in the Ritz Carlton - Battery Park in New York City, and in 2008, 2009, and 2010 the
meeting returned to various luxury hotels in midtown Manhattan. In line with the results of this
study, the company’s stock price fell from $38.97 on the day of the 2007 annual meeting to
$25.90 six months later, a drop of 33% during a period when the S&P500 index fell just 2%.

8

Thirteen of these annual meetings take place in Canada, but most of the others occur in far-flung locations
such as China, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Australia, and the Netherlands Antilles. One company, General Cable
Corp., has a Kentucky headquarters but held its annual meetings in Spain, Costa Rica, and Germany at different times
during our sample period.

12

Companies exhibit considerable year-to-year persistence in their meeting locations. Of
those firms that appear in the sample all five years, and 67% of these companies meet in the same
location (identical distance from headquarters) every year. When looking at year-to-year location
choices for the entire sample, the unconditional probability that a firm meets in the same location
as the previous year is 84%. For an especially interesting subsample, we identify several dozen
cases in which companies engage in one-time deviations from an otherwise consistent meeting
pattern, and this group provides the basis for certain empirical tests below. Some companies
move their meeting every year as a matter of policy, with conglomerate firms convening at
facilities that they own all over the country. General Electric Co. provides a good example of
this type of scheduling. A review of 21 General Electric proxy statements between 1994 and
2014 shows that the company held annual meetings in 18 different locations during this period,
some of them in major cities such as Atlanta and Chicago, but others in far-flung venues such as
Greenville, SC, Erie, PA, and Waukesha, WI. Only once in 21 years, in 2006 in Philadelphia,
did General Electric’s shareholders meet anywhere remotely proximate to its Fairfield, CT,
headquarters.
Inspection of our dataset allows us to rule out a number of straightforward motivations
for relocating a firm’s annual meeting away from headquarters. A “leisure” or “tourism”
hypothesis would predict that firms schedule meetings in resort destinations, as is common with
industry conventions. For instance, United Technologies held its 2009 annual meeting near Palm
Beach, FL, where it has a helicopter factory, instead of its Hartford, CT, headquarters. Leisure
destinations typically have hotels, meeting space, and offer opportunities for off-hours recreation
and entertainment. However, we found that annual meetings only rarely occur at such
13

destinations. Our database includes only a smattering of meetings in cities such as Las Vegas,
New Orleans, and Honolulu, and the large majority of these are convened by companies with
local headquarters.9 A second “Delaware” hypothesis predicts that firms might hold meetings in
Wilmington, DE, due to the widespread practice of incorporating under Delaware law. In his
heavily-cited account of annual meeting protocol written more than 60 years ago, Caplin (1951)
writes that “the typical annual meeting of shareholders continues to be completely dominated by
the man who has just gotten off the train at Wilmington, Delaware, carrying a little black bag
filled with proxies solicited by the management.” While many annual meetings seem to have
occurred in Wilmington in the mid-20th century,10 in our sample we find very little evidence of
firms meeting in Delaware unless they are headquartered nearby. We construct a simple
transition matrix of the 50 states and the District of Columbia, and we compare the number of
meetings held in each state against the number of companies with headquarters located in that
state. Delaware has a modestly positive surplus of meetings, with 13 more meetings than
predicted by physical headquarters locations out of our total sample of nearly 10,000. Leisure
states like Louisiana and Hawaii have almost exactly the number of meetings predicted by
headquarters locations, and Nevada surprisingly has one of the largest deficits, with 58 fewer
meetings than expected. California (+55 meetings) and Washington, DC (+45 meetings) attract
the most net out-of-state meetings, while the largest net meeting deficits occur in New Jersey (9

New York City hosts more annual meetings than any other location, and other urban tourist destinations like
San Francisco and Los Angeles are also popular, but these locations seem to offer at least as much opportunity for
business as for pleasure.
10

Asking companies to hold their shareholder meetings near headquarters rather than in Wilmington appears to
have been a priority for early shareholder activists such as the Gilbert brothers, who sued in federal court and won the
right to have shareholder resolutions added to the annual meeting agenda in the landmark 1947 SEC v. Transamerica
Corp. decision. See Fisch (2008) and Caplin (1951), who alludes to “meetings often held at places selected without
much thought being given to shareholders’ convenience.”

14

56 meetings) and Ohio (-67 meetings) as well as Nevada (-58 meetings). Many New Jersey firms
choose to meet nearby in New York, but it is not obvious why so many companies headquartered
in Nevada or Ohio choose to avoid meeting there.
We examine the agendas of the meetings in our sample to determine which ones exhibit
the potential for conflict with shareholders in the form of a contested ballot provision that may
attracting broad support. Director elections represent the most important items at most meetings,
and we identify cases of contested director elections as those meetings in which shareholders
nominate candidates for the board to compete head to head with management’s nominees, or
when management’s nominees are not endorsed for election by Institutional Shareholder Services
(ISS), a research organization that plays a powerful and somewhat controversial role and issuing
voting recommendations that are widely followed by institutional investors; these nominees
lacking ISS support face the prospect of a low vote total or even losing their seats if a firm has
adopted majority voting in director elections. We find that contested director elections occur at
more than 27% of all annual meetings in our sample. We also identify contested agenda items in
the areas of executive compensation, corporate governance, and socially oriented shareholder
proposals; our criteria for identifying a contested vote generally requires a management proposal
not to be endorsed by ISS, or an outside shareholder proposal that does receive pre-meeting ISS
support.
Table 2 presents information about voting patterns at the meetings in our sample. More
than 55,000 candidates are nominated by management for board seats at our 9,616 meetings, and
on average these candidates receive more than 94% of the vote and are elected 98% of the time,
consistent with the data on director elections in Cai, Garner, and Walkling (2010). Executive
15

compensation proposals, including increases in the authorized number of common shares,
generally receive about 85% support, as do changes to corporate governance such as charter
amendments or alterations to voting regulations, when management is the proponent. However,
the lack of an ISS endorsement is associated with much lower vote totals for these agenda items
and, in the case of governance provisions, a materially lower pass rate, though it is not clear from
the table whether ISS’s recommendations are correlated with other data that may independently
influence voters (see Choi, Fisch and Kahan, 2010). Shareholder proposals in these areas and
shareholder board nominations generally receive much lower vote totals than management’s
proposals, with ISS support of shareholders appearing to have a modestly positive impact.

4.

Analysis
In this section we present our analysis of the associations between annual meeting

locations and start times, and subsequent company disclosures and stock returns.

4.1.

Choice of annual meeting venue

We begin by investigating a company’s choice of where to locate its annual meeting. We
undertake this analysis due to the possibility that companies relocate their meetings for reasons
that may also affect their subsequent stock price performance, such as major disagreements with
shareholders or other constituencies that manifest themselves in the form of contested agenda
items at the meeting.
Regression analysis of the meeting location choice appears in Table 3. We study four
separate dependent variables: the meeting’s distance from corporate headquarters, in log form;
16

the meeting’s distance from the nearest large hub airport, also in logs; a binary variable for
whether the meeting occurs at a remote location, which we define as more than 50 miles from
headquarters and 50 miles from a major airport (340 observations out of 9,616); and a binary
variable for whether the meeting occurs at an exceptional location. For the last category, we
examine only those firms that appear in the sample all five years, and we create an indicator
variable equal to one if the firm holds its annual meeting more than 150 miles from headquarters
one year out of the five, with its meetings taking place near headquarters every other year. This
subsample of exceptional meetings includes 46 observations, all of which are at least 157 miles
from headquarters, with a mean distance of 1,239 miles and a median of 1,048 miles.11 In
estimations using this variable in Table 3 and Table 4, we include only those firms that appear in
the sample for all five years. All four of the distance variables ignore the 18 Internet on-line
meetings and 34 international meetings in our sample; we treat these categories separately,
including them in certain regressions with indicator variables, and excluding them from other
regressions to focus only on U.S.-based meetings.
In Table 3 we regress our four location variables against firm size, measured as the log of
sales; the abnormal stock return in the prior fiscal year, equal to the raw return minus the CRSP
value-weighted index; the four variables described above that capture contested ballot items at
the annual meeting; and three corporate governance variables: institutional ownership, dual-class
equity structure, and classified board. We download institutional ownership data from the

11

As an example, in May 2006 KeyCorp, a regional banking company, held its annual meeting at an art
museum in Portland, ME, the only time in the last 10 years that the company did not meet in the vicinity of its Cleveland
headquarters. Consistent with the results in this paper, KeyCorp’s stock underperformed the S&P500 Index by -3.7% in
the six months subsequent to this meeting.

17

Thomson Reuters Stock Ownership Summary database, and our sample observations have a
mean value of 70.2% with 210 missing values, about 2% of the sample. For a few cases in which
Thomson reports institutional ownership above 100%, we truncate the value to this level. We
obtain dual-class ownership data from Erin Smith, who hand-collected the information for use in
Smith (2013). About 4.4% of our sample firms have more than one class of voting stock. We
identify firms with classified boards by reading the agenda items for each meeting. Those firms
with classified boards generally elect individual directors every third year and identify them as
belonging to a group within the board that might be labeled class 1, class 2, or class 3. Other
companies with classified boards can be identified when a ballot proposal is docketed to consider
declassifying the board. Through these methods, and by reading certain firms’ proxy statements
in more detail, we are able to create a classified board indicator that has a mean value of 52.3%.
For the regression estimates shown in Table 3, we omit Internet and international shareholder
meetings in the first three columns. The two distance models shown on the left of the table are
estimated in least squares, and the two binary variable models shown on the right of the table are
estimated in logit. All models have standard errors clustered at the firm level and include month
indicator variables, save for the exceptional meetings estimation on the right, which has too few
positive observations to accommodate the month variables. The month indicators capture the
seasonality of the annual meeting calendar (see Figure 1) as well as differences in weather and
travel that may affect meeting participation.
The estimates in Table 3 suggest that larger firms are more likely to move their meetings
far from headquarters, a result that seems logical since the relocation probably involves
additional expense that would not be borne as easily by a smaller firm. However, the table
18

includes very little evidence that firms relocate their annual meetings in response to poor prior
performance or in anticipation of contested votes at the meeting. The abnormal return variable
has a positive estimate in one model out of four, suggesting the firms move the meeting far from
headquarters after enjoying good years rather than poor ones. Among the contested vote
indicator variables, only five out of 16 coefficients have significant estimates, and four of these
five are negative. This suggests that firms are more likely to meet close to home when they
anticipate a contentious meeting. Corporate governance seems to play a role in the choice of
meeting location. Firms with dual-class ownership structures and classified boards are less likely
to move the meeting far from headquarters, a result that seems intuitive, since these companies
are relatively immune from pressure from shareholder democracy. When institutional ownership
is high, firms tend to locate the meeting near a major airport, implying that companies in rural
locations may shift the meeting to a major city when pension funds and mutual funds populate
the shareholder base. In all, the results in Table 3 seem surprising, because they give little
indication that firms meet in far-away locations when they have performed badly, or expect a
contentious meeting, or have bad corporate governance. To the contrary, most of the significant
estimates associated with these variables lead to the opposite implication: firms that schedule
long-distance meetings appear to be of larger size, better quality, with fewer takeover defenses,
and no clear expectation of conflict in advance of the meeting.

4.2.

Stock performance following the annual meeting

The central analysis of our paper appears in Table 4, which shows estimates for a
standard four-factor model of expected stock returns. For each of the 9,616 company-year
19

observations, we regress the daily stock returns against an intercept, the three widely used FamaFrench stock market factors, and the Carhart momentum factor. We include up to 252 daily
observations for each firm, beginning the day following each year’s annual shareholder meeting
and continuing until either the date of the next year’s meeting or the passage of 252 trading days
(one calendar year), whichever comes first. If the firm is delisted before either of these dates, we
include all observations up to the delisting date. We then augment each model by indicator
variables that equal one during the six months (126 trading days) following each annual meeting.
These indicators are then multiplied by each of the four distance variables introduced above in
Table 3. We cluster standard errors for each company. Our choice of a six-month window for
the interaction term is based on visual inspection of the abnormal returns, which seem to
cumulate steadily over this period before bottoming out. For all Internet and overseas meetings
we set the distance variables equal to zero.
As shown by the estimates in Table 4, companies that hold long-distance annual meetings
experience subsequent abnormal returns that are negative, statistically significant, and of large
magnitude. For example, the estimate in the first column of the table implies a daily abnormal
return of -0.000043 times the log of the annual meeting’s distance from headquarters. For
example, following a meeting held 1,000 miles away from headquarters, a company’s average
cumulative return over the next six months would be:
(-0.000043) (126) ln(1,000) = -.037 or -3.7%
In the second column, the variable measuring the distance from the meeting to a major airport
has an estimate about half as large as the variable in the first column. In the third and fourth
columns, the estimates for remote meetings and exceptional meetings are especially strong. For
20

the 340 firms that hold remote meetings at least 50 miles from headquarters and at least 50 miles
from a major airport, the average abnormal stock performance is -6.8% over the next six months,
and for the 46 firms that hold exceptional meetings, moving at least 150 miles away from
headquarters only one time in a five-year cycle, those meetings are followed by average abnormal
stock returns of -11.7% over the next six months.
These results imply that when managers announce a distant location for an upcoming
shareholder meeting, they must often have undisclosed information suggesting poor future
performance. Moving the meeting may be part of a strategy to reduce attendance or forestall
questioning from audience members, so that the chance is reduced for questions or
confrontations that might force the managers to reveal what they know. The strong results in
Table 4 imply that the market up to now has not internalized any such motivation of the
managers; if their reasons for choosing a distant meeting location were transparent, then stock
prices should fall sharply when these meeting locations are announced rather than gradually
declining over a period of months after the meeting. We examine the proxy statement release
dates for the companies in our sample and find no evidence of any significant reaction on these
announcement dates, either for the sample as a whole or for the various subsamples of longdistance, remote, and exceptional meetings. Similarly, we find little unusual movement in
company stock prices on the meeting dates themselves, either for the entire sample or for the
relevant subsamples.

4.3.

Quarterly earnings announcements after shareholder meetings

If companies badly underperform the market after holding long-distance annual meetings,
21

then what goes wrong? We investigate the next quarterly earnings announcements released by
our sample companies after their shareholder meetings. These may occur anywhere from 1 to
approximately 90 days following the meeting, but they are made by all firms in the sample.
Quarterly earnings are a useful event to study, because the information is always considered
material by shareholders, and the announcements are mandatory and not subject to selection bias.
We use the IBES and CapitalIQ databases to identify the dates of earnings
announcements following annual meetings, and we obtain coverage for 9,423 observations, or
about 98% of the company-years in our sample. We test the favorability of these announcements
using a standard market model event study over a two-day window including the announcement
day and the next day; the two-day window accounts for the possibility of earnings
announcements occurring after the closing of the stock market on the announcement day. As
shown in the first line of Table 5, the mean abnormal return after the quarterly earnings
announcements for our sample firms is positive and significant at +0.41%.
The next four lines of Table 5 show the average abnormal returns for earnings
announcements as a function of the annual meeting’s distance from headquarters. The data show
a monotonic pattern, with the most favorable announcements made by companies who hold
annual meetings within five miles of headquarters. These firms’ announcements result in an
average abnormal return of +0.55%. In the next three cohorts, encompassing meetings up to 50
miles, up to 250 miles, and more than 250 miles from headquarters, the subsequent earnings
announcements become increasingly adverse, according to the average shareholder reactions.
The right part of the table tests the significance of the differences between the abnormal returns
in each subsample, and the abnormal returns for the first group that holds its meetings close to
22

the home office. The most long-distance meetings, occurring more than 250 miles from
headquarters, are followed by the most negative average abnormal returns of -0.21%. All three
subsamples have average abnormal returns significantly below the average for the cohort of firms
holding their meetings within five miles of headquarters, and these differences are all significant
below the 1% level. At the bottom of the table we find that remote meetings are followed by
earnings announcements significantly worse than for meetings held near headquarters, and we
find exceptionally negative mean returns -2.24% for earnings announcements the follow
exceptional meetings, those at which the company breaks its pattern of meeting near headquarters
for one time only.

4.4.

Special meetings

As a robustness test of our main results, we examine the location, agendas, and stock
performance in the aftermath of extraordinary or special meetings of shareholders, which are
usually called at the discretion of management. Special meetings occur only infrequently, in just
268 for the 9,616 fiscal years covered by our sample. Table 6 shows information about the ballot
items at the special meetings in our sample. The table shows that special meetings are
sometimes called to ratify mergers and acquisitions, but more typically involve the authorization
of new shares of common stock or changes in corporate governance.
In Table 7, we repeat our abnormal returns analysis for annual meetings and apply the
same method to estimate the returns over the six months following special shareholder meetings.
We drop 34 companies for which the special meeting is a dissolution event related to an
acquisition by another company. We use three of the four distance variables, all of the ones from
23

Table 4 except for the exceptional meeting indicator (it is not intuitively possible to identify
exceptional special meetings, since these meetings do not occur according to a predictable
schedule, and arguably all special meetings could reasonably be described as exceptional). Again
we obtain negative estimates for the distance variable, and they are statistically significant in two
out of three cases.
The magnitudes of these two estimates, in the first and third columns of Table 7, are
especially large. If a firm holds a special shareholder meeting 1,000 miles from headquarters, the
estimate in the first column implies average underperformance of its shares on the order of 16.5% over the next 126 trading days or six months. If the meeting takes place at a remote
location, more than 50 miles from headquarters and also more than 50 miles from a major
airport, the average underperformance is approximately -22.7% over the next six months. The
evidence for special meetings therefore reinforces our findings for annual meetings, implying that
the choice of a distant meeting location is heavily influenced by management’s possession of
adverse private information.

4.5.

Meeting days and times

In addition to the information about meeting locations, we also examine the days of the
week on which meetings take place, and the hours at which they convene. We find few if any
significant relations between meeting days and times and subsequent stock price performance.
However, we do find that the scheduling of meetings appears to influence voter participation, or
turnout, as well as the fraction of votes cast in favor of management. Table 8 contains the
relevant analysis.
24

Table 8 shows regression models for two dependent variables: voter participation, or
turnout, and the fraction of votes in favor of each agenda item. We calculate turnout as the sum
of votes for and against a ballot item, plus abstentions, all divided by shares outstanding. The
fraction of votes cast in favor of an item equals the votes for, divided by a denominator which
can equal either shares outstanding, or votes cast, or votes cast less abstentions, depending on the
rules of each firm. The sample includes approximately 66,000 agenda items at the annual
meetings in our dataset. We exclude dual-class firms from the analysis because of the conceptual
difficulty of calculating statistics such as voter turnout in such a setting. For both turnout and
vote received, we estimate two regressions, with subsamples partitioned according to whether the
observation exhibits institutional ownership above or below the sample median value of 74.57%.
Estimates in the top two rows of the table imply that turnout is higher in larger companies, and
voter support in favor of generic ballot propositions is higher if the company has a good year.
Our main variables of interest, however, are a series of indicator variables derived from the start
time of meetings, the day of the week, the identity of the sponsor of a particular ballot question,
and the type of item covered by each ballot question.
We find that voter turnout is affected by meeting start times, at least within the subsample
of observations with lower levels of institutional investor ownership. Achieving a sufficient
turnout level may be important, because sometimes voter turnout falls short of the quorum need
to convene a board meeting and ratify a proposal. If a meeting occurs very early (before 9:00
a.m.) or very late (after 4:00 p.m.), voter turnout falls by 2% to 3%. No such result seems to
apply to firms with higher institutional ownership. We also find lower turnout when the distance
from headquarters to the meeting is large or institutional ownership is lower. Participation
25

appears to be highest for auditor ratification votes, followed by director elections, executive
compensation proposals, and other governance proposals. Turnout also increases when ISS
endorses a ballot item.
The voter turnout results seem surprising, because shareholder voting can take place
electronically during a fairly lengthy period in the weeks before the meeting. Whether a meeting
begins at dawn or a midnight, the large majority of shareholders might be expected to cast their
votes well in advance, without any regard to the physical location of the meeting. One possible
explanation, suggested by the discussion of voting-count in Kahan and Rock (2008), is that vote
tabulators do not conscientiously record every vote if the election occurs either very early or very
late in the day, simply because they may be understaffed at an unusual meeting time. It is also
possible that some shareholders delay voting until the last minute and then forget to vote if the
meeting takes place at an hour different than the typical starting time of 10:00 a.m. If
management is mindful of this tendency and wishes to suppress turnout, then scheduling a
meeting either very early or very late in the day might have such an effect.
While voter turnout may be influenced somewhat by irregular meeting times, less
evidence exists that the proportion of votes in favor of an agenda item will depend upon the
details of scheduling. In the right two columns of Table 8, regression estimates indicate that
favorable vote totals are higher for weekend meetings and overseas meetings, for instance, but
these categories are relatively rare. We do find only one significant estimate related to meeting
start times, suggesting that votes against proposals are more likely if a meeting begins late in the
day, and institutional investor ownership is high. ISS endorsement of an agenda item appears to
boost both turnout and the favorable vote percentage, while institutional ownership leads to
26

significantly higher turnout and fewer favorable votes.

5.

Conclusions
In this paper we analyze the signals coveyed by companies’ decisions about where and

when to hold their shareholder meetings. We find a strong negative performance pattern in the
aftermath of meetings scheduled far from corporate headquarters. Companies holding distant
shareholder meetings underperform the market by substantial amounts in the six months
following both annual meetings and special meetings. Firms’ first earnings announcements after
long-distance annual meetings tend fall short of investors’ expectations, according to event study
stock price evidence.
The poor performance of companies following long-distance meetings suggests that
management knows adverse news when choosing the location of these meetings, and it may
move them far from headquarters as part of a scheme to suppress negative news for as long as
possible. While this motivation seems understandable, it is less obvious why shareholders fail to
decode such an unambiguous signal at the time the meeting location is announced.
In addition to these performance results, we find that evidence that voter participation and
the pattern of votes in favor of various proposals may also be influenced by meeting scheduling,
especially in cases when firms depart significantly from the common practice of beginning
meetings at 10:00 a.m.
Shareholder meetings can be important events at which critical corporate decisions are
made and management sometimes faces challenges from the company’s shareholders and other
constituencies. Our analysis shows that these meetings generate rich detail for statistical
27

analysis. Further research into shareholder meetings might examine attendance, duration, news
coverage, transcripts of questions and answers, the strategic bundling of agenda items by
management, and other related variables.

28

References
Banko, John, Melissa B. Frye, Weishen Wang, and Ann Marie Whyte, 2013, Earnings
management and annual general meetings: The role of managerial entrenchment, Financial
Review 48, 259-282.
Bethel, Jennifer E., and Stuart L. Gillan, 2002 , The impact of the institutional and regulatory
environment on shareholder voting, Financial Management, winter, 29-54.
Cai, Jie, Jacqueline L. Garner, and Ralph A. Walkling, 2009, Electing directors, Journal of
Finance 64, 2389-2421.
Caplin, Mortimer H., 1951, Annual meetings and corporate democracy: The lawyer’s role,
Virgina Law Review 37, 653-697.
Choi, Stephen, Jill Fisch, and Marcel Kahan, 2010, The power of proxy advisors: Myth or
reality? Emory Law Journal 59, 869-918.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference
in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.
Cunat, Vicente, Mireia Gine, and Maria Guadalupe, 2012, The vote is cast: The effect of
corporate governance on shareholder value, Journal of Finance 62, 1943-1977.
De Jongh, Joahn M., 2011, Shareholder activists avant la lettre: The “complaining participants”
in the Dutch East India Company, 1622-1625, in Jonathan G.S. Koppell ed., Origins of
Shareholder Advocacy (New York: Palgrave Macmillan).
Del Guercio, Diane, Laura Seery, and Tracy Woidtke, 2008, Do boards pay attention when
investor activists “just vote no”? Journal of Financial Economics 90, 84-103.
Dimitrov, Valentin, and Prem C. Jain, 2011, It’s showtime: Do managers report better news
before annual shareholder meetings? Journal of Accounting Research 49, 1193-1221.
Fisch, Jill, 2008, The Transamerica case, in Jonathan Macey ed., The Iconic Cases in Corporate
Law (Thomson-West).
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy Stein, 2005, Thy neighbor’s portfolio: Word-ofmouth effects in the holdings and trades of money managers, Journal of Finance 60, 2801-2824.
Hu, Henry T.C., and Bernard Black, 2006, The new vote buying: Empty voting and hidden
(morphable) ownership, Southern California Law Review 79, 811-908.

29

Kahan, Marcel, and Edward Rock, 2008, The hanging chads of corporate voting, Georgetown
Law Journal 96, 1227-1281.
Knyazeva, Anzhela, Diana Knyazeva, and Ronald Masulis, 2013, The supply of local directors
and board independence, Review of Financial Studies 26, 1561-1605.
Kothari, S.P., Susan Shu, and Peter D. Wycocki, 2009, Do managers withhold bad news? Journal
of Accounting Research 47, 241-276.
Malloy, Christopher J., 2005, The geography of equity analysts, Journal of Finance 60, 719-755.
Maug, Ernst, and Kristian Rydqvist, 2009, Do shareholders vote strategically? Voting behavior,
proposal screening, and majority rules, Review of Finance 13, 47-79.
Smith, Erin E., 2013, Do shareholders want less governance? unpublished manuscript, available
at ssrn.com/abstract=2303921.
Yermack, David, 2010, Shareholder voting and corporate governance, Annual Review of
Financial Economics 2, 103-125.

30

Table 1
Descriptive statistics
The table shows descriptive statistics for 9,616 annual and 268 special shareholder meetings held by 2,342 U.S. public companies
between 2006 and 2010. Location data relative to headquarters is not tabulated for online and overseas meetings. The indicator for
contested board votes equals one if at least one management nominee for the board fails to receive a favorable endorsement from
Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), or if shareholders nominate at least one hostile board candidate as part of a proxy fight. The
indicator for contested compensation votes equals one if at least one management proposal on executive compensation or common
share increase fails to receive an endorsement from ISS, or if at least one outside shareholder proposal on executive compensation
does receive support from ISS. The indicator for contested governance vote equals one if at least one shareholder resolution on board
structure, voting, or related matters is opposed by management but does receive an endorsement from ISS. The indicator for contested
social proposal equals one if at least one shareholder resolution on the corporation’s labor, humans rights, or other social policies is
opposed by management but does receive support from ISS. The indicator for contested merger & acquisition equals one if at least
one vote to approve a corporate control transactions does not receive an endorsement from ISS. The indicator for contested equity
issue equals one if a management proposal for a private placement, creation of a new security class, or a related transaction does not
receive a support from ISS. Information about individual shareholder meetings is obtained from CapitalIQ (time and place) and
Voting Analytics (agenda items and ISS endorsements).

31

Annual meetings
Number
2,342
9,616

Frequency

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Weekdays prior to legal holidays
Legal holidays
Weekdays following legal holidays

Special meetings
Frequency

100.0%

Number
2,342
268

611
2,365
2,582
3,020
1,020
18
102
2
60

6.4%
24.6%
26.9%
31.4%
10.6%
0.2%
1.1%
0.02%
0.6%

39
71
50
58
50
0
6
1
1

14.6%
26.5%
18.7%
21.6%
18.7%

Less than 5 miles from headquarters
Between 5 and 50 miles from headquarters
Between 50 and 250 miles from headquarters
More than 250 miles from headquarters
More than 50 miles from nearest major airport
Online virtual meetings
Overseas meetings

6,815
1,577
350
822
2,822
18
34

70.9%
16.4%
3.6%
8.5%
29.3%
0.2%
0.4%

208
37
4
18
76
0
1

77.6%
13.8%
1.5%
6.7%
28.4%

Meetings with contested board vote
Meetings with contested compensation vote
Meetings with contested governance vote
Meetings with contested social proposal
Meetings with contested merger & acquisition
Meetings with contested equity issue

2,654
1,130
845
199
5
43

27.6%
11.8%
8.8%
2.1%
0.05%
0.4%

10
26
32
0
3
18

3.7%
9.7%
11.9%

Number of unique firms
Number of shareholder meetings

32

100%

2.2%
0.4%
0.4%

0.4%

1.1%
6.7%

Table 2
Annual meeting votes
The table presents a summary of ballot items in a sample of 9,616 annual shareholder meetings held by 2,342 U.S. public companies
between 2006 and 2010. The left half of the table shows the average vote totals and passage frequency for all agenda items. The right
half of the table shows the same information for the subset of agenda items for which Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) fails to
issue a voting recommendation in support of management’s position.
Full sample
Type of vote

Proponent

Board nominations
Board nominations

ISS not supporting management

Obs.

Avg. vote

Pass rate

Obs.

Avg. vote

Pass rate

Management
Shareholders

55,288
195

94.4%
68.7%

98.7%
63.1%

6,656
58

79.2%
84.0%

98.5%
87.9%

Auditor ratifications
Compensation plans
Governance changes

Management
Management
Management

8,312
5,347
946

98.5%
85.4%
85.3%

98.7%
97.8%
90.2%

51
908
107

94.3%
71.5%
66.0%

96.1%
92.1%
64.5%

Compensation resolutions
Governance resolutions
Social policy resolutions

Shareholders
Shareholders
Shareholders

560
1,291
924

31.9%
43.1%
12.6%

7.7%
34.0%
1.0%

409
1,043
263

39.2%
48.8%
27.3%

9.8%
40.2%
3.0%

33

Table 3
Determinants of annual meeting location relative to headquarters
The table shows regression estimates of the choice of where to locate the company’s annual
shareholder meeting. The sample includes 9,616 meetings held by 2,342 U.S. public companies
between 2006 and 2010. A limited number of observations are dropped due to missing sales or
voting data, and overseas and online virtual meetings are excluded from the analysis in the first
three columns. The fourth column includes only observations for those firms that appear in the
sample all five years. The dependent variable in the left column equals the log of the distance
between company headquarters and the annual meeting location, based upon ZIP codes. The
dependent variable in the second column equals the log of the distance between the nearest major
(large hub) airport and the annual meeting location. The dependent variable in the third column
is an indicator that equals one if the annual meeting takes place at a remote location, more than
50 miles from headquarters and also more than 50 miles from the nearest major airport. The
dependent variable in the right column is an indicator that equals one if the annual meeting takes
place at an exceptional location, which occurs when the company holds the annual meeting in the
vicinity of headquarters in four out of the five sample years, but shifts the meeting more than 150
miles away in the exceptional year. The prior year’s abnormal return equals the shareholder
return for the last fiscal year minus the return on the CRSP value-weighted stock index. The
indicator for contested board votes equals one if at least one management nominee for the board
fails to receive a favorable endorsement from Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), or if
shareholders nominate at least one hostile board candidate as part of a proxy fight. The indicator
for contested compensation votes equals one if at least one management proposal on executive
compensation or common share increase fails to receive an endorsement from ISS, or if at least
one outside shareholder proposal on executive compensation does receive support from ISS. The
indicator for contested governance vote equals one if at least one shareholder resolution on board
structure, voting, or related matters is opposed by management but does receive an endorsement
from ISS. The indicator for contested social proposal equals one if at least one shareholder
resolution on the corporation’s labor, humans rights, or other social policies is opposed by
management but does receive support from ISS. Standard errors clustered at the firm level
appear in parentheses below each estimate.

34

Dependent variable

log(1+HQ
distance)

log(1+apt.
distance)

Remote
location

Exceptional
location

OLS

OLS

Logit

Logit

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-5.799 ***
(1.069)

Log(sales)

0.096 ***
(0.025)

-0.015
(0.019)

0.185 ***
(0.055)

-0.011
(0.129)

Prior year abnormal return

0.100 **
(0.042)

0.003
(0.030)

-0.089
(0.103)

-0.340
(0.345)

Contested board vote(0, 1)

0.095
(0.067)

-0.035
(0.056)

0.198
(0.164)

-0.814 *
(0.483)

Contested compensation vote (0, 1)

-0.138 *
(0.083)

-0.046
(0.065)

-0.873 ***
(0.246)

0.644
(0.408)

Contested governance vote (0, 1)

0.199 *
(0.121)

-0.256 ***
(0.090)

-0.229
(0.233)

-0.944
(0.783)

Contested social proposal (0, 1)

-0.242
(0.215)

0.006
(0.195)

0.102
(0.386)

0.027
(1.136)

Institutional investor ownership (%)

0.019
(0.180)

-0.648 ***
(0.148)

-0.424
(0.448)

1.084
(0.689)

Dual class ownership structure (0, 1)

-0.244
(0.185)

0.231
(0.178)

-0.632 **
(0.715)

-12.778 ***
(0.227)

-0.288 ***
(0.081)

0.102
(0.070)

-0.385 **
(0.194)

0.377
(0.326)

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

9,041
2,244

9,041
2,244

9,041
2,244
308

6,504
1,326
44

0.022

0.020
106.4 ***

16.2 **

Estimation
Intercept

Classified board of directors (0, 1)
Month indicator variables
Observations
Firms
Number of cases
R2
Likelihood ratio test statistic

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.
35

Table 4
Annual meeting location and subsequent performance of stock
The table shows Fama-French four factor daily abnormal stock returns. The sample includes 2,342 U.S. public companies that hold
9,616 annual shareholder meetings between 2006 and 2010. The estimation includes up to one year (252 days) of stock returns
following each shareholder meeting, with fewer returns included only if the firm is delisted or if the subsequent shareholder meeting
occurs within one year. The key explanatory variables are an indicator for whether less than six months has elapsed since the prior
annual meeting, times four variables related to that meeting’s location. In the first column, the variable measures the distance between
company headquarters and the annual meeting location, based upon ZIP codes. In the second column, the variable measures the
distance from the nearest major airport to the annual meeting location. In the third column, an indicator variable equals one if the
annual meeting takes place at a remote location, encompassing 340 meetings held more than 50 miles from headquarters and also more
than 50 miles from the nearest major airport. In the fourth column, an indicator variable equals one if the annual meeting takes place
at an exceptional location, encompassing 46 cases in which the company holds the meeting in the vicinity of headquarters in four out
of the five sample years, but shifts the meeting more than 150 miles away in the exceptional year. The four distance variables are all
set equal to zero for online virtual meetings (18 observations) and overseas meetings (34 observations), which are represented in the
model by separate indicators. Meeting locations are obtained from shareholder proxy statements as recorded in CapitalIQ. Major
airports include the 33 U.S. large hub airports that handle at least 1 percent of nationwide revenue passenger boardings. Stock return
data is obtained from CRSP. The fourth column includes only observations for those firms that appear in the sample all five years. tstatistics clustered at the firm level appear in statistics below each estimate.

36

Distance variable

log(1+HQ
distance

log(1+apt.
distance)

Remote
location

Exceptional
location

Intercept

-0.0003 ***
(9.74)

-0.0002 ***
(10.33)

-0.0002 ***
(14.32)

-0.0001 ***
(6.89)

Market excess return

1.1336 ***
(159.89)

1.1336 ***
(159.89)

1.1336 ***
(159.88)

1.1188 ***
(130.39)

Small - large excess return

0.7694 ***
(58.01)

0.7694 ***
(58.00)

0.7694 ***
(58.01)

0.7128 ***
(42.67)

High - low excess return

0.0652 ***
(5.87)

0.0652 ***
(5.87)

0.0652 ***
(5.87)

0.0918 ***
(6.48)

Up - down excess return

-0.1404 ***
(25.47)

-0.1404 ***
(25.48)

-0.1405 ***
(25.47)

-0.1249 ***
(19.55)

-0.000043 ***
(3.44)

-0.000023 **
(2.33)

-0.00054 ***
(2.94)

-0.00093 **
(2.97)

2,400,181
2,342
9,616

2,400,181
2,342
9,616

0.3160
Yes

0.3160
Yes

2,400,181
2,342
9,616
340
0.3160
Yes

1,667,365
1,335
6,675
46
0.3471
Yes

Meeting within past six months x
distance variable
Daily stock price observations
Firms
Annual meetings
Number of cases
R2
Online and overseas meeting indicators
Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.

37

Table 5
Stock price reactions to quarterly earnings announcements
The table shows the abnormal stock returns accompanying quarterly earnings disclosures. The sample includes the first announcement
made by each firm following its annual shareholder meeting, for a sample that includes 9,616 meetings held by 2,342 U.S. public
companies between 2006 and 2010. Abnormal stock returns are cumulated over a two-day window including the earnings release day
and the next day. Announcement dates are obtained from IBES and CapitalIQ, annual meeting dates and locations are obtained from
CapitalIQ, and abnormal stock returns are calculated using standard market model methods. Missing values occur due to gaps in
coverage for the two data sources, and lengthy omissions of earnings announcements by certain companies.

Observations

CAR(0, 1) for
next earnings
announcement after
annual meeting

Patel
z-statistic

Full sample

9,423

0.41% ***

11.09

Less than 5 miles from headquarters
Between 5 and 50 miles from headquarters
Between 50 and 250 miles from headquarters
More than 250 miles from headquarters

6,684
1,536
341
810

0.55% ***
0.20% ***
-0.08%
-0.21%

12.09
3.18
-0.54
-1.46

Online virtual meetings
Overseas meetings
Remote meetings
Exceptional meetings

18
34

1.46% *
0.44%

332
46

-0.18%
-2.24% ***

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.

38

1.85
1.13
0.60
-4.02

Difference
from CAR
for HQ
meetings

n.a.
-0.35% ***
-0.63% ***
-0.76% ***
0.91%
-0.11%
-0.73% **
-2.79% ***

Table 6
Special meeting votes
The table presents a summary of ballot items in a sample of 268 special shareholder meetings held by U.S. public companies between
2006 and 2010. The left half of the table shows the average vote totals and passage frequency for all agenda items. The right half of
the table shows the same information for the subset of agenda items for which Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) fails to issue a
voting recommendation in support of management’s position.
Full sample
Type of vote

Proponent

Director nominations
Director nominations
Director removals

ISS not supporting management

Obs.

Avg. vote

Pass rate

Obs.

Avg. vote

Pass rate

Management
Shareholders
Shareholders

69
12
20

79.6%
73.4%
43.1%

85.5%
33.3%
40.0%

23
4
3

55.4%
94.2%
95.4%

65.2%
50.0%
100.0%

M&A transactions
Compensation plans
Governance changes
Security issuance

Management
Management
Management
Management

93
144
211
93

85.1%
76.4%
82.9%
88.1%

94.6%
92.4%
72.0%
91.4%

4
28
64
18

62.1%
72.9%
68.3%
65.8%

75.0%
85.7%
64.0%
88.9%

Governance resolutions

Shareholders

9

39.0%

11.1%

3

43.7%

33.3%

39

Table 7
Special meeting location and subsequent performance of stock
The table shows Fama-French four factor daily abnormal stock returns. The sample includes 268
special or extraordinary shareholder meetings held by U.S. public companies between 2006 and
2010, but 34 firms are excluded from the regression analysis because they are delisted after an
acquisition is approved by vote at the special meeting. The estimation includes up to one year
(252 days) of stock returns following each shareholder meeting, with fewer returns included only
if the firm is delisted or if the subsequent shareholder meeting occurs within one year. The key
explanatory variables are an indicator for whether less than six months has elapsed since the
special shareholder meeting, times three variables related to that meeting’s location. In the first
column, the variable measures the distance between company headquarters and the special
meeting location, based upon ZIP codes. In the second column, the variable measures the
distance from the nearest major airport to the special meeting location. In the third column, an
indicator variable equals one if the special meeting takes place at a remote location,
encompassing 7 special meetings held more than 50 miles from headquarters and also more than
50 miles from the nearest major airport. The three distance variables are all set equal to zero for
one overseas special meeting, which is represented in the model by a separate indicator. Meeting
locations are obtained from shareholder proxy statements as recorded in CapitalIQ. Major
airports include the 33 U.S. large hub airports that handle at least 1 percent of nationwide
revenue passenger boardings. Stock return data is obtained from CRSP. t-statistics clustered at
the meeting level appear in statistics below each estimate.

40

Distance variable

log(1+HQ
distance

log(1+apt.
distance)

Remote
location

Intercept

-0.0008 ***
(5.04)

-0.0008 ***
(4.43)

-0.0008 ***
(5.68)

Market excess return

1.1181 ***
(32.95)

1.1182 ***
(32.93)

1.1181 ***
(32.94)

Small - large excess return

0.8346 ***
(14.35)

0.8346 ***
(14.35)

0.8347 ***
(14.35)

High - low excess return

0.2941 ***
(4.18)

0.2939 ***
(4.18)

0.2938 ***
(4.18)

Up - down excess return

-0.1604 ***
(4.07)

-0.1605 ***
(4.07)

-0.1608 ***
(4.08)

Meeting within past six months x
distance variable

-0.00019 *
(1.83)

-0.00004
(0.55)

-0.0018 *
(1.93)

58,905
234

58,905
234

0.2616
Yes

0.2616
Yes

58,905
234
7
0.2616
Yes

Daily stock price observations
Meetings
Number of cases
R2
Overseas meeting indicator

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.

41

Table 8
Election turnout and outcomes
The table shows ordinary least squares estimates of the voter turnout and votes received in a
sample of 9,616 annual shareholder meetings held by 2,342 U.S. public companies between 2006
and 2010. Holiday weekend meetings include those on the weekdays immediately before and
after public holidays or the adjacent weekends. Information about meeting times and locations is
obtained from CapitalIQ, institutional investor ownership data is obtained from Thomson
Reuters, and voting data, including Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) recommendations, is
obtained from Voting Analytics. Dual-class firms are excluded from the analysis. The table
presents information for subsamples partitioned according to the sample median value of
institutional investor ownership (74.55%). t-statistics clustered at the meeting level appear in
statistics below each estimate.
Dependent variable:

Voter turnout

Vote received

Institutional investor ownership:

Above
median

Below
median

Log(sales)

0.003 ***
(2.76)

0.008 ***
(5.70)

0.0004
(0.89)

0.001 **
(2.06)

Prior year abnormal return

0.001
(0.13)

0.003
(0.36)

0.007 **
(2.97)

0.005 ***
(3.07)

Early meeting, before 9:00 a.m.

0.005
(1.01)

-0.026 **
(2.49)

0.005 *
(1.70)

0.002
(0.80)

Lunch meeting, 12:00 or 1:00 p.m.

-0.001
(0.16)

-0.005
(0.52)

0.002
(0.79)

0.0001
(0.02)

Late meeting, after 4:00 p.m.

-0.021
(0.60)

-0.035 **
(2.30)

-0.027 **
(2.09)

0.002
(0.55)

-0.085 ***
(4.89)

- 0.010
(0.38)

0.032 **
(2.09)

0.013 **
(2.37)

0.015 *
(1.67)

0.020
(1.16)

-0.013 ***
(2.70)

-0.001
(0.17)

Weekend

Holiday weekend

42

Above
median

Below
median

Online virtual meeting

0.004
(0.17)

-0.007
(0.25)

-0.003
(0.35)

-0.022
(0.81)

Overseas meeting

-0.037
(0.64)

0.002
(0.07)

0.015
(1.12)

0.040 ***
(3.49)

log(1 + distance from headquarters)

0.0001
(0.08)

-0.004 ***
(2.87)

-0.001 *
(1.65)

-0.0002
(0.68)

Institutional investor ownership (%)

0.114 ***
(4.50)

0.067 ***
(3.75)

0.014
(1.33)

-0.069 ***
(12.87)

Management sponsored ballot item

0.045 **
(2.08)

0.060 ***
(3.54)

0.331 ***
(14.42)

0.468 ***
(37.19)

ISS support indicator

0.046 ***
(7.98)

0.021 ***
(3.58)

0.242 ***
(38.81)

0.161 ***
(41.96)

Board election indicator

0.133 ***
(8.22)

0.139 ***
(8.86)

0.097 ***
(6.38)

0.065 ***
(5.26)

Auditor ratification indicator

0.150 ***
(9.38)

0.175 ***
(11.37)

0.120 ***
(7.95)

0.084 ***
(7.53)

Compensation plan or policy indicator

0.077 ***
(5.22)

0.062 ***
(4.63)

-0.007
(0.49)

-0.022 **
(2.13)

Shareholder social proposal indicator

0.108 ***
(5.93)

0.058 ***
(3.17)

-0.230 ***
(13.78)

-0.194 ***
(18.04)

Observations
Mean of dependent variable
Month indicator variables
R2

33,473
85.61%
Yes
0.079

33,264
81.47%
Yes
0.051

32,959
91.39%
Yes
0.749

32,649
91.23%
Yes
0.776

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.

43

Figure 1
Dates of annual meetings
The figure shows the dates of 9,616 annual shareholder meetings held by 2,342 U.S. public
companies between 2006 and 2010.
100

50

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

2006
100

50

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

2007
100

50

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

2008
100

50

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

2009
100

50

44
0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

2010

1,200
1,000

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday

800
600
400
200

0
10 0
:0
0
11
:0
12 0
:0
0
1:
00
2:
00
3:
00
4:
00
5:
00
6:
00
7:
00
8:
00

9:

00

8:

00

0
7:

Number of meetings in sample (n = 9,620)

Figure 2
Days and starting times of annual meetings
The figure shows the days of the week and starting times for 9,616 annual shareholder meetings
held by 2,342 U.S. public companies between 2006 and 2010.

Starting time

45

