NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GETTING BETTER OR FEELING BETTER? HOW EQUITY INVESTORS RESPOND
TO INVESTMENT EXPERIENCE
John Y. Campbell
Tarun Ramadorai
Benjamin Ranish
Working Paper 20000
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20000
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

The first version of this paper was circulated under the title "Getting Better: Learning to Invest in an
Emerging Stock Market''. We gratefully acknowledge NSDL and SEBI for providing us with access
to the data, the Sloan Foundation for financial support, and the use of the University of Oxford Advanced
Research Computing (ARC) facility. We thank Samar Banwat, Chandrashekhar Bhave, Gavin Boyle,
Stefano Della Vigna, Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos, Matti Keloharju, Ralph Koijen, Stefan Nagel,
Nagendar Parakh, Prabhakar Patil, Gagan Rai, G V Nageswara Rao, Enrichetta Ravina, Renuka Sane,
Manoj Sathe, Ajay Shah, Tyler Shumway, U.K. Sinha, Jayesh Sule, seminar participants at NSDL,
SEBI, NIPFP, NSE, the Einaudi Institute, EDHEC, the Oxford-Man Institute, the IGIDR Emerging
Markets Finance Conference, the NBER Household Finance and Behavioural Economics Groups,
and the Sloan-Russell Sage Working Group on Behavioral Economics and Consumer Finance for many
useful comments, and Vimal Balasubramaniam and Sushant Vale for excellent and dedicated research
assistance.˛The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Board of Governors, other employees of the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20000.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Getting Better or Feeling Better? How Equity Investors Respond to Investment Experience
John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish
NBER Working Paper No. 20000
March 2014
JEL No. G11
ABSTRACT
Using a large representative sample of Indian retail equity investors, many of them new to the stock
market, we show that both years of investment experience and feedback from investment returns have
significant effects on investor behavior, favored stock styles, and performance. We identify two channels
of feedback: performance relative to the market, and the directly experienced returns to behavior and
styles of stock. Both of these vary across investors at a point in time because investors are imperfectly
diversified and receive idiosyncratic returns. We find that experienced investors generally behave
in a manner more consistent with the recommendations of finance theory, although this tendency is
weakened by strong investment performance. High trading profits increase turnover, while high returns
to equity styles have a short-term negative and a longer-term positive effect on investors' style demands,
possibly reflecting the offsetting effects of disposition bias and style chasing. We document high returns
on a portfolio of stocks held by experienced investors, and on individual Indian stocks with an experienced
and low-turnover investor base.
John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Tarun Ramadorai
University of Oxford
Said Business School
Park End St.
Oxford OX1 1HP
United Kingdom
tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20000

Benjamin Ranish
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Washington, DC 20006
ben.ranish@frb.gov

It’s a little better all the time. (It can’t get no worse.)
Lennon and McCartney, “Getting Better,”1967.

1

Introduction

In this paper, using comprehensive data on the holdings, trades, and returns of Indian
stock market participants, we analyze how retail investors respond to the investment experience they gain from participation. This experience a¤ects investment behavior, speci…cally
underdiversi…cation, turnover, and disposition bias; demands for small-cap, value, and momentum equity styles; and investor performance.

We measure experience not only from

the time since investors …rst begin participating in the equity market, but also by exploiting
cross-sectional variation in directly experienced feedback that investors receive from the performance of their overall portfolios and of speci…c behaviors and styles. The latter source
of identi…cation is novel, exploiting the imperfect diversi…cation of retail investor portfolios
and the resulting idiosyncratic variation in experienced returns. Using these identi…cation
strategies, we …nd that strong overall investment performance encourages aggressive behaviors with potentially deleterious consequences in the longer run, while strong performance of
style-representative stocks within investors’portfolios induces short-run decumulation and
longer-run accumulation of these styles. These results may re‡ect reinforcement learning,
with investors “feeling better”after positive feedback and repeating behaviors they associate
with the feedback. Despite these consequences of positive feedback, we …nd that more experienced Indian retail investors generally behave more in line with the recommendations of
…nance theory, “getting better”at investing over time.
Equity investing is an important task for households accumulating …nancial assets. Because stocks have historically o¤ered a risk premium, households with no initial exposure to
the asset class can bene…t from holding at least some stocks. The optimal equity allocation
depends on market conditions, the equity premium, and many details of the household’s
…nancial situation, including the household’s risk aversion and other risk exposures, but typical normative calibrations suggest it is substantial –at least for households with su¢ cient
1

wealth to justify paying the …xed cost of equity market participation (Campbell and Viceira
2002, Campbell 2006, Siegel 2007, Gomes and Michaelides 2008).

Investing in stocks is

not straightforward, however, and households can lose much of the bene…t of stock market participation if they engage in certain investment behaviors that appear to be quite
prevalent.
Three such investment behaviors can be costly even in a market where all individual
stocks have the same risk and the same expected return. First, underdiversi…cation increases
portfolio risk without increasing return (Blume and Friend 1975, Kelly 1995, Calvet et al.
2007). Second, high turnover of an equity portfolio leads to high trading costs (Odean 1999,
Barber and Odean 2000). Third, selling stocks that have appreciated while holding those
that have depreciated— a tendency known as the disposition e¤ect— increases the present
value of tax obligations by accelerating the realization of capital gains and deferring the
realization of o¤setting losses (Shefrin and Statman 1985, Odean 1998). In a market where
expected returns di¤er across stocks, it is also possible for households to lose by picking
underperforming stocks.

They may do this by taking risk exposures that are negatively

compensated, for example by holding growth stocks in a market with a value premium, or
by adopting a short-term contrarian investment strategy (perhaps driven by the disposition
e¤ect) in a market with momentum where outperforming stocks continue to outperform for a
period of time. If these style tilts do not o¤set other risks of the household, they are welfare
reducing.2

Alternatively, households may lose by trading with informed counterparties in

a market that is not strong-form e¢ cient, and thus rewards investors who possess private
information (Grossman and Stiglitz 1980, O’Hara 2003).
One response to the challenges of direct equity investing is for households to hold mutual
funds, thereby gaining equity exposure without trading stocks directly. This, however, may
result in trade-o¤s between households’tendencies to engage in suboptimal behaviors, the
2
This is true whether risk prices are driven by fundamentals or by investor sentiment (the preferences
of unsophisticated investors for certain types of stocks). In a market where fundamentals determine risk
prices it may be more likely that households’ non-equity risk exposures justify equity positions with low
expected returns, but if this is not the case such positions still reduce household welfare just as they would
in a sentiment-driven model.

2

level of fees charged by intermediaries, and the possibility that mutual fund managers may
themselves be susceptible to these behaviors. That delegation is not a magic bullet for retail investors is also re‡ected in the direction in which the extensive literature on behavioral
…nance has evolved over the years, moving away from the simple characterization of institutions as “smart money” and retail investors as “dumb money”. Findings of an unequal
distribution of ability in institutional money management, and the constraints imposed on
institutions by agency problems, limits to arbitrage, and peer benchmarking have been complemented by …ndings that an appreciable fraction of retail investors appear to outperform
in equity markets.
Empirically, direct equity investing remains important for many households.

Because

direct equity investing can have signi…cant bene…ts but also substantial costs, depending on
implementation, it is important to understand how households learn to perform this function.
Several recent papers have explored the way in which equity investors respond to experience
(Nicolosi et al. 2009, Seru et al. 2010, Malmendier and Nagel 2011, 2012). An optimistic
view is that even if households make investment mistakes initially, they rapidly learn to
avoid these mistakes, “getting better” in the words of Lennon and McCartney.

A more

pessimistic view is that households overreact to random personal experiences, in an attempt
to “feel better”by repeating investment behaviors or investing in styles that happen to have
performed well for them in the recent past. The optimistic view emphasizes the potential
bene…ts of rational Bayesian learning, while the pessimistic view emphasizes the potentially
perverse e¤ects of reinforcement learning in which salient but random personal experiences
are overweighted relative to broader patterns of evidence in historical data.
The Indian market that we study in this paper is for several reasons an ideal laboratory
for studying learning among equity investors.

First, India is an emerging market whose

capitalization and investor base have been growing rapidly.

In such a population of rel-

atively inexperienced investors, learning may be faster and easier to detect than in better
established equity markets. Second, as discussed more fully below, mutual funds account
for a relatively small value share of Indian individuals’equity exposure. This has several
important implications. Most obviously, it is meaningful to measure the diversi…cation of
3

directly held stock portfolios. The prevalence of direct equity ownership also implies that it
is more important for Indian investors to develop the skills necessary to own stocks directly
than it is in a mature market with a large mutual fund share. Third, and most importantly
for our purposes, underdiversi…cation of directly held Indian stock portfolios creates a rich
cross-section of investment experiences that we can use to identify how investors learn about
aspects of investing such as di¤erences in expected returns across categories of stocks, and
the bene…ts or costs of engaging in certain investment behaviors. Because investors in the
same cohort have idiosyncratic experiences, this source of identi…cation is di¤erent from the
variation in experience across cohorts exploited by Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2012). Finally, India has electronic registration of equity ownership, allowing us to track the complete
ownership history of listed Indian stocks over a decade. The relatively long time dimension
of our panel allows us to measure investors’performance using realized returns, a method
that is vulnerable to common shocks when applied to a short panel. Moreover, our data are
monthly, and this relatively high frequency allows us to more accurately measure momentum
investing and turnover.
The bene…ts of Indian data do come with some limitations – the most serious one is
that we have almost no information about the demographic characteristics of investors.
Thus we cannot follow the strategies, common in household …nance, of proxying …nancial
sophistication using information about investors’age, education, and occupation (Calvet et
al. 2007, 2009a, Betermier et al. 2013), their IQ test scores (Grinblatt and Keloharju 2011),
or survey evidence about their …nancial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007).

Instead,

we study learning by relating the behavior and investment performance of each investor to
account age (the length of time since stocks were …rst held in an account) and measurements
of past behavior and performance.
We measure feedback in two ways. The broader source of feedback that we consider is the
overall past account performance of an investor relative to the market. We also construct
more speci…c measures of feedback for each behavior and style tilt that we study.

For

example, each month investors receive new feedback regarding the desirability of portfolio
turnover from the comparison between their actual investment returns and the returns they
4

would have received had they stopped trading three months earlier and moved to a buyand-hold strategy. Similarly, each month investors receive feedback on the desirability of
a style tilt, for example towards value, from the di¤erences in the returns of stocks in their
portfolios which are positively style-tilted (value stocks), and those that are negatively styletilted (growth stocks). In this way we can measure investors’response to style returns at
the idiosyncratic rather than the aggregate level.

Our use of this idiosyncratic variation

in directly experienced feedback to identify investor responses contrasts with much of the
literature (including Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes 2001, and Campbell, Ramadorai, and
Schwartz 2009), which identi…es positive-feedback trading behavior using aggregate style
returns. As aggregate style returns are potentially correlated with a range of unobserved
time-series variables, the investor-speci…c variation in observed style returns that we exploit
allows for relatively sharp identi…cation.
Our main results are as follows. Considering investment behaviors …rst, we …nd that both
turnover and the disposition e¤ect decline substantially with account age. Over the …rst eight
years of investing experience, controlling for feedback, we …nd that turnover falls by 84% and
the disposition e¤ect by 52% relative to their mean levels. However there is little e¤ect of age
on the idiosyncratic share of retail investors’portfolio variance. Overall account performance
appears to encourage aggressive investment behavior: less diversi…cation, heavier trading,
and a greater disposition e¤ect. However these e¤ects are short-lived, dying out after one or
two quarters. We …nd that behavior-speci…c feedback has a signi…cant and highly persistent
impact on turnover, but little impact on the disposition e¤ect.
Investors’style tilts are also signi…cantly a¤ected by both overall time spent in the market
and feedback. We …nd that experienced investors have a strong tendency to accumulate value
stocks and a more modest tendency to accumulate small stocks. The e¤ect of experience
on the accumulation of momentum stocks is non-monotonic, as both novice and extremely
experienced investors favor momentum stocks slightly more than investors with two to …ve
years of investment experience.
Indian retail investors.

Feedback also has important e¤ects on the style tilts of

We …nd that investors who achieve high overall returns tend to

accumulate large, growth, and high momentum stocks.
5

In the short term, we …nd that

investors decumulate styles that have recently outperformed within their portfolios, in a
manner consistent with the disposition e¤ect. However, we …nd a smaller but far longerlived tendency to accumulate or “chase”styles in which investors have experienced positive
returns. Such style chasing behavior is a feature of several theoretical models, most notably
that of Barberis and Shleifer (2003), although it has been di¢ cult to …nd well-identi…ed
e¤ects of directly experienced feedback on investing behavior.
Account age and feedback ultimately a¤ect retail investor performance both through their
impacts on measured behavior and style tilts, and through other channels that we do not
measure directly. Experienced investors appear to have substantially higher returns than
novice investors, although this result is imprecisely estimated.

Investors who behave like

experienced investors –those with low turnover and a low disposition e¤ect –perform better
with and without controls for standard risk factors.

Experienced Indian investors tend

to tilt their portfolios towards the type of stocks which have higher returns: small stocks,
low turnover stocks, and stocks held by institutions. Experienced Indian investors are also
more likely to avoid large, attention-grabbing initial public o¤erings. The e¤ects of investor
experience can also be detected in the cross-section of Indian stock returns. Controlling for
stock characteristics and factor loadings, characteristics of Indian stocks’investor base can
be used to predict their returns. Indian stocks held by more experienced investors, investors
with low portfolio turnover, and investors with value tilts have signi…cantly positive returns
unexplained by standard factors and characteristics.
The organization of the paper is as follows.

Section 2 describes our data, de…nes the

empirical proxies we use for investment mistakes and style tilts, and presents some summary
statistics.

Section 3 presents our methodology for estimating age and feedback e¤ects.

Section 4 applies this methodology to estimate age and feedback e¤ects on behavior, while
Section 5 applies it to age and feedback e¤ects on style tilts. Section 6 draws implications for
individuals’account performance given their behavior and the performance of stocks given
the behavior of their investor base. Section 7 concludes.

6

1.1

Related Literature

The behavior of individual investors in equity markets has been of interest to …nancial economists studying market e¢ ciency since the e¢ cient markets hypothesis was …rst formulated.
Shleifer (2000) summarizes the importance of this line of inquiry for the study of market
e¢ ciency, outlining that theoretical defenses of the e¢ cient markets hypothesis rely on at
least one of three concepts. The …rst is rational decision making and securities valuation by
individuals, the second, the absence of correlated deviations from rationality even if some
investors deviate from rational decision making, and the third, limits to arbitrage.
Understanding the behavior of individual investors is also important for the …eld of household …nance (see Campbell 2006, for example). There has been much work on theoretically
optimal investment in risky assets, and deviations from such idealized behavior by households
have important implications for the evolution of the wealth distribution in the economy.
While the theoretical motivation for the study of individual investors has been clear for
some time, empirical work has been hampered by the di¢ culty of obtaining detailed data on
individual investors’portfolios and the computational burden imposed by the study of such
large datasets. These constraints have gradually been surmounted, and this …eld is now one
of the most active areas of empirical …nance research.
Early work in the area (Cohn et al. 1975, Schlarbaum et al. 1978, Badrinath and Lewellen
1991) used relatively small samples of trader accounts from retail or discount brokerages to
shed light on the stocks held by individual investors, the returns they earned, and the practice of tax-loss selling. The …rst set of empirical studies with a primary focus on questions
related to rationality and market e¢ ciency followed in the late 1990s, also using data sourced
from discount brokerages, identifying that individual investors exhibit the disposition e¤ect
(Odean 1998), and trade excessively in the sense that their transactions costs outweigh any
stock-picking ability they may possess (Odean 1999, Barber and Odean 2000). These tendencies were found to vary with the demographic characteristics and trading technologies
of investors such as gender, marital status, and access to online trading (Barber and Odean
2001, 2002). A related focus has been on characterizing the trading strategies of individual

7

investors through the lens of various behavioral biases such as the disposition e¤ect, overcon…dence, or inattention (see, for example, Barber and Odean 2008 and references above),
and demonstrating the types of stocks (large, hard-to-value) in which these biases are most
likely to manifest themselves (Ranguelova 2001, Kumar 2009).
A characteristic of this early literature, and continuing to the present day, is the focus
on trading rather than investment decisions of individual investors. While many questions
in household …nance are about the performance and risk properties of the entire risky asset
portfolio of individual households, much of the literature has concentrated on performance
evaluation of individual investors’purchases and sales at di¤erent post-trade horizons (see,
for example, Coval et al. 2005, Barber et al. 2008, Seru et al. 2010), and on contrasting individual returns with those achieved by domestic and foreign institutional investors (Grinblatt
and Keloharju 2000, Kaniel et al. 2008). Several of these studies arrive at the conclusion
that treating individual investors as a monolithic entity may be misleading, as there are
detectable di¤erences in performance in the cross-section of investors. Most recently, Kelley
and Tetlock (2013) suggest that learning by retail investors may be one promising explanation of such variation –our …ndings on variations in behavior, style tilts, and performance
in the cross-section of Indian retail investors are consonant with this line of thinking, albeit
distinguished by our emphasis on investment rather than trades.
The literature’s focus on trading arises naturally from the limitations of the data used
to study investor behavior.

In the US, discount brokerage accounts from a single service

provider may not be truly representative of the entire portfolio of an individual investor, a
problem made signi…cantly worse when investors also have untracked mutual fund or 401(k)
investments.3

And some international datasets, such as the Taiwanese stock exchange

data used by Barber et al. (2008), track all individual investor transactions but have little
detail on holdings. Our use of Indian data on direct equity holdings and trades helps us to
partially surmount this obstacle. We have a relatively high-quality proxy for total household
investment in stocks, because equity mutual fund ownership by individual investors in India
3

Calvet et al. (2007), show that mutual fund investments are an important source of diversi…cation for
Swedish investors.

8

is much smaller than direct equity ownership. As detailed in the internet appendix, we
estimate that Indian households’equity mutual fund holdings are between 6% and 19% of
their direct equity holdings over our sample period.
There are some other countries, such as Sweden and Finland, in which both direct equity ownership and mutual fund holdings are tracked. In principle this allows for a fuller
characterization of household investment, but most previous studies using data from these
countries have pursued di¤erent objectives than our focus on learning to invest.

For ex-

ample, Grinblatt et al. (2011) show that IQ a¤ects stock market participation using data
from the Finnish registry which provides detailed information on direct equity portfolios
combined with an indicator for whether the household invested in mutual funds in the year
2000. Grinblatt et al. (2012) highlight the impacts of IQ on mutual fund choice by Finnish
investors using detailed data on mutual fund choices alongside less detailed information on
direct equity investment.

Calvet et al. (2007, 2009) use comprehensive data on Swedish

investors’total wealth to shed light on stock-market participation and portfolio rebalancing,
and a recent study by Betermier et al. (2013) examines the value tilt of Swedish investors,
…nding a tendency for this tilt to increase over the life cycle. However the annual frequency
of the Swedish data makes it di¢ cult for them to evaluate higher-frequency phenomena such
as momentum investing and turnover.
Several papers, including those referenced in the previous section, share our focus on
learning by individual investors, but emphasize di¤erent facets of this important issue. Feng
and Seasholes (2005) use data on over 1500 individual accounts from China over the 1999
to 2000 period, and …nd that both experience (measured by the number of positions taken)
and sophistication (measured by variables that include idiosyncratic variance) attenuate the
disposition e¤ect. Our analysis di¤ers from theirs in our use of a more comprehensive set of
investor behaviors and our exploration of feedback e¤ects on future investing behavior.
Linnainmaa (2010) estimates a structural model of learning and trading by investors in
Finland, focusing on high-frequency traders, who make at least one round-trip trade in a
given day.

He …nds, intriguingly, that traders appear to experiment with high-frequency

trading to better understand their levels of skill, and cease trading if they experience poor
9

returns. Our estimated feedback e¤ects on underdiversi…cation suggest that households also
experiment with the composition of their equity portfolios, choosing to underdiversify more
aggressively if they beat the market.
This …nding of experimentation is also consistent with Seru et al. (2010), who carefully
study the trading behavior of Finnish investors, focusing on the disposition e¤ect. Seru et
al. …nd that investors stop trading (“exit”) after inferring that their ability is poor, and
that trading experience weakens the disposition e¤ect.4 Our work is distinguished from this
literature by our focus on investments rather than trades, and our analysis of style tilts in
addition to behaviors such as the disposition e¤ect. It is worth noting that “exit” in our
setting is the relatively uncommon exit of an investor from all equity positions, whereas Seru
et al. use this term to refer to a period of time during which no trading occurs.
Goetzmann and Massa (2002) identify both positive- and negative-feedback investing in a
cross-section of 91,000 investor accounts in an S&P 500 index fund, but do not consider stylechasing behavior speci…cally. Recent work by Huang (2013) documents that US households
with discount brokerage accounts react to outperformance within an industry by increasing
their probability of purchasing new stocks in that industry.

This result is similar to our

…nding of style-chasing behavior among Indian investors.
Several papers have documented household reinforcement learning in other settings, such
as investment in IPOs (Kaustia and Knüpfer 2008, Chiang et al. 2011) and household choice
of credit cards (Agarwal et al., 2006, 2008). Agarwal et al. (2008) …nd that households learn
how best to reduce fees on their credit card bills, and estimate that knowledge depreciates
by roughly 10% per month, i.e., they …nd evidence that households learn and subsequently
forget. In a similar spirit our empirical speci…cation allows us to compare the short- and
long-run e¤ects of investment performance feedback on household investment decisions.
Finally, there is a parallel literature measuring the e¤ects of experience and feedback on
the decisions of professional investors.

Institutional investors’ feedback trading behavior

4

Related work on the positive e¤ect of trader experimentation and trader experience on returns and
bias attenuation includes Dhar and Zhu (2006), Mahani and Bernhardt (2007), and Nicolosi et al. (2009).
Korniotis and Kumar (2011), in contrast, …nd that the adverse e¤ects of aging dominate the positive e¤ects
of experience.

10

has been studied by a range of authors including Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001),
Froot and Teo (2008), and Campbell, Ramadorai, and Schwartz (2009) – our analysis is
distinguished from these by our use of cross-sectional variation in the directly experienced
performance of styles rather than the use of aggregate style returns. Greenwood and Nagel
(2009) document trend following by mutual fund managers during the technology boom,
which is stronger for younger managers.

Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt (2013) show that

mutual fund managers perform better in industries where they have more years of investment
experience.

2

Data and Summary Statistics

2.1

Electronic stock ownership records

Our data come from India’s National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL), with the approval of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the apex capital markets
regulator in India. NSDL was established in 1996 to promote dematerialization, that is,
the transition of equity ownership from physical stock certi…cates to electronic records of
ownership.

It is the older of the two depositories in India, and has a signi…cantly larger

market share (in terms of total assets tracked, roughly 80%, and in terms of the number
of accounts, roughly 60%) than the other depository, namely, Central Depository Services
Limited (CDSL). NSDL’s share of individual accounts by state tends to be slightly greater
in wealthier urban states, but has the majority of the depository market in most areas.
While equity securities in India can be held in both dematerialized and physical form,
settlement of all market trades in listed securities in dematerialized form is compulsory.
To facilitate the transition from the physical holding of securities, the stock exchanges do
provide an additional trading window, which gives a one time facility for small investors to
sell up to 500 physical shares; however the buyer of these shares has to dematerialize such
shares before selling them again, thus ensuring their eventual dematerialization. Statistics
from the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and the National Stock Exchange (NSE) highlight

11

that virtually all stock transactions take place in dematerialized form.
We do not observe data on the derivatives transactions of Indian investors, including their
participation in single-stock futures markets (in which open interest and trading volume are
both larger than the stock index futures market, see, for example, Vashishtha and Kumar
2010). However, there is evidence that trading volume on Indian stock futures is very highly
correlated with trading volume in the corresponding underlying equity security (Martins,
Singh, and Bhattacharya 2012), suggesting that the patterns that we uncover will not be
greatly a¤ected by the absence of these data.
The sensitive nature of our data mean that there are certain limitations on the demographic information provided to us. While we are able to identify monthly stock holdings and
transactions records at the account level in all equity securities on the Indian markets, we
have sparse demographic information on the account holders. The information we do have
includes the state in which the investor is located, whether the investor is located in an urban, rural, or semi-urban part of the state, and the type of investor. We use investor type to
classify accounts as bene…cial owners, domestic …nancial institutions, domestic non-…nancial
institutions, foreign institutions, foreign nationals, government, and individual accounts.5
This paper studies only the category of individual accounts.
A single investor can hold multiple accounts on NSDL; however, a requirement for account opening is that the investor provides a Permanent Account Number (PAN) with each
account. The PAN is a unique identi…er issued to all taxpayers by the Income Tax Department of India. NSDL provided us with a mapping from PANs to accounts, so in our empirical
work, we aggregate all individual accounts associated with a single PAN. PAN aggregation
reduces the total number of individual accounts in our database from about 13.7 million to
11.6 million. It is worth noting here that PAN aggregation may not always correspond to
household aggregation if a household has several PAN numbers, for example, if children or
5
We classify any account which holds greater than 5% of an stock with market capitalization above
500 million Rs (approximately $10 million) as a bene…cial owner account if that account would otherwise
be classi…ed as a trust, “body corporate,”or individual account. This separates accounts with signi…cant
control rights from standard investment accounts. Otherwise our account classi…cations are many-to-one
mappings based on the detailed investor types we observe.

12

spouses have separate PANs.

In addition it is possible that there may be households in

our NSDL data who also have depository accounts with CDSL, which we do not observe.
Conversations with our data provider suggest, however, that the fraction of retail investors
with such multiple depository relationships is small, and that depository relationships tend
to be persistent.6
Table 1 summarizes the coverage of the NSDL dataset.

The …rst two columns report

the total number of securities (unique International Securities Identi…cation Numbers or
ISIN) and the total number of Indian equities reported in each year.

Securities coverage

grows considerably over time from just 12,350 in 2004 to almost 23,000 in 2011, as does the
number of unique Indian equities covered. Starting at 4,533 in 2004, the number of equities
reaches a peak of 7,735 in 2012. When we match these data to price, returns, and corporate
…nance information from various datasets, we are able to match between 96% and 98% of
the market capitalization of these equities, and roughly the same fraction of the individual
investor ownership share each year. The third column shows the market capitalization of the
BSE at the end of each year. The dramatic variation in the series re‡ects both an Indian
boom in the mid-2000s, and the impact of the global …nancial crisis in 2008.
The fourth column of Table 1 shows the fraction of Indian equity market capitalization
that is held in NSDL accounts. The NSDL share grows from just above 50% at the beginning
of our sample period to about 70% at the end.

The …fth column reports the fraction of

NSDL market capitalization that is held in individual accounts. The individual share starts
at about 18% in 2004, but declines to just below 10% in 2012, re‡ecting changes in NSDL
coverage of institutions, as well as an increase in institutional investment over our sample
period. The sixth column shows the mutual fund share of total equities, which accounts for
a little over 3.5% of total assets in the NSDL data in 2004, growing to a maximum of 4.72%
in 2006, and declining to 3.97% by 2012. While comparing the …fth and sixth columns of
Table 1 demonstrates the magnitude of direct household equity ownership relative to mutual
6

Moreover, in the absence of the unlikely scenarios of substantial negative correlation in trading in crossdepository accounts, or movement of trading activity from one depository account to the other conditional
on experience or feedback, we would not expect this issue to importantly a¤ect our inferences.

13

funds, this simple comparison would lead to an overestimate of mutual fund ownership by
households. SEBI data in 2010 show that roughly 60% of mutual funds in India are held
by corporations.7 In the internet appendix (Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish 2014), we
estimate that individuals’ indirect equity holdings through mutual funds, unit trusts, and
unit-linked insurance plans were between 6% and 19% of total household equity holdings
over the sample period.

We note also that a 2009 SEBI survey of Indian equity-owning

households found that about 65% of such households did not own any bonds or mutual
funds.
From the beginning to the end of our sample period, the number of individual NSDL
accounts grew from 2.7 million to roughly 6.1 million, that is, by 125%.

While equity

ownership expanded throughout the decade, the growth is correlated with the return on the
aggregate Indian market (illustrated by the dashed line in internet appendix Figure A1).
Growth was particularly rapid in 2004 and 2007, and much slower in the period since the
onset of the global …nancial crisis.

2.2

Characteristics of individual accounts

Table 2 describes some basic characteristics of Indian individual accounts.

Because this

dataset is an unbalanced panel, with accounts entering and exiting over time, we summarize
it in two ways. The …rst set of three columns reports time-series moments of cross-sectional
means. The …rst column is the time-series mean of the cross-sectional means, which gives
equal weight to each month regardless of the number of accounts active in that month. The
second and third columns are the time-series maximum and minimum of the cross-sectional
mean, showing the extreme extent of time-variation in cross-sectional average account behavior.

The second set of three columns reports cross-sectional moments of time-series

means calculated for each account over its active life, giving equal weight to each account
for which the given characteristic can be measured in at least twelve months.

Since the

cross-sectional dimension of the dataset is much larger than the time-series dimension, we
7

See the SEBI website, http://www.sebi.gov.in/mf/unithold.html.

14

report the 10th percentile, median, and 90th percentile of the cross-sectional distribution.
For this table and all subsequent analysis, the data used represents a strati…ed random
sample (described more fully in the next section) of individual accounts opened after January
2002. For accounts opened earlier, which represent about 14.4% of all individual accounts,
we do not observe the full investing history, do not know when the account …rst invested
in stocks, and do not observe the initial account characteristics. In our internet appendix,
we show that our results are qualitatively unchanged when we perform our analyses with all
individual accounts after making assumptions required to make use of the additional older
accounts.
Account size, number of stocks held, and location
In the …rst panel of Table 2, we begin by reporting account sizes both in rupees (using
Indian conventions for comma placement), and in US dollars, both corrected for in‡ation to
a January 2012 basis. The cross-sectional average account size varies across months from
under $5,000 in 2004 to about $66,000 in June 2008, with a time-series mean of $24,771.
The median account size is however much smaller at $1,327, and even the 90th percentile
account size is only $10,815, re‡ecting positive skewness in the distribution of account sizes.
This positive skewness also explains the time-series variability of cross-sectional average
account size, which is strongly in‡uenced by the entry and exit of very large accounts. The
large di¤erence between mean and median account sizes implies that the weighting scheme
used in summary statistics and regressions will have an important in‡uence on the results.
Given our focus on household …nance questions, as opposed to the determination of Indian
asset prices, we equally weight accounts in our empirical analysis as advocated by Campbell
(2006).
The number of stocks held in each account is also positively skewed. The average number
of stocks held across all accounts and time periods is almost 7, but the median account holds
only 3.4 stocks on average over its life. The 10th percentile account holds 1 stock, while the
90th percentile account holds 14.3 stocks.
The next row shows that around 56% of individual accounts are associated with urban
account addresses, 32% with rural addresses, and 12% with semi-urban addresses. These
15

relative shares do change somewhat over time.8
Account performance
The second panel of Table 2 looks at monthly account returns, calculated from beginningof-month stock positions and monthly returns on Indian stocks.

These returns are those

that an account will experience if it does not trade during a given month; in the language
of Calvet et al. (2009a), it is a “passive return”. It captures the properties of stocks held,
but will not be a perfectly accurate measure of return for an account that trades within a
month.9
The table shows that on average, individual accounts have slightly underperformed the
Indian market (proxied by a value-weighted index that we have calculated ourselves). There
is considerable variation over time in the cross-sectional average, with individual accounts
underperforming in their worst months by as much as 4.8% or overperforming in their best
months by as much as 10.2%. This variation is consistent with the literature on institutional
and individual performance in US data (e.g. Grinblatt and Titman 1993, Kovtunenko and
Sosner 2004, Kaniel et al. 2008), and can be explained in part by style preferences of
individual investors. There is also dramatic variation across investors in their time-series
average performance, with the 10th percentile account underperforming by 1.75% per month
and the 90th percentile account outperforming by 1.52% per month.
Underdiversi…cation
The next set of three rows examines account-level statistics that proxy for the investment
mistakes described in the introduction.

The idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance is

calculated from estimates of each stock’s beta and idiosyncratic risk, using a market model
with the value-weighted universe of Indian stocks as the market portfolio, using a procedure
very similar to that employed in Calvet et al. (2007). In order to reduce noise in estimated
stock-level betas, however, we do not use realized stock-level betas but instead use …tted
values from a panel regression whose explanatory variables include stock-level realized betas
8

The internet appendix describes the method used to classify accounts into location-based categories.
The internet appendix provides details on our procedures for calculating Indian stock returns. The
appendix also shows that our results are robust to consideration of “active”returns from intra-month trading.
9

16

(in monthly data over the past two years), realized betas on four portfolios of similar stocks
(formed based on industry, and size, value, and momentum quintiles), and a dummy for
stocks that are less than two years from their initial listing. To reduce noise in the estimate
of idiosyncratic risk, we estimate idiosyncratic variance from a GARCH(1,1) model.10
The average idiosyncratic share is about 45% in both the time-series and cross-sectional
moments, which is slightly lower than the median idiosyncratic share of 55% reported by
Calvet et al. (2007), the di¤erence probably resulting from our use of an Indian rather than
a global market index. Once again there is considerable variation over time (from 25% to
55%) and across accounts (from 24% at the 10th percentile to 68% at the 90th percentile).
However, the idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance is not skewed to the same degree as the
number of stocks held (reported in the top panel of the table), re‡ecting the convex declining
relation between the number of stocks held in a portfolio and the portfolio’s idiosyncratic
risk.
Turnover
We measure turnover by averaging sales turnover and purchase turnover. Sales turnover
equals the value of last month’s holdings (at last month’s prices) that were sold in the current
month divided by the geometric average of the value of last month’s holdings and the current
month’s holdings. This value is winsorized at 100%. Purchase turnover equals the value
of the current month’s holdings (at current prices) that were bought in the current month,
divided by the same denominator and also winsorized at 100%. Our measure of turnover
is not particularly high on average for Indian individual accounts. The time-series mean of
the cross-sectional mean is 5.7% per month (or about 68% per year), and the cross-sectional
median turnover is only 2.6% (or 31% per year). Turnover this low should not create large
di¤erences between the passive return we calculate for accounts and the true return that
takes account of intra-month trading.

Once again, however, there is important variation

over time and particularly across accounts.

The 10th percentile account has no turnover

10

The GARCH model is …rst estimated for each stock, then is re-estimated with the GARCH coe¢ cients
constrained to equal the median such coe¢ cient estimated across stocks. This approach deals with stocks
for which the GARCH model does not converge or yields unstable out of sample estimates.

17

at all (holding the same stocks throughout its active life), while the 90th percentile account
has a turnover of 16.3% per month (196% per year).
Following Odean (1999), we have compared the returns on stocks sold by individual
Indian investors to the returns on stocks bought by the same group of investors over the
four months following the purchase or sale. In India, the former exceeds the latter by
2.41%, which makes it more di¢ cult to argue that trading by individuals is not economically
harmful. By comparison, the di¤erence Odean …nds in US discount brokerage data is a much
smaller 1.36%. At a one year horizon following the purchase or sale, we …nd that stocks sold
outperform stocks bought by 4.36% compared to 3.31% in Odean’s data.
The disposition e¤ect
We calculate the disposition e¤ect using the log di¤erence of the proportion of gains
realized (PGR) and the proportion of losses realized (PLR), with these proportions both
winsorized at 0.01.11 This is a modi…cation of the previous literature which often looks at
the simple di¤erence between PGR and PLR. By calculating a log di¤erence, we eliminate
any mechanical relation between the level of turnover and our measure of the disposition
e¤ect. PGR and PLR are measured within each month where the account executes a sale
as follows: Gains and losses on each stock are determined relative to the cost basis of the
position, which is observed whenever the position was established after the account was
opened.

In the remaining 35% of cases we use the median month-end price over the 12

months prior to NSDL registry as the cost basis.

We only count sales where a position

is fully sold, as partial sales could be driven by account re-balancing, but this convention
makes little di¤erence to the properties of the measure.
The disposition e¤ect is important for Indian individual accounts.

On average across

months, the cross-sectional mean proportion of gains realized is 1.23 log points or 242% larger
than the proportion of losses realized, while the median account has a PGR that is 1.35 log
points or 286% larger than its PLR. While both time-series and cross-sectional variation
in the disposition e¤ect are substantial, it is worth noting that over 90% of accounts in the
11

Our results are robust to reasonable variation in this winsorization threshold.

18

sample with 12 or more months with sales exhibit this e¤ect.
In the internet appendix, we compare the disposition e¤ect in our Indian data with US
results reported by Odean (1998). Speci…cally, we plot the mean ratio of PGR and PLR
aggregated across accounts by calendar month, a series that can be compared with Odean’s
numbers.

The Indian disposition e¤ect is considerably stronger on average than the US

e¤ect, and in both India and the US, the disposition e¤ect is weaker towards the end of the
tax year (calendar Q4 in the US, and calendar Q1 in India).
Style tilts
Table 2 also reports several measures of individual accounts’style tilts. We construct
account-level betas with the Indian market by estimating stock-level betas as described
earlier, and then value-weighting them within each account.

The average beta is very

slightly greater than one at 1.03 in both the time-series and cross-sectional moments. The
cross-sectional mean betas have modest variation over time from 0.95 to 1.09, and the crosssectional variation in the time-series average beta is also small.
In US data, individual investors overweight small stocks and institutional investors overweight large stocks (Falkenstein 1996, Gompers and Metrick 2001, Kovtunenko and Sosner
2004). We measure this tendency in our Indian dataset by calculating the value-weighted
average inverse market-capitalization (i.e. “small”) percentile of stocks held in individual
accounts, relative to the value-weighted average market-capitalization percentile of stocks in
the market index. We scale this by the di¤erence in market-capitalization percentiles between market-capitalization-sorted portfolios constructed in the manner of Fama and French
(1993). As a result, the reported time-series mean small tilt indicates that the average small
(or inverse size) percentile of the individual investor is equal to the small percentile of a portfolio consisting of the market, a long position of 8.54% in the small-stock portfolio, and a
short position of -8.54% in the large-stock portfolio. The implied small tilt varies modestly
over time, but never switches sign. The tilt is skewed across accounts: the 10th percentile
account has a roughly a 6% large tilt while the 90th percentile account has a 34% small tilt.
Individual Indian investors also have a modest average tilt towards value stocks. Ranking
stocks by their book-market ratio and calculating a value tilt in the same manner as we did
19

for smallness, we …nd that the time-series mean value tilt is about 11%.

This value tilt

varies over time and does switch sign, reaching around -15% in the month that is most tilted
towards growth. There are also very large di¤erences across accounts in their tilt towards
growth or value, with a spread of about 80% between the 10th and 90th percentiles of accounts. Finally, individual investors have a contrarian, or anti-momentum tilt. Calculating
the momentum tilt using our standard methodology, we …nd that both the time-series mean
and cross-sectional median momentum tilts are about -8%. This pattern is consistent with
results reported for US data by Cohen et al. (2002), and with short-term e¤ects of past
returns on institutional equity purchases estimated by Campbell et al. (2009).
Cross-sectional correlations of characteristics
In the internet appendix we ask how the account characteristics described in Table 2 are
correlated across accounts. We calculate cross-sectional correlations of account characteristics for each month, and then report the time-series mean of these correlations. To limit the
in‡uence of outliers, we winsorize account-level stock returns at the 1st and 99th percentiles,
and winsorize account value below at 10,000 rupees (approximately $200).

There are a

number of intriguing patterns in these correlations. Older accounts tend to be larger, and
account age is negatively correlated with all three of our investment behavior proxies –an effect we explore in detail in the next section. Among investment behaviors, turnover also has
a 0.33 correlation with the idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance, implying that underdiversi…ed accounts tend to trade more. All the investment behaviors are positively correlated
with accounts’market betas and small tilts, implying that accounts holding high-beta and
small-cap stocks tend to be less diversi…ed, trade more, and have a stronger disposition e¤ect.
The log of account value correlates negatively with beta, small, and value, and positively
with momentum tilts. This implies that larger individual accounts look more like institutional accounts in that they prefer lower-beta stocks, growth stocks, large stocks, and recent
strong performers. Finally, there is a strong correlation of 0.47 between the small and value
tilts, implying that individuals who hold value stocks also tend to hold small stocks. This
e¤ect is somewhat mechanical given the correlation of these characteristics in the Indian
universe.
20

3

The E¤ects of Age and Feedback: Methodology

In this section we describe our approach to understanding how Indian investors learn. We
consider two potential sources of learning.

The …rst is the amount of time spent by an

investor in the market, which we proxy by the time elapsed since the investor began to hold
stocks in an account. The second is the set of speci…c experiences that each investor has
had in the market. Our econometric speci…cations identify the …rst of these sources as an
age e¤ect in the panel of investors, and the second using the fact that variation in portfolio
holdings across investors and time generates variation in their “experienced returns.” We
use these speci…cations to explain and forecast the evolution of investors’ behaviors, style
demands, and overall performance.
Our empirical speci…cations are constructed to capture variation in behaviors, style demands, and performance arising from age and feedback. However, to ensure that we correctly
identify these e¤ects, we need to control for the e¤ect of broader temporal ‡uctuations in the
Indian market, as well as the possibility that individuals di¤er in their inherent preferences,
ability, or sophistication.
To begin, consider a speci…cation which provides for estimation of all these sources of
potential variation in behavior, style tilts, and performance, represented generically as an
outcome Yit below:
Yit = si +
where si is an investor …xed e¤ect,

t

t

(1)

+ Ait + Xit + "it

represents an unobserved time …xed e¤ect, Ait is a

measure of the age of account i at time t, and Xit is a predictor variable such as the feedback
experienced by investor i at time t. In the case where Yit measures investment performance,
we might think of si as capturing the inherent sophistication or investment ability of investor
i.
We can re-write equation (1) in cross-sectionally demeaned form as:
Yit

Yt = (si

st ) + (Ait

21

At ) + (Xit

Xt ) + "it

(2)

where st is the cross-sectional average …xed e¤ect of investors in the market at time t. As
investors enter and exit the market, st could vary over time.
The fatal drawback of equations (1) and (2) is that they are not identi…ed on account
of perfect collinearity.

This is the usual problem with any speci…cation containing a lin-

ear transformation of unrestricted age e¤ects, unrestricted cohort or individual e¤ects, and
unrestricted time e¤ects (Ameriks and Zeldes 2004, Guiso and Sodini 2013).
To estimate the objects of interest (

and ), we therefore apply restrictions on st in

equation (2). The simplest such restriction that we employ is that st = 0, which in the case
of a performance regression implies that the average inherent sophistication of investors in
the market does not change with time. Applying this restriction, we arrive at our baseline
speci…cation:

Yit

Yt = si + (Ait

At ) + (Xit

Xt ) + "it :

Our baseline speci…cation is vulnerable to a few econometric di¢ culties.

(3)
First, it is

possible that the average inherent sophistication of Indian investors has been changing over
time as market participation expands. To address this possibility, we model these changes
in the internet appendix using the cross-sectional average of a set of investor attributes, i.e.,
by estimating:
Yit

Yt = (si

Ct ) + (Ait

At ) + (Xit

Xt ) + "it

(4)

where Ct includes the cross-sectional average of investor initial log account value and investor
initial number of equity positions, as well as the income and literacy rates of the states in
which investors are located, and the share of the investor population residing in rural and
urban areas. Put di¤erently, speci…cation (4) simply attempts to …t cross-sectional average
sophistication with the set Ct of cross-sectional average investor attributes. We …nd that
the majority of our results are una¤ected by the introduction of these variables Ct , though
their introduction weakens identi…cation of age e¤ects.
Second, panel estimation with …xed e¤ects can deliver biased estimates when explanatory
22

variables are not strictly exogenous. Intuitively, if the time dimension of the panel is short,
and if high values of Yi early in the sample predict high future values of Xi , then relative to
its sample mean Yi must be low later in the sample. As a result, Yi will spuriously appear
to be negatively predicted by Xi . This is a particular problem if we use account size as an
explanatory variable to predict returns, since account size is mechanically driven in part by
past returns. Similar issues may arise when we use investment behaviors or style tilts as
explanatory variables, if their prevalence is behaviorally in‡uenced by past returns.
Even the use of account age as an explanatory variable may su¤er from this problem if
the disposition e¤ect – the tendency of investors to sell gains rather than losses – leads to
disproportionate exit of investors who have been lucky, as reported by Calvet et al. (2009a).
In this case, the surviving, experienced investors may disproportionately be investors who
had poor returns when they were novices. In the presence of investor …xed e¤ects, this can
produce an upward bias in the estimated e¤ect of account age on portfolio returns. This
bias can also exist in age e¤ects in our behavior and style regressions to the extent that
behaviors are also in‡uenced by returns.
Fortunately violations of strict exogeneity are less serious in our application than in many
panel estimation exercises because our panel has a relatively long time dimension, and the
outcomes we study are generally not strong predictors of subsequent control variables. Furthermore, in the internet appendix we respond to the problem by estimating an alternative
speci…cation:
Yit

Yt = (Ci

Ct ) + (Ait

At ) + (Xit

Xt ) + "it

(5)

This speci…cation restricts the individual …xed e¤ects used in (3), modeling them using the
same set of investor attributes C described above. By eliminating the use of sample mean
Yi to estimate …xed e¤ects, the speci…cation protects against the bias discussed above. The
appendix shows that our inferences about the impact of variables (such as feedback variables)
for which we might be concerned about bias arising from violations of strict exogeneity are
una¤ected in this new speci…cation.
With regard to the speci…c issue of luck-driven account exit, in the internet appendix we

23

model the relationship of account exit and investor behaviors to past returns and use this to
simulate survival bias in account age e¤ects using our primary speci…cation. We …nd that
the account exit rate is too modest, and too weakly related to past returns for our inferences
to be a¤ected signi…cantly.
A few notes on estimation. First, we focus primarily on a ‡exible piecewise linear form
for the account age e¤ect. Second, all our regressions, except account returns, include log
account size as a control variable.

Third, when predicting investment behaviors we also

include lagged behavior, Yit 1 , as a regressor. The inclusion of a lagged outcome variable
makes the model one in which there is partial adjustment to a target which depends on
account age and the investor’s feedback. Since changes in account age are permanent, we
report the impact of account age on the target level of behavior. Feedback is almost entirely
transitory, so we report the impulse response function, that is, the e¤ect of lagged feedback
on behavior taking into account the endogenous response of lagged behavior and its e¤ect
on current behavior.
We consider two sources of feedback in our empirical estimation. The …rst, which we
term “account performance feedback” is the historical total outperformance of the investor
relative to the market. The coe¢ cients on account performance feedback capture the e¤ects
on the outcome variables of interest (behavior and style demands) of the investor performing
relatively well or relatively poorly over a period of time. The second is “behavior-speci…c”
or “style-speci…c”feedback. We measure this source of feedback using historical experienced
returns attributable speci…cally to the past behavior or style tilt of the investor which we
seek to explain.

For example, when forecasting investor turnover, the turnover-speci…c

feedback is measured as the increase in returns due to trading activity. This is computed as
the di¤erence between actual returns in the current month and the returns that would have
obtained if no trades had been made in the past three months.
Our regressions are estimated on a strati…ed random sample, drawing 5,000 individual
accounts from each Indian state with more than 5,000 accounts, and all accounts from
states with fewer than 5,000 accounts.

The internet appendix shows that, as expected,

state participation rates are highly correlated with per-capita state income.
24

Our return

regressions are estimated using about 4.2 million account months of data spanning January
2004 through January 2012, and our regressions of account behaviors and style tilts use
somewhat fewer observations, as these measures cannot be de…ned for as many account
months.
We estimate panel regressions applying equal weight to each cross-section, and within
each cross-section, we use weights to account for the sampling strategy. Standard errors are
computed by bootstrapping months of data, to account for any possible contemporaneous
correlation of the residuals. This estimation methodology is in the spirit of the well-known
Fama-Macbeth regression method (since it gives each time period equal weights, and assumes
errors are cross-sectionally correlated within each period but uncorrelated across periods),
although ours di¤ers in its inclusion of account …xed e¤ects.
These panel regressions are reported in Tables 3 (investment behaviors) and 4 (net demands for styles, de…ned in section 5.1). Table 3 reports the coe¢ cients on log account value
and lagged behavior, showing that large accounts are better diversi…ed, have higher turnover,
and lower disposition bias, and that underdiversi…cation is highly persistent, turnover less
so, and disposition bias is actually negatively serially correlated.

Table 4 reports the co-

e¢ cients on log account value and lagged style tilts, showing that large accounts have a
greater tendency to accumulate small stocks and growth stocks.

For example, for each

log unit increase in account value, the increase in net demand for small and growth stocks
has equivalent impact on portfolio tilts as a monthly shift of 0.077% of the portfolio from
large to small stocks, and 0.117% from value to growth stocks. The table also shows that
all net style demands are negatively related to lagged style tilts, capturing a tendency for
investors to move their portfolios towards the average style characteristics of stocks in the
Indian market.
The age and feedback e¤ects in the regressions of Tables 3 and 4 are the main focus of
this paper and are discussed in the following sections. Since these e¤ects are modeled in a
relatively unrestricted way, it is easier to interpret them in graphical form.

25

4

Age and Feedback E¤ects on Behavior

4.1

How behavior changes with age

We …rst ask whether our three proxies for investment behaviors change with the age of
the account. In our speci…cations, we predict the idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance,
turnover, and disposition bias measured by the log ratio of PGR to PLR using speci…cation
(3), allowing for a piecewise linear age e¤ect. Figure 1 shows these age e¤ects; this form
of presentation carries through our analysis of style tilts and performance. In the plot, the
solid line represents the point estimate from the regression, and the surrounding dotted lines
encompass the 95% con…dence interval. We scale behaviors by the time-series average of
their cross-sectional means reported in Table 2.
The age e¤ects documented in Figure 1 are large in economic magnitude.

Over the

course of …ve years, monthly turnover declines by a statistically signi…cant 75% of the mean,
with this number becoming an even larger 98% for an eight-year old account relative to a
novice account. The disposition bias declines by 42% for a …ve-year account relative to a
novice, although the internet appendix shows that much of this e¤ect may be attributable to
the fact that early cohorts appear more sophisticated along the dimension of the disposition
bias. In contrast, the idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance changes little with age. This
may not be surprising when considering the results of Ivkovic et al. (2008), who suggest
that underdiversi…cation may in some cases result from stock-speci…c information possessed
by sophisticated investors – they …nd that individual trader performance improves as the
number of stock holdings decrease, holding other determinants of performance constant.

4.2

How behavior changes with feedback

Since two of our behavior measures vary strongly with account age, it is plausible that behavior may also be a¤ected not only by the fact of investing, but also by the experiences that
investors have in the market. Figure 2 shows the impacts of feedback on the three behaviors
that we consider (in rows), with the two columns showing, respectively, the impacts of past

26

total account performance relative to the market, and past behavior-speci…c feedback.
In the …rst row, we consider the impact of the outperformance of the account relative to
the market on the future idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance. The …gure shows that
account outperformance leads investors to make larger idiosyncratic bets, especially over
the …rst quarter following an increase in performance.

The estimated coe¢ cient implies

that the idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance becomes about 22% higher than the mean
idiosyncratic share for an account that has recently outperformed the market by 100%. This
may be because past outperformance encourages investors to assess their investing skills more
optimistically, in turn leading them to increase their idiosyncratic bets.12
The second row of Figure 2 shows the ability of feedback to predict turnover. Again,
outperformance of the account relative to the market appears to have a signi…cant e¤ect
on turnover, with a rise of over 70% relative to mean turnover following an account return
of 100% relative to the market. The e¤ect is slightly longer-lived than the impact on the
idiosyncratic variance share, although it continues to show a relatively rapid decline following
the …rst quarter after the elevated account outperformance.
In the same row, the second column shows the impact of the increase in returns due to
trades, a measure of an account’s past trading success. Turnover-speci…c feedback from a
given month is the di¤erence between actual returns in that month and the returns that
would have obtained if the investor had not traded in the previous three months.

This

variable strongly predicts turnover, implying that trading pro…ts strengthen the tendency
to trade stocks frequently.13

Speci…cally, a return of 100% from recent trading initially

increases turnover by over 100% of its cross-sectional mean.

Even after several years,

the e¤ect remains statistically signi…cant and economically important at about 30% of the
cross-sectional mean.
12
Note that the presence of the lagged idiosyncratic variance share in the regression controls for any
mechanical impact (given less than complete rebalancing within the month) of the return to an undiversi…ed
account on the end-of-month idiosyncratic variance share of the account. That is, we measure account
return during the month leading up to the measurement date for the lagged idiosyncratic variance share,
not the month following that measurement date. In this way we guarantee that the e¤ects we estimate are
behavioral and do not result mechanically from imperfect rebalancing.
13
This result is consistent with the …ndings of Linnainmaa (2011), who employs information on a set of
high-frequency traders from Finland.

27

It should be noted that the e¤ects of recent account performance and trading pro…ts
on turnover may result in part from the disposition e¤ect. If recent trading is pro…table,
then an account has tended to purchase winners, and these are more likely to be sold if the
investor has a disposition bias. Such sales, and subsequent purchases of replacement stocks,
increase turnover.

However, the stronger response of turnover to trading pro…ts than to

account performance, and the persistence of the response to trading pro…ts, suggest that the
disposition e¤ect is not the only factor driving turnover.
Finally, in the third row, we predict disposition bias. The …gure in the …rst column of this
row shows that high account outperformance relative to the market substantially increases
the short-term tendency to sell winners rather than losers. The second column uses a more
speci…c measure of feedback which captures the impact of disposition-bias-induced selling
on account returns. We calculate excess returns relative to the market index on stocks that
each account sold, during the three month period following each sale, and compare the excess
returns to losers sold relative to winners sold, weighting by the value of each sale.

This

feedback measure could be positive if the account holds mean-reverting stocks, or negative if
the account holds stocks that display momentum. This variable predicts future disposition
bias with the expected positive sign, but the e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant.14
Figure 3 illustrates the relative importance of account age and investment experience in
predicting each of our three investment behaviors. For all accounts that opened in December
2003, the …gure shows the predicted behaviors from January 2004 through the end of the
sample, using all the predictor variables except account value from our speci…cations. The
…gure illustrates the median and the 10th and 90th percentiles of predicted behaviors. In
both the disposition e¤ect and turnover plots, the dominant in‡uence of the age e¤ect
is clearly visible in the …gure, suggesting that Indian retail investors are indeed “getting
better” overall. The spread in predicted behaviors across accounts is meaningful for both
idiosyncratic variance share and turnover, emphasizing that there is substantial variation in
the extent to which investors are “feeling better” –and that feeling worse, especially early
14

Consistent with this result, Ranguelova (2001) …nds that disposition bias is attenuated among investors
who hold small US stocks with greater momentum in their returns.

28

on, may indeed be helpful in the longer run. The internet appendix decomposes the spread
into parts separately attributed to variation in account performance and behavior-speci…c
feedback.
One might think that feedback e¤ects vary with account age, implying a nonlinear interaction between the age and feedback variables in our regressions.

We have explored

regressions of this sort but …nd few statistically signi…cant results and no consistent patterns
in the interaction coe¢ cients (see our internet appendix).
This section has provided evidence for reinforcement learning among Indian equity investors.

Our interpretation might be challenged if there is reverse causality, for example

if skilled traders generate trading pro…ts and continue to trade frequently in the future, or
if certain investors specialize in holding mean-reverting stocks for which realizing gains and
holding losses is a systematically pro…table strategy. The presence of account-level …xed effects in our speci…cations should signi…cantly reduce concerns on this score, as the investor’s
average skill at trading should be absorbed by these account-level e¤ects. In addition, we
will show during our analysis of the impacts of behavior on performance that both turnover
and the disposition bias are associated with lower account returns, not higher returns as
reverse causality would require. We now turn to the impacts of age and feedback on another important dimension of investment behavior, namely, investors’demands for particular
styles of stock.

5
5.1

Age and Feedback E¤ects on Style Demands
How net style demands change with age

We focus on measures of style demand and supply. Style demand is de…ned as the crosssectionally demeaned percentile of the portfolio of stocks bought by the investor multiplied
by the purchase turnover of that investor. Thus, demand for value can be high when an
investor buys a sizable amount of stocks with a modest value tilt or a modest amount of
stocks with a sizable value tilt. As with our measures of style tilt in Table 2, we scale style

29

demand by the di¤erence in style percentiles between style-sorted portfolios constructed in
the manner of Fama and French (1993).

Then, value demand of 1% is equivalent to the

impact of reducing purchases of the Fama-French growth portfolio by an amount equal to
1% of the investor’s equity holdings, and reallocating these purchases to the Fama-French
value portfolio.

Style supply is de…ned similarly, but for the investor’s sales.

We are

especially interested in net style demand, which is the di¤erence between style demand and
style supply. The internet appendix provides separate results for style demand and supply.
It is important to understand that net style demand does not translate directly into a
change in the style characteristics of an investor’s portfolio. Because the style characteristics
of any individual stock tend to regress towards the mean (with value stocks becoming more
expensive relative to book value and growth stocks becoming cheaper, for example), a styletilted portfolio requires some net style demand just to maintain its current style tilt. This
e¤ect is more important for large style tilts, so for example an investor who wishes to maintain
an extreme value tilt must continually sell those stocks in the portfolio that have lost their
extreme value characteristics, and replace them with the cheapest stocks available in the
market.

While for some purposes one might be interested in the dynamics of portfolio

characteristics (studied by Calvet et al. 2009a, for example), net style demand directly
measures investors’trading behavior and hence indirectly measures the price pressure that
investors create on style portfolios.
The three plots of Figure 4 show how net style demand varies with age for three di¤erent
style dimensions, namely size, value, and momentum.

The top panel shows that the net

small demand of an investor with eight years of experience exceeds that of a new investor
by about 0.45% per month. The middle panel indicates that net value demand increases
even more with account age, increasing by a total of about 1.8% over the …rst eight years.
Our …nding here is consistent with the results reported by Betermier et al. (2013) for older
investors in Sweden, although it is important to keep in mind that Betermier et al. work
with the age of underlying investors, not our measure of account age. As discussed further
in the next section, these trends in net style demand contribute to the e¤ect of experience
on account performance.
30

The bottom panel of Figure 4 demonstrates a modest U-shaped e¤ect of account age on
the accumulation of momentum stocks – one cannot reject the hypothesis that eight-yearold accounts have momentum tilts that are comparable to those of novice investors, with a
minimum rate of accumulation of winners at the …ve-year age mark. This may result from
novices entering the market by purchasing well known stocks that have recently appreciated,
then moving to a more neutral investing style, and then perhaps appreciating the evidence
for momentum pro…ts when they become extremely experienced.
The internet appendix shows that these results are driven by the e¤ects of account age on
both style demand and style supply. However, the increasing net demand for small stocks
is driven more by intensifying purchases of small stocks, whereas the increasing net demand
for value stocks is primarily due to a reduction in the tendency to sell value stocks.

5.2

How net style demands change with feedback

Figure 5 illustrates the impacts of an account’s overall market-relative performance on the
investor’s net style demands. The left column of the …gure shows the impact on net style
demands as a function of the time elapsed since the the outperformance occurred. The
right column of the …gure integrates these responses to show the cumulative impacts of
performance on the investor’s trading behavior.

The top panel of the …gure shows the

impact on net small demand, the second panel shows the impact on net value demand, and
the third panel shows the impact on net momentum demand.
Impacts of account outperformance are substantial, persistent, and highly statistically
signi…cant, with outperformance predicting higher net demands for large, growth, and momentum stocks. Even four years after a 100% outperformance by an account, net demand
for small stocks is about 25 basis points per month lower, net demand for value stocks is
about 1% per month lower, and net demand for momentum stocks is about 40 basis points
per month higher.

The cumulative e¤ect on net style demand at the four-year mark is

over 10% lower for small stocks, over 60% lower for value stocks, and over 25% higher for
momentum stocks.

31

The internet appendix shows that the positive e¤ect of account outperformance on net
style demand for large, growth, and momentum stocks comes mostly from reduced investor
sales of these styles.

One possible interpretation is that large, growth, and momentum

stocks have similar characteristics to the best performing stocks among investors’ current
and recent holdings. The disposition e¤ect implies that investors tend to sell their speci…c
winners, but when their overall account performance has been good this tendency may
be weaker, and they may also seek to replace these winners with other stocks that have
similar characteristics at the date of sale.

It is also likely that outperformance increases

overcon…dence, as suggested by Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), Gervais and
Odean (2001), Statman, Thorley, and Vorkink (2006), and Kruger (2013). However, while
overcon…dence might explain a preference for growth stocks it is not clear that it should
generate tilts towards large-cap or momentum stocks.
Figure 6 is constructed in the same way as Figure 5, but shows the impact of stylespeci…c feedback on investors’net style demands. This style-speci…c feedback is constructed
by taking the total returns on the sub-portfolio of stocks held by the investor that are ranked
above the cross-sectional average of all stocks in the same period on the given style (i.e.,
size, value, and momentum) minus the total returns on the sub-portfolio of stocks held by
the investor ranked below average in the given style. In cases in which the investor does
not own stocks ranked above or below the average for a given style, value-weighted market
returns are substituted for the type of stocks that the investor does not own (e.g. growth, if
an investor holds only value stocks).
The plots show that there are two impacts of style-speci…c feedback. The …rst is a more
precisely estimated short-term e¤ect, in which the investor decumulates the style that has
outperformed.

The internet appendix shows that this short-term e¤ect is due to a spike

in supply of the outperforming style, suggesting this is a manifestation of the disposition
e¤ect. However, for all three of the styles, the less precisely estimated but far longer-lived
e¤ect is a tendency to continue to accumulate styles in which the investor has experienced
positive returns. This “style chasing” behavior is consistent with the theoretical model of
Barberis and Shleifer (2003).

For all three cases, the cumulative net demand is positive,
32

indicating that style chasing ultimately more than o¤sets the initial decumulation. However,
this positive cumulative net e¤ect is statistically signi…cant only for value. The maximum
e¤ect at 4 years implies that over this horizon, a 100% outperformance of value stocks
induces investors to adjust their portfolios by an amount equivalent to a shift of about
3% of their portfolios from the Fama-French growth portfolio to the Fama-French value
portfolio. While this e¤ect is identi…ed from cross-sectional variation in experienced returns
to value, the internet appendix calculates the implied response of aggregate individualinvestor demand to an aggregate outperformance of value stocks relative to growth stocks
of 20%.

After taking account of the e¤ect on aggregate individual-investor performance,

which also in‡uences style demand, such a shock implies a four-year adjustment of 0.8% of
the aggregate individual-investor portfolio from growth to value stocks.
Figure 7 illustrates the relative importance of account age and investment experience in
predicting each of the three net style demands. For all accounts that opened in December
2003, the left hand side plots show the predicted changes to net style demands from January
2004 through the end of the sample, using all the predictor variables except account value
from our speci…cations. For the right hand side plots, these changes to net style demand are
cumulated over time, with the benchmark implicitly being the cumulative net style demands
of a perpetual novice investor.
these predictions.

All plots show the median, 10th, and 90th percentiles of

In both the size and value plots, the dominant in‡uence of the age

e¤ect on net demand is visible, which in a market such as India with positive size and value
premiums, suggests that Indian retail investors are “getting better”with overall experience
in the market.

However, the spread in predicted behaviors across accounts generated by

di¤erential feedback, or “feeling better”, is meaningful in all three cases.
As in the case of investment behaviors, we have considered interaction e¤ects between
age and feedback, but have not found statistically signi…cant or economically meaningful
interactions. To save space we report these speci…cations only in the internet appendix.

33

6

Implications for Performance

In the previous sections we have shown that both account age and investment experiences
strongly a¤ect behaviors and net style demands. How do these sources of learning feed into
overall performance?

In this section we analyze the impacts of age, behaviors, and style

tilts on investor performance.
Performance is inherently di¢ cult to measure, because account returns are subject both
to considerable idiosyncratic volatility and to common shocks resulting from our measured
style tilts and other systematic tilts.

Accordingly we look at performance using three

di¤erent approaches. First we measure performance directly at the account level; then we
analyze the returns on portfolios of stocks held by novice and experienced investors; and
…nally we predict the returns on individual Indian stocks using the characteristics of the
investor base as well as characteristics of the stocks and companies themselves.

6.1

Determinants of account performance

The top plot of Figure 8 shows the impact of age on account performance, estimated from a
piecewise linear model. While the reported age e¤ects have substantial economic magnitudes
(roughly 100 basis points a month higher for an eight year old investor relative to a novice),
they are imprecisely estimated and only barely signi…cant at the …ve percent level at seven
years.

The internet appendix reports more comprehensive results, showing that the age

e¤ect remains economically meaningful but statistically insigni…cant when it is restricted
to be linear.

When we add measures of investor behavior and style tilts as explanatory

variables, we …nd that changes in these behaviors with experience account for about onethird of the age e¤ect on returns.
It is important to note that these performance results do not account for transactions
costs.

In India one-way levies and fees (primarily in the form of a securities transaction

tax) of about 20 basis points plus brokerage fees of around 10-30 basis points result in an
estimate of direct trading costs of 30 to 50 basis points each way. The predicted di¤erence in
monthly (two-way) turnover between the oldest and newest quintile of accounts is just under
34

5%. Combining these facts leads to the estimate that increased turnover reduces after-cost
returns of the newest quintile of accounts relative to the oldest by about 3 to 5 basis points
per month, strengthening the return to experience illustrated in Figure 8.

6.2

Aggregated novice- and experienced-investor portfolios

We now analyze the returns to various portfolios formed on the basis of stockholder account
age.

There is no equivalent of the …xed e¤ects we have used in our study of individual

accounts, so we do not attempt to distinguish stocks that are preferred by older accounts
because of these accounts’constant characteristics from stocks that are increasingly preferred
by accounts as they grow older.
We …rst form representative stock portfolios for individual investors sorted by accountage quintile. The representative older individual account has a strati…ed-sample-weighted
average of the portfolio weights of accounts in the top quintile of account age, while the
representative novice account is formed in the same way from accounts in the bottom quintile of account age. The bottom plot of Figure 8 illustrates the cumulative excess returns
(relative to the Indian short rate) to the experienced-investor and novice-investor portfolios,
along with the overall excess return of the Indian equity market, over the period January 2004-January 2012.

By the end of this period the cumulative excess return on the

experienced-investor portfolio was 89%, while the cumulative excess return on the Indian
market index was 79%, and the cumulative excess return on the novice-investor portfolio
was only 10%.

In the internet appendix, we also plot an exponentially weighted moving

average of the di¤erence in returns on the experienced and novice portfolios. This shows
that the novice portfolio outperformed only in 2004, late 2007, and during the surge in stock
prices in the spring of 2009.
We next form a zero-cost portfolio that goes long the representative older account and
short the representative novice account. The …rst column of Table 5 reports results for this
portfolio.

The second and third columns decompose it into long-short portfolios formed

between the older and average (i.e. middle-quintile) representative investor and between the

35

average and novice representative investor.
In the …rst column of Table 5, we regress the portfolio weights in the older minus novice
zero-cost portfolio onto a vector of stock characteristics, to see what characteristics are
preferred or avoided by older investors relative to novice investors. The second and third
columns of the table do the same for the older minus average and average minus novice
portfolios respectively. In the bottom of the table, we show how the returns on the zerocost portfolios can be attributed into unconditional and timing e¤ects related to either stock
characteristic tilts or a residual that we call “selectivity” following Wermers (2000). This
decomposition is described in our internet appendix.
The table shows that relative to novice investors, the most experienced Indian investors
tilt their portfolios towards small stocks, value stocks, stocks with low turnover, stocks
without large bene…cial ownership, and stocks held by institutions. Experienced investors
also avoid large, attention-grabbing initial public o¤erings. This is unsurprising considering
that such IPOs are one of the main routes to initial investor participation in the Indian stock
market.
In terms of their contribution to performance, the stock characteristics of older investors
explain only 9 basis points out of a total outperformance relative to novice investors of 38
basis points per month.

The remainder is not explained by characteristic timing, which

makes an insigni…cant but negative contribution of 10 basis points. The performance di¤erential is attributable mainly to stock timing e¤ects (27 basis points) and non-characteristic
related stock selection (13 basis points).

Most of these di¤erences are preserved when

looking at the di¤erence between average aged and novice accounts, implying that the initial
mistakes made by inexperienced investors (“rookie mistakes”) contribute to the performance
di¤erential between experienced and novice accounts.
In the …rst column of Table 6 we evaluate the older minus novice zero-cost portfolio in a
di¤erent way, by regressing its return on six factors commonly used in the asset pricing literature: the market return, small minus big (SMB) return, value minus growth (HML) return,
momentum (UMD) return, and factor portfolios capturing short-term reversals and illiquidity as measured by turnover. We …nd that the portfolio has a negative loading on HML,
36

despite its slight tilt towards value characteristics, and has a signi…cantly positive six-factor
alpha. This result implies that experienced investors add value not by taking compensated
factor exposures, but by …nding outperforming stocks whose factor exposures are generally
poorly compensated. To the extent that this is the case, the results of Coval et al. (2005)
that following high-performing individual investors’trades generates high abnormal returns
should also apply to a strategy of emulating experienced investors’equity holdings.
The remaining columns of Table 6 repeat this exercise using zero-cost portfolios that go
long stocks held by investors with high levels of behaviors or style tilts, and short stocks
held by investors with unusually low levels of these behaviors or style tilts.

It appears

that underdiversi…ed investors hold stocks with compensated factor exposures, but do not
add value relative to the six-factor model, while high-turnover investors have similar factor
exposures to underdiversi…ed investors but have a signi…cantly negative alpha relative to the
model.

6.3

Stock returns and the investor base

Finally, we change our focus from the performance of individual accounts to the performance
of the stocks they hold, as predicted by the investor base of those stocks. This is analogous
to the recent literature on the performance of mutual funds’stock picks, as opposed to the
overall performance of the funds themselves (Wermers 2000, Cohen et al. 2010).
Table 7 uses Fama-Macbeth regressions to predict the returns of Indian stocks with at
least 10 individual investors in our sample of individual accounts. Column 1 shows that the
average age of the accounts that hold a stock predicts the return to that stock, consistent
with the account-level results in Figure 8. Column 2 adds information on the behavior of the
investor base— the average idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance of the stock’s investors,
the turnover of these portfolios, and the disposition bias of the stock’s investors— as well as
the style tilts of the investor base. The age e¤ect, though somewhat diminished, remains
signi…cant, and we …nd that an investor base with high turnover predicts lower returns.
Column 3 adds a standard set of stock characteristics to the regression. The book-market

37

ratio and momentum enter positively, and stock turnover enters negatively, consistent with
evidence from developed markets. The e¤ect of account age in the investor base is now much
weaker, but stocks with underdiversi…ed investors have lower average returns (signi…cant at
the 5% level), and stocks with disposition-biased investors have lower average returns. The
e¤ect of a high-turnover investor base remains negative, but declines in magnitude because
it is correlated with turnover in the stock itself. Finally, we see that while large stocks have
lower returns, stocks held by investors who favor large stocks— who may generally be larger,
more sophisticated investors— tend to have higher returns.
The institutional ownership of stocks is included in Table 7 to address one possible
concern about our …nding of a positive age e¤ect. Since institutional investors have gained
market share over our sample period, stocks favored by such investors may rise in price
just because they control more capital over time (Gompers and Metrick 2001). If older
individual accounts are more like institutions, and hold similar stocks, this transitional e¤ect
may bene…t long-established individual investors as well as institutions. However, in Table
7, the coe¢ cient on institutional ownership is only weakly positive.

7

Conclusion

In this paper we have studied the investment strategies and performance of individual investors in Indian equities over the period from 2004 to 2012. We have measured the feedback
investors receive from the returns on their equity holdings. Because these holdings are imperfectly diversi…ed, we can use cross-sectional variation in feedback to help identify investor
responses. Our results can be summarized in three main categories.
First, we …nd that both years of investment experience and feedback from overall investment performance are important drivers of investment behavior and style tilts. Turnover,
disposition bias, and the propensity to invest in large growth stocks all decline with experience. However, strong investment performance relative to the aggregate market reduces
diversi…cation, increases turnover, and pushes investors towards large growth stocks.

It

appears that Indian investors typically develop investment skill over time, decreasing be38

haviors and style tilts that are generally thought to reduce performance. Good investment
performance early on, however, encourages what we might characterize as “bad”investment
behavior through a reinforcement learning e¤ect.
Second, we …nd evidence for narrower feedback e¤ects that are driven not by overall
investment performance, but by the experienced returns to speci…c investment behaviors and
style tilts. Returns to recent trading activity encourage turnover, and this e¤ect is highly
persistent. Returns to style tilts within investors’ portfolios, which vary idiosyncratically
with the particular style stocks held, have short-term negative e¤ects on net style demand—
probably a manifestation of the disposition e¤ect, as investors sell winning positions— but
longer-term persistent positive e¤ects that are consistent with theories of “style chasing”.
In the case of value, the cumulative e¤ect is positive and statistically signi…cant over a 2-4
year time horizon.
Third, we …nd that the Indian market rewards investment skill among individual investors. Experienced accounts tend to outperform novice accounts, although this e¤ect is
imprecisely estimated. Portfolios formed by aggregating experienced-investor holdings outperform portfolios of novice-investor holdings, and the characteristics of the investor base
for Indian stocks, particularly investor experience and turnover, predict the returns on these
stocks. The turnover of the investor base remains statistically signi…cant even when controlling for the turnover and other characteristics of the stocks themselves.
These …ndings should be of interest beyond the particular Indian context in which we have
obtained them. India is a natural laboratory in which to study investor learning, given the
rapid development of its …nancial system and the availability of high-quality data on directly
held equity portfolios, which represent the great majority of Indian equity investments.
However the e¤ects of experience and feedback on investor behavior and the rewards to
investment skill documented in this paper are directionally consistent with fragmentary
evidence from other countries, and are likely to re‡ect general patterns of investor behavior
and stock price formation.

Matching such patterns is an important challenge for future

theoretical work in household …nance and asset pricing.

39

References
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2006,
Do consumers choose the right credit contracts?, unpublished paper, available online
at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=843826.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, 2008, Learning in
the credit card market, NBER Working Paper 13822.
Ameriks, John, and Stephen Zeldes, 2004, How do household portfolio shares vary with
age?, unpublished paper, Columbia University.
Badrinath, S., and Wilbur Lewellen, 1991, Evidence on tax-motivated securities trading
behavior, Journal of Finance 46, 369–382.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The
common stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55,
773–806.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overcon…dence,
and common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 261–292.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2002, Online investors: Do the slow die …rst? Review
of Financial Studies, 15, 455–487.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2008, All that glitters: The e¤ect of attention
and news on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Review of
Financial Studies, 21, 785–818.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, 2009, Just how much
do individual investors lose by trading?, Review of Financial Studies 22, 609–632.
Barberis, Nicholas and Andrei Shleifer, 2000, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 161–199.
40

Betermier, Sebastien, Laurent Calvet, and Paolo Sodini, 2013, Who are the value and
growth investors?, unpublished paper, McGill University, HEC Paris, and Stockholm
School of Economics.
Blume, Marshall, and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios and
some implications for utility functions, Journal of Finance 30, 585–603.
Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or out: Assessing the
welfare costs of household investment mistakes, Journal of Political Economy 115,
707–747.
Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009a, Fight or ‡ight? Portfolio
rebalancing by individual investors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 301–348.
Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009b, Measuring the …nancial
sophistication of households, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99,
393–398.
Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household …nance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.
Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish, 2014, Online appendix to
Getting Better or Feeling Better? How Equity Investors Respond to Investment Experience, available online at scholar.harvard.edu/campbell.
Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Allie Schwartz, 2009, Caught on tape: Institutional trading, stock returns, and earnings announcements, Journal of Financial
Economics 92, 66–91.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice
for Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press.
Chiang, Yao-Min, David Hirshleifer, Yiming Qian, and Ann E. Sherman, 2011, Do investors
learn from experience?

Evidence from frequent IPO investors, Review of Financial

Studies 24, 1560–1589.
41

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2009, Reinforcement learning and savings behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1639-1674.
Cohen, Randolph B., Paul A. Gompers, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2002, Who underreacts to
cash-‡ow news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions, Journal
of Financial Economics 66, 409–62.
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Bernhard Silli, 2010, Best ideas, unpublished
paper, Harvard Business School, London School of Economics, and Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc.
Cohn, Richard A., Wilbur G. Lewellen, Ronald C. Lease and Gary G. Schlarbaum, 1975,
Individual investor risk aversion and investment portfolio composition, Journal of Finance 30, 605–620.
Coval, Joshua, David Hirshleifer, and Tyler Shumway, 2005, Can individual investors beat
the market?, Unpublished paper, available online at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=364000.
Cremers, Martijn and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new
measure that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329–3365.
Cronqvist, Henrik, Stephan Siegel, and Frank Yu, 2013, Value versus growth investing:
Why do di¤erent investors have di¤erent styles?, unpublished paper, available online
at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2351123.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology
and security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839–1885.
De, Sankar, Naveen R. Gondhi, and Bhimasankaram Pochiraju, 2010, Does sign matter
more than size? An investigation into the source of investor overcon…dence, unpublished paper, Indian School of Business, Hyderabad, available online at
42

http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1657926.
Dhar, Ravi, and Ning Zhu, 2006, Up close and personal: An individual level analysis of the
disposition e¤ect, Management Science, 52, 726–740.
Falkenstein, Eric G., 1996, Preferences for stock characteristics as revealed by mutual fund
portfolio holdings, Journal of Finance 51, 111–135.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2002, Testing tradeo¤ and pecking order predictions about dividends and debt, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1–33.
Feng, Lei and Mark S. Seasholes, 2005, Do investor sophistication and trading experience
eliminate behavioral biases in …nancial markets?, Review of Finance 9, 305–351.
Froot, Kenneth, Paul O’Connell, and Mark Seasholes, 2001, The portfolio ‡ows of international investors, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 151–193
Froot, Kenneth and Melvyn Teo, 2008, Style investing and institutional investors, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 883-906.
Gervais, Simon and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overcon…dent, Review of Financial Studies 14, 1–27.
Goetzmann, William N. and Massimo Massa, 2002, Daily momentum and contrarian behavior of index fund investors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37,
375–389.
Gomes, Francisco and Alexander Michaelides, 2008, Asset pricing with limited risk sharing
and heterogeneous agents, Review of Financial Studies 21, 415–448.
Gompers, Paul A. and Andrew Metrick, 2001, Institutional ownership and equity prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 229–260.
43

Greenwood, Robin and Stefan Nagel, 2009, Inexperienced investors and bubbles, Journal
of Financial Economics 93, 239–258.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance
of various investor types: a study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial
Economics 55, 43–67.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa, 2011, IQ and stock market
participation, Journal of Finance 66, 2121–2164.
Grinblatt, Mark, Ikaheimo, Seppo, Keloharju, Matti and Knüpfer, Samuli, 2012, IQ and
mutual fund choice, unpublished paper, available online at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2021957
Grinblatt, M., and S. Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without benchmarks: An
examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47–68.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
e¢ cient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Guiso, Luigi, and Paolo Sodini, 2013, Household …nance: An emerging …eld, Chapter 21 in
George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz eds., Handbook of the Economics
of Finance, Volume 2B, North-Holland, 1397–1531.
Han, Bing and Alok Kumar, 2013, Speculative retail trading and asset prices, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48, 377-404.
Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein, 2004, Social interaction and stock market participation, Journal of Finance 59, 137–63.
Huang, Xing, 2013, Mark Twain’s cat: Industry investment experience, categorical thinking, and stock selection, unpublished paper, Michigan State University.

44

Ivkovic, Zoran, Clemens Sialm, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2008, Portfolio concentration
and the performance of individual investors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 43, 613–55.
Ivkovic, Zoran, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2005, Local does as local is: Information content of
the geography of individual investors’common stock investments, Journal of Finance
60, 267–306.
Ivkovic, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007, Information di¤usion e¤ects in individual
investors’common stock purchases: Covet thy neighbors’investment choices, Review
of Financial Studies 20:1327–57.
Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual investor trading and
stock returns, Journal of Finance, 63, 273–310.
Kaustia, Markku and Samuli Knüpfer, 2008, Do investors overweight personal experience?
Evidence from IPO subscriptions, Journal of Finance 63, 2679–2702.
Kelley, Eric K. and Paul C. Tetlock, 2013, How wise are crowds? Insights from retail orders
and stock returns, Journal of Finance 68, 1229–1265.
Kelly, Morgan, 1995, All their eggs in one basket: Portfolio diversi…cation of U.S. households, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27, 87–96.
Kempf, Elisabeth, Alberto Manconi, and Oliver Spalt, 2013, Learning by doing: The value
of experience and the origins of skill for mutual fund managers, unpublished paper,
Tilburg University and CentER.
Kovtunenko, Boris and Nathan Sosner, 2004, Avoidance of small stocks and institutional
performance, unpublished paper, Blue Fir Capital and AQR Capital Management,
available online at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1132770.
Kruger, Samuel, 2013, Disagreement and liquidity, unpublished paper, Harvard University.

45

Kumar, Alok, 2009, Hard-to-value stocks, behavioral biases, and informed trading, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44, 1375–1401.
Kumar, Alok and George Korniotis, 2011, Do older investors make better investment decisions? Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 244–265.
Linnainmaa, Juhani, 2011, Why do (some) households trade so much? Review of Financial
Studies 24, 1630–1666.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell, 2007, Baby boomer retirement security: The roles
of planning, …nancial literacy, and household wealth, Journal of Monetary Economics
54, 205–224.
Mahani, Reza and Dan Bernhardt, 2007, Financial speculators’underperformance: Learning, self-selection, and endogenous liquidity, Journal of Finance 62, 1313–1340.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, 2011, Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences in‡uence risktaking?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373–416.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, 2012, Learning from in‡ation experiences, unpublished paper, UC Berkeley and Stanford University.
Martins, Renato, Harminder Singh, and Sukanto Bhattacharya, 2012, What does volume
reveal: A study of the Indian single-stock futures market, Indian Journal of Economics
& Business, 11, 409-419.
Mukherjee, Saptarshi and Sankar De, 2012, Are investors ever rational?, unpublished paper,
Indian School of Business, available online at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2156047.
Nicolosi, Gina, Liang Peng, and Ning Zhu, 2009, Do individual investors learn from their
trading experience?, Journal of Financial Markets 12, 317–366.

46

Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance
53, 1775–1798.
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89,
1279–1298.
O’Hara, Maureen, 2003, Presidential address: Liquidity and price discovery, Journal of
Finance 58, 1335–1354.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Learning in …nancial markets, Annual Review of
Financial Economics 1, 361–381.
Ranguelova, Elena, 2001, Disposition e¤ect and …rm size: New evidence on individual
investor trading activity, unpublished paper, available online at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=293618.
Schlarbaum, Gary, Wilbur Lewellen, and Ronald Lease, 1978, Realized returns on common
stock investments: The experience of individual investors, Journal of Business 51,
299–325.
Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway, and Noah Sto¤man, 2010, Learning by trading, Review of
Financial Studies 23, 705–739.
Shefrin, Hersh and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and ride
losers too long: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 40, 777–790.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000, Ine¢ cient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford
University Press.
Siegel, Jeremy J., 2007, Stocks for the Long Run, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill.
Stambaugh, Robert, 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375–
421.

47

Statman, Meir, Steven Thorley, and Keith Vorkink, 2006, Investor overcon…dence and
trading volume, Review of Financial Studies 19, 1531–1565.
Strahilevitz, Michal Ann, Terrance Odean, and Brad M. Barber, 2011, Once burned, twice
shy: How naïve learning, counterfactuals, and regret a¤ect the repurchase of stocks
previously sold, Journal of Marketing Research 48, S102-S120.
Vashishtha, Ashutosh, and Satish Kumar, Development of …nancial derivatives market in
India - a case study, 2010, International Research Journal of Finance and Economics,
37, 15-29.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655–
1695.

48

49

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

12,350
13,613
15,408
17,262
17,417
17,592
19,681
22,794
21,431

Number of Unique
Securities
4,533
4,844
5,150
5,516
5,988
6,398
6,897
7,493
7,735

Number of Unique
(Indian) Equities
$386.3
$553.1
$818.9
$1,819.1
$647.2
$1,306.5
$1,631.8
$1,007.2
$1,263.3

51.02%
57.71%
63.12%
66.06%
64.60%
64.01%
66.82%
67.73%
68.55%

Market Capitalization
% of Indian Equity
of BSE (Billions of Market Capitalization
US$)
in NSDL Accounts

17.50%
15.78%
14.94%
12.81%
11.89%
11.22%
10.78%
10.12%
9.91%

% of NSDL Equity
Value in Individual
Accounts

3.51%
3.73%
4.72%
4.55%
4.46%
4.56%
4.35%
4.00%
3.97%

% of NSDL Equity
Value in Mutual Funds

The percentages below are computed for each monthly cross-section, and the average of these monthly percentages within each year appear in the table. The number of unique securities
and equities are determined by the average number of unique ISIN appearing in the NSDL database in each month in the given year. Individual accounts exclude beneficial owners. BSE
market capitalization (from the World Federation of Exchanges), is from the end of each year and represents the market capitalization of all equities listed on the BSE, representing the
vast majority of Indian equities.

Table 1: Summary Statistics for NSDL Database

50

Account Value, Jan 2012 Rs
Account Value, Jan 2012 US$
Number of Equity Positions
Urban Accounts
Semi-Urban Accounts
Rural Accounts
Monthly Account Stock Return Minus Market
Idiosyncratic Share of Portfolio Variance
Monthly Turnover
Disposition Effect
Stock Portfolio Beta
Style of Holdings Minus Market:
Small
Value
Momentum
8.54%
10.97%
-8.49%

5.82%
-14.58%
-25.59%

12.84%
73.61%
10.64%

Time Variation in Cross-Sectional Means
Mean
Min
Max
Rs 12,63,311
Rs 2,50,767
Rs 33,73,772
$24,771
$4,917
$66,152
6.88
4.75
8.02
55.84%
54.60%
57.54%
12.31%
11.86%
12.79%
31.85%
30.05%
33.05%
-0.03%
-4.80%
10.21%
0.45
0.25
0.55
5.72%
2.09%
12.28%
1.23
-1.26
2.40
1.03
0.95
1.09
-5.92%
-22.07%
-32.87%

2.93%
7.58%
-8.70%

33.77%
61.97%
6.52%

Cross-Sectional Variation in Time-Series Means
10th
50th
90th
Rs 7,288
Rs 67,684
Rs 5,51,585
$143
$1,327
$10,815
1.00
3.42
14.27
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
-1.75%
-0.12%
1.52%
0.24
0.46
0.68
0.00%
2.57%
16.30%
0.25
1.35
2.38
0.95
1.02
1.13

Statistics are computed on the basis of individuals' account months used in the regression models. Sampling weights are used to reflect the state-stratified manner in which the random sample was drawn.
Time-series means of the variables are computed only for accounts where the given data are observed in at least 12 months. Styles of holdings are measured as the difference in account and market style
percentiles divided by the difference in the corresponding Fama-French style portfolios.

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Individual NSDL Accounts

Table 3: Individual Investors Behavior Regressions
Regressions follow Equation (3) using account-months for which the variables used in the regression are defined (disposition
effect is defined only where a trade occurs and gains and losses both exist). Investor behaviors (Y ) are scaled by the timeseries average of their cross-sectional means. Account value is winsorized below at Rs. 10,000 (approximately $200 US). For
turnover and disposition effect, the lagged 12-month average is used as the lagged behavior control. Panel regressions are run
using weights that account for sampling probability and further apply equal weight to each cross-section (month). Standard
errors in ( ) are computed from bootstraps of monthly data. Coefficients that are significant at a five percent level are in bold
type.

Idiosyncratic Share of
Portfolio Variance
3,444,690

Turnover
Disposition Effect
Dependent Variable:
3,444,690
439,974
Number of Observations:
Account Age, Piecewise Linear
Form
------------------------------------See Figure 1-----------------------------------Account Performance Feedback,
by Time Since Event
------------------------------------See Figure 2-----------------------------------Behavior-Specific Feedback, by
Time Since Event
------------------------------------See Figure 2-----------------------------------Log Account Value
Lagged Investor Behavior

-0.015
(0.001)
0.776
(0.008)

0.126
(0.013)
0.369
(0.018)

-0.037
(0.015)
-0.149
(0.011)

Table 4: Individual Investors Net Style Demand Regressions
Regressions follow Equation (3) using account-months for which the variables used in the regression are defined. Investor net
style demands (Y ) are scaled by the spread in percentiles between the Fama French long and short portfolios based on the
corresponding styles. Account value is winsorized below at Rs. 10,000. Panel regressions are run using weights that account
for sampling probability and further apply equal weight to each cross-section (month). Standard errors in ( ) are computed
from bootstraps of monthly data. Coefficients that are significant at a five percent level are in bold type.

Net Small Demand
3,599,452

Net Value Demand
3,599,452

Net Momentum
Demand
3,599,452

0.077%
(0.018%)
-0.078%
(0.005%)

-0.117%
(0.031%)
-0.118%
(0.006%)

0.019%
(0.026%)
-0.052%
(0.003%)

Dependent Variable:
Number of Observations:
Account Age, Piecewise Linear
Form
------------------------------------See Figure 4-----------------------------------Account Performance Feedback,
by Time Since Event
------------------------------------See Figure 5-----------------------------------Style-Specific Feedback, by
Time Since Event
------------------------------------See Figure 6-----------------------------------Log Account Value
Lagged Portfolio Style
Percentile

51

Table 5: Decomposition of the Difference in Returns on Old and New Accounts
Over our sample period, we form zero cost portfolios as differences in average portfolio weights between the cohorts (determined by
quintile rankings on age) of investors mentioned in the column headers (e.g., oldest minus average (middle quintile)). These weights pertain
to 2,677 stocks with market capitalization of at least Rs. 500 million (approximately $10 million US). In the top panel of the table, we relate these
portfolio weights to stock characteristics listed below using Fama MacBeth regressions, where all characteristics used except market beta, stock
age, and the IPO control are measured in rank-normalized form, and coefficients are multiplied by 1000. The bottom panel decomposes total
returns into timing and selection effects -- Section 6.2 of the paper provides details. Standard errors in ( ) are computed by bootstrap, and
statistically significant coefficients at the five and ten percent level are indicated by bold and italicized type respectively.

Number of Observations (Stock-Months): 103,509
Zero-Cost Portfolios:
Oldest minus Newest
Portfolio Tilts
[1]
Market Beta
-0.547
(0.568)
0.318
1 / Market Capitalization
(0.233)
0.171
Book-Market
(0.143)
-0.003
Momentum (Lagged) Returns
(0.340)
Stock Turnover
-0.908
(0.262)
-0.604
Beneficial Ownership
(0.367)
Institutional Ownership
0.919
(0.356)
0.010
Log (1 + Stock Age)
(0.075)
Large IPOs (Market Cap if
-13.358
Age<One Year)
(3.723)
Return Decomposition
Stock Characteristic Selection
8.52
(5.54)
Additional Stock Selection
12.90
(14.55)
-9.63
Stock Characteristic Timing
(11.13)
Additional Stock Timing
26.60
(21.24)
Total Difference in Returns
38.40
(28.34)

52

Oldest minus Average
[2]
-0.393
(0.224)
0.448
(0.185)
0.100
(0.095)
0.113
(0.255)
-0.237
(0.306)
-0.457
(0.192)
0.447
(0.162)
0.216
(0.118)
-0.733
(0.358)

Average minus Newest
[3]
-0.154
(0.428)
-0.130
(0.272)
0.071
(0.179)
-0.116
(0.175)
-0.671
(0.396)
-0.147
(0.246)
0.472
(0.438)
-0.207
(0.104)
-12.625
(3.625)

3.37
(2.34)
4.72
(5.97)
1.16
(5.73)
-0.41
(7.35)
8.83
(10.87)

5.15
(3.54)
8.19
(11.15)
-10.79
(7.17)
27.02
(21.53)
29.56
(24.42)

53

Table 6: Performance Evaluation of Portfolios Based on Account Age and Investor Behavior

Short Term
Reversals
Illiq (Based
on Turnover)

UMD

HML

SMB

Factor Loadings
Market Beta

Monthly Alpha

Raw Return

Investor
Characteristic Sort

-0.10
(0.06)
0.07
(0.04)
-0.20
(0.07)
0.03
(0.05)
-0.10
(0.07)
-0.14
(0.13)

1.11%
(0.33%)

Account Age
[1]
0.38%
(0.23%)

0.08
(0.04)
0.20
(0.04)
0.19
(0.07)
-0.23
(0.04)
0.08
(0.05)
-0.13
(0.13)

-0.04%
(0.33%)

Idiosyncratic Share of
Portfolio Variance
[2]
0.30%
(0.19%)

0.07
(0.04)
0.11
(0.03)
0.19
(0.06)
-0.21
(0.04)
0.04
(0.06)
-0.06
(0.08)

-0.79%
(0.24%)

Turnover
[3]
-0.49%
(0.30%)

0.00
(0.01)
0.07
(0.02)
0.08
(0.03)
-0.08
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.06
(0.04)

-0.12%
(0.12%)

Disposition
Effect
[4]
-0.05%
(0.11%)

0.12
(0.04)
0.51
(0.06)
0.29
(0.08)
-0.24
(0.05)
0.01
(0.06)
0.00
(0.12)

-0.80%
(0.34%)

Small Tilt
[5]
0.03%
(0.54%)

0.02
(0.04)
0.29
(0.05)
0.08
(0.08)
-0.23
(0.05)
0.01
(0.06)
-0.11
(0.14)

0.82%
(0.43%)

Value Tilt
[6]
0.83%
(0.38%)

0.05
(0.05)
-0.10
(0.08)
-0.02
(0.09)
0.53
(0.08)
-0.01
(0.10)
-0.03
(0.15)

-0.47%
(0.46%)

Momentum Tilt
[7]
-0.03%
(0.44%)

The zero-cost portfolios evaluated below are differences in representative portfolios held by [1] the oldest and newest accounts (the first column of Table 5), [2]-[4] the accounts most and least
likely to engage in the given behaviors, and [5]-[7] the accounts with the strongest tilts towards and away from the given style of stocks. Account behaviors and style tilts are determined by the
cumulative average of cross-sectionally de-meaned behaviors or tilts of investors. Portfolio returns are adjusted using a six factor model, where the factor returns (except Illiq) are constructed in
an analogous way to the factor returns from Ken French's website. The yield on three-month Indian Treasury bills is used as the risk free rate. The illiquidity factor (Illiq) is constructed from a
independent double sort on size and turnover over the past 12 months, Illiq=0.5 x (Small, Low Turnover-Small, High Turnover)+0.5 x (Large, Low Turnover-Large, High Turnover). All standard
errors are computed using a Newey West adjustment for serial correlation (with three lags).

Table 7: Stock Return Regressions Using Stock and Stockholders' Characteristics
For each of 3,614 stocks with at least 10 individual investors from our sample, we regress monthly stock returns over our
sample period on characteristics of the average investor in that stock at that point in time, and characteristics of the stock. For
each investor, characteristics at a point in time are given by the cumulative average of the investors' cross-sectionally demeaned behavior or style tilt. Stock-level investor characteristics, and all stock characteristics except for market beta and stock
age are converted to normalized rank form. The regressions below are carried out by the Fama MacBeth procedure, with a
Newey West serial correlation adjustment. All coefficients are multiplied by 100, and statistical significance at the five and ten
percent level are indicated by bold and italicized type respectively.

Number of Observations (Stock-Months): 194,487
Account Age

[1]
1.61
(0.58)

Idiosyncratic Share of
Portfolio Variance
Portfolio Turnover
Investor
Disposition Effect
Characteristics
Small Tilt
Value Tilt
Momentum Tilt
Market Beta
1 / Market Capitalization
Book-Market
Momentum (Lagged)
Stock
Returns
Characteristics Stock Turnover
Beneficial Ownership
Institutional Ownership
Log (1 + Stock Age)

54

[2]
0.61
(0.29)
-0.22
(0.32)
-1.88
(0.54)
-0.16
(0.29)
0.46
(1.29)
1.83
(0.46)
0.81
(0.47)

[3]
0.14
(0.23)
0.16
(0.34)
-0.64
(0.32)
-0.12
(0.25)
-1.32
(0.59)
-0.70
(0.51)
0.19
(0.32)
0.35
(1.30)
3.40
(1.63)
3.91
(0.67)
3.16
(0.58)
-1.73
(0.41)
0.75
(0.33)
0.28
(0.37)
0.09
(0.11)

Figure 1: Account Age Effects on Investor Behaviors
Idiosyncratic Share of Portfolio Variance
0.20

0.00
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

-0.20

Turnover
0.00
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

-0.20
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
-1.20

Disposition Effect
0.00
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

-0.20

-0.40

-0.60

-0.80
The plots above are produced from investor behavior regressions in Table 3. Values are adjusted to represent the effect of
age on the target level of behavior (scaled relative to the mean level of the given behavior). Specifically, point estimates
given by the regression are divided by one minus the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable. Dotted lines represent
95% confidence intervals.

55

Figure 2: Feedback Effects on Investing Behavior
Account Performance Feedback (Left) and Behavior-Specific Feedback (Right)
Idiosyncratic Share of Portfolio Variance
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
-0.10
After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

Turnover
1.40

1.40

1.20

1.20

1.00

1.00

0.80

0.80

0.60

0.60

0.40

0.40

0.20

0.20
0.00

0.00
-0.20

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-0.20

After 1
Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

After 1
Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

Disposition Effect
1.00

1.00

0.80

0.80

0.60

0.60

0.40

0.40

0.20

0.20

0.00

0.00

-0.20

-0.20
-0.40

-0.40
After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

Plots are impulse responses of investor behavior to a unit (100%) shock to either performance feedback or behaviorspecific feedback. Responses are generated from investor behavior regressions in Table 3, making use of coefficients on
both feedback and lagged behavior. Only one plot appears for idiosyncratic share of portfolio variance, as account
outperformance is also used as a measure of idiosyncratic-variance share specific feedback. Dotted lines represent 95%
confidence intervals.

56

Figure 3: Evolution in Investor Behaviors from Age and Feedback Effects
10th, Median, and 90th Percentile (light to dark) of Accounts Opened December 2003
Idiosyncratic Share of Portfolio Variance
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
Apr-04
-0.02

Apr-05

Apr-06

Apr-07

Apr-08

Apr-09

Apr-10

Apr-11

Apr-09

Apr-10

Apr-11

Apr-09

Apr-10

Apr-11

-0.04
-0.06

Turnover
0.20
0.00
Apr-04

Apr-05

Apr-06

Apr-07

Apr-08

-0.20
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
-1.20

Disposition Effect
0.00
Apr-04

Apr-05

Apr-06

Apr-07

Apr-08

-0.10
-0.20
-0.30
-0.40
-0.50
-0.60
The plots fit age effects, feedback effects, and lagged behavior coefficients from investor behavior regressions in Table 3 with the actual age and
feedback received by individual investor accounts opened in December 2003. The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the simulated distribution
appear above.

57

Figure 4: Account Age Effects on Net Style Demand
Small
0.70%
0.60%
0.50%
0.40%
0.30%
0.20%
0.10%
0.00%
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

-0.10%

Value
2.50%
2.00%
1.50%
1.00%
0.50%
0.00%
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

Momentum
0.10%
0.00%
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

-0.10%
-0.20%
-0.30%
-0.40%
-0.50%
The plots above are produced from investor net style demand regressions in Table 4. Dotted lines represent 95%
confidence intervals.

58

Figure 5: Account Performance Feedback Effect on Net Style Demand
Response (Left) and Cumulative Response (Right)
Small
0%

0.00%
-0.20%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-5%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-0.40%
-10%
-0.60%
-15%
-0.80%
-1.00%

-20%

-1.20%

-25%

Value
0.00%
-0.50%

0%
After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-10%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-20%
-30%

-1.00%

-40%
-50%

-1.50%

-60%
-70%

-2.00%

-80%
-90%

-2.50%

Momentum
2.50%

40%
35%

2.00%

30%
25%

1.50%

20%
1.00%

15%
10%

0.50%

5%
0.00%

0%
After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

Plots are produced from investor net style demand regressions in Table 4. Dotted lines represent 95% confidence
intervals.

59

Figure 6: Style Feedback Effect on Net Style Demand
Response (Left) and Cumulative Response (Right)
Small
0.40%

4%

0.30%

3%

0.20%

2%

0.10%

1%

0.00%
-0.10%

0%
After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-1%

-0.20%

-2%

-0.30%

-3%

-0.40%

-4%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

Value
0.80%

8%

0.60%

6%

0.40%

4%

0.20%

2%
0%

0.00%
-0.20%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-2%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-4%

-0.40%

Momentum
0.90%

6%

0.75%

5%

0.60%

4%

0.45%

3%

0.30%

2%

0.15%

1%

0.00%
-0.15%

0%
After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-1%

-0.30%

After 1 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years
Year

-2%

Plots are produced from investor net style demand regressions in Table 4. Dotted lines represent 95% confidence
intervals.

60

Figure 7: Evolution in Net Style Demand from Age and Feedback Effects
Net Demand (Left) and Cumulative Net Demand (Right)
10th, Median, and 90th Percentile of Accounts Opened Dec. 2003

Feb-09

Feb-10

Feb-11

Feb-09

Feb-10

Feb-11

Feb-11

Feb-08
Feb-08

Feb-10

Feb-07
Feb-07
Feb-07

Feb-09

Feb-06
Feb-06
Feb-06

-10.00%

Feb-08

Feb-05
Feb-05
Feb-05

-0.20%

Feb-04

0.00%
Feb-11

0.00%
Feb-10

10.00%

Feb-09

0.20%

Feb-08

20.00%

Feb-07

0.40%

Feb-06

30.00%

Feb-05

0.60%

Feb-04

40.00%

Feb-04

Small
0.80%

-20.00%

-0.40%

Value
180.00%

3.00%
2.50%

140.00%

2.00%
100.00%

1.50%

60.00%

1.00%
0.50%

20.00%
Feb-11

Feb-10

Feb-09

Feb-08

Feb-07

Feb-06

Feb-05

-0.50%

Feb-04

0.00%
-20.00%
-60.00%

-1.00%

Feb-11

Feb-10

Feb-09

-0.50%

Feb-08

0.00%
Feb-07

0.00%
Feb-06

10.00%

Feb-05

0.50%

Feb-04

20.00%

-10.00%

-1.00%

-20.00%

-1.50%

-30.00%

-2.00%

-40.00%

-2.50%

-50.00%

Feb-04

Momentum
1.00%

The plots fit age and feedback effects from investor net style demand regressions in Table 4 with the actual age and feedback received by
individual investor accounts opened in December 2003. The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the simulated distribution appear above.

61

Figure 8: Top: Account Age Effects on Account Returns (bp/mo)
Bottom: Cumulative Excess Equity Returns to Old and New Accounts
250

200

150

100

50

0
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

7 Years

8 Years

Jan-11

Jan-12

-50

-100

Market

Newest

Oldest

4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-06

Jan-07

Jan-08

Jan-09

Jan-10

Top: The plotted series represents piecewise linear age effects from the regression Rit-Rt=si+β(Ait-At)+εit, where the break-points in piecewise
linear age occur at years one, two, three, four, five, and seven. Dotted lines represent the 95% confidence interval.
Bottom: Oldest and newest reflect representative portfolios of individual investors in the oldest and newest quintile of accounts present in the
month. Excess returns are produced by subtracting the yield on three-month Indian Treasury bills from the portfolios.

62

