                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ERRORS OF MEASUREMENT
                       IN OUTPUT DEFLATORS




                       Frank R. Lichtenberg

                          Zvi Griliches




                      Working Paper No. 2000




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             August 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     Working Paper #2000
                                                     August 1986


                      Errors of Measurement in Output Deflators


                                      ABSTRACT
             In this paper we investigate the incidence of measurement errors in

      two independent estimates of long-tenii price change, within the framework

      of "multiple indicators" models of price measurement. We develop esti-

      mates of the measurement-error variances associated with both the Produc-

      er Price Index (PPJ) and the Census Unit Value Relative (1JVR).      Our

      estimates provide support for the generally accepted view that the PPI is

      a far more reliable indicator of long—term price change: the estimated

      signal—to—noise ratios for the PPI and UVR are 2.72 and 0.53, respective-

      ly- Our estimates should be useful for both
                                                       constructing an optimal
      indicator of price change, and for identifying econometric models includ-

      ing error-ridden price— or output-growth terms as regressors. Our

      analysis suggests that "scores" assigned to product deflators provide

     useful information about their reliability. By extending our model to

     explicitly incorporate product-quality change, we are able to assess the

     importance of the problem posed by quality change for price and produc-
     tivity measurement. Less than half of quality change, which we estimate
     to occur at an average annual rate of 1.3 percent, appears to be adjusted
     for in the PPI. Consequently, estimates of productivity growth based on
     the   PPI underestimate    "quality-adjusted" productivity growth by an
     estimated   43 percent.


Frank R.   Lichtenberg                              Zvi Griliches
Graduate   School of Business                       Department of Economics
Columbia   University                               Harvard University
726 Uris   Hall                                     125 Littauer Center
New York, NY 10027                                  CambrIdge, MA 02138
                   Errors of Measurement in Output Deflators

                    Frank R. Lichtenberg and Zvi Griliches



     Three of the most important indicators of a sector or country's

economic performance are its rates of inflation, real output growth, and

productivity growth. The accurate measurement of all three of thesft

growth rates entails the development of reliable commodity price indices.

Since    much of the accounting data reported in surveys of producers is in
current dollars only, such price indices are required to partition the
growth in nominal output into its "desirable" and "undesirable' compo-
nents -— real    output growth and inflation, respectively. Neasured rates
of growth of intermediate materials and producers (investment) goods
prices   will determine not only the aggregate rate of total factor produc—

tivity    (TIP) growth,   but also the sectoral         -.                   2
                                                  composition of this growth.

     Unfortunately, there are major obstacles to the accurate measurement

of industrial price change. We believe that it is useful to classify

errors of measuring price change into two main types: "short-run" and




     11n part due to the high inflation rates of the 1970's, the
Financial Accounting Standards Board began requiring firms to report
income statements and balance sheets both in current dollars and adjusted
for the effects of inflation. Unfortunately, firms generally adjust or
deflate financial statements using aggregate price indices such as the
Consuwer Price Index rather than industry-, finn-, or product-specific
indices, so there is little information about price behavior to be
gleaned from these 'inflation—adj usted" statements.

     2One of the central issues in the classic debate between Denison on
the one hand and Jorgensen and Griliches on the other concerned the
effect of oiismeasurement of capital goods prices on aggregate TFP growth.
For a discussion of the "transmission" of errors of price measurement via
interindustry transactions and their effects on sectoral productivity
growth estimates, see Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984).
                                                                                 2



"long—run." Many of the problems of measuring short-rim (e.g., month-
to—month) price change arise because rather than a unique, well—defined
price, there typically exists a multiplicity of concepts of "the" price
of    a good, e.g., shipment versus order price, list price versus actual

transaction price, gross price versus price net of transportation costs,

and so forth. Moreover, the relationship between different concepts of

price (e.g., shipment versus order) are likely to change over the course

of the business cycle, as order backlogs and delivery lags fluctuate.

Stigler and Kindahl (1910) have shown that, despite the efforts of the

Bureau of Labor Statistics' Division of Industrial Prices to secure

reports on a uniform concept of price --        i.e.,   the actual shipment price,

net of any discounts —-     the   official price   indices are contaminated by
reporters'    failure to distinguish among these concepts.3

       Errors in the measurement of price change in the short run are

perhaps   of greatest concern to business-cycle analysts and to economists
interested in testing microeconomic theories of producer price
determination.4 Because we are primarily interested in the measurement
and   analysis of long-run economic growth,      this study is concerned with

errors of measuring price change in       the long run. In    our view, the major

source of such errors is tin—     or   imperfectly—measured changes in product

quality. Due to quality change, i.e., changes in the characteristics of




       3Another   problem with the Producer Price Index (PPI), noted by
              is that, because the PPI is not based on a scientifically
Ruggles (1917),
drawn sample of reporting firms, it is difficult or impossible to assess
the magnitude of ordinary sampling error.


     4See Garber (1985) for a discussion of the problem of discriminating
empirically between alternative theories of short-run price determination
in the presence of noisy price data.
                                                                              3



goods whose prices we are trying to observe over time, intertemporal
comparisons of directly observed prices of goods are of limited value.
Quality change is likely to pose the most serious measurement problems in
highly R&D-intensive industries . While the "hedonic' price index
approach6 in principle provides a partial solution to the problem of
treating    quality change in price index construction, for various reasons

this technique has not been widely adopted by the statistical agencies

responsible for monitoring price change.

     The objective of this paper is to investigate empirically the nature

and extent of errors of measurement of relatively long-run changes in

prices of manufactured goods. We analyze these errors within the frame-

work of a "multiple indicators" (factor analysis) model of price change,

estimated    using (4-digit SIC) industry-level data on price change (and in
one version, an indicator of product-quality change) between 1972 and
1977. In the next section, we describe the two (presumably independent)
indicators of price change available to us, and formulate and present
estimates    of the simplest   possible measurement model, in which both
indicators    are represented as unbiased indicators of true but unobserved

price change. This model yields estimates of the measurement—error

variance    (hence the "signal-to—noise" ratio) corresponding to each
indicator. These estimates are potentially useful for both (1) con-
structing a price index which has lower mean—squared—error than either



     5flost R&D expenditure is product-, rather than process-, oriented,
i.e., devoted to modifying existing products or developing new products.

             approach   is discussed in detail in several papers contained in
Griliches (1911).
                                                                                    4



indicator alone, and (2) identifying econometric models which include

error-ridden   price- (or output—) growth variables on the right-hand side.
We also briefly investigate the issue of        heteroskedasticity   with respect
to   errors of measurement.

       Because, as we discuss below, the       sample mean difference between
the   two indicators is significantly different from zero, the data are

not consistent with the assumption maintained in Section II that both

indicators are unbiased estimates of the true price change. In Section

III we attempt to remedy this defect by specifying a more general mea-

surement model, in which both indicators are        postulated   to be linear

combinations of pure price change and of quality change. This model

enables us, under certain assumptions, to estimate both the average rate

of product-quality change in our sample, and the extent of bias attend-

ing conventional price and productivity estimates resulting from their

treatment of quality change. A sunmiary and conclusions are presented

in   Section IV.


                                          II
       In this section we formulate and present estimates of a simple
measurement model of industrial price change. The data base for          this

investigation      was assembled and   provided by the Interagency Task Force

for   the Measurement of Real Output, a corittee of representatives from
five Federal agencies      established to oversee the selection of price

deflators used to construct the 1977 indexes of production.7 The Task




     7See the introduction of U.S. Bureau of the Census (1983) for a
description of the task force's activities and procedures. We are grate—
                                                                             S




Force attempted to obtain, for as many of the approximately 10,000

(7—digit) census products as possible, two independent measures of the

change in the product's price between 1972 and 1977: the Producer Price

Index (PH), generated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the

Unit Value Relative (UVR), generated by the Bureau of the Census.     Only
about 2500 PPI's were available for use in the deflation of the 10,000

census products. Specifications for a number of the BLS products are far

more refined than the census individual product categories, so that it is

often necessary to average the PPI movements on the basis of the relative

importance of each specified product to the overall 7-digit census

product value to be deflated. Other producer prices apply to products

which are broader than any individual 7—digit product and, consequently,

have to be used for more than one of them. The census unit value is

defined simply as the ratio of the value of shipments of a product to the

number of units (quantity) of the product shipped; the Ufl is the ratio

of 1977 to 1972 unit value.

     As noted by the task force, the PPI and the IJVR each has both

advantages and disadvantages with respect to the measurement of pure

price change. Salient differences between the two indicators are suona—

rized in Table 1. PPI's are price relatives relating to highly specified

products of (it is hoped) unchanging quality. Census unit values are

often an average of a mix of products of varying degrees of homogeneity.

Consequently a change in unit values between two census years could be

measuring not merely change in price, but also change in composition of




jul to Edward Robinson, Patrick Duck, and the Task Force for providing us
with the data.
                                                                          6


                                Table    1

                 Salient Differences Between PPI and UVR



Attribute               PPI                          TJVR


specificity        highly specified          mix of products of varying
of product         products                  degrees of homogeneity

type of price      list or book prices       reflects actual transac—
                   used if actual. trans—    tion prices at f.o.b.
                   actions prices 'in—       plant level
                   available

source of data     some data collected       all data collected
                   by BLS indirectly         directly frøm producer
                   from other government
                   agencies and from
                   private trade asso-
                   ciations
                                                                             1




product mix and change in quality. On the other hand, UVRs, unlike Pfls,

reflect actual transaction prices and are based on data collected direct-

ly from producers. In view of these different limitations, perhaps the

comparative advantage of the UVR is in measuring short—run price

changes1 and that of the PPI in measuring long-run changes.

       The task force ptovided us with a listing of PPI's and UVR's for all

census products for which both measures were available and which did not

pose any problem of disclosure of confidential company data.8 In order

to be able to match these data to an indicator of quality change (requir-

ed to estimate the model presented in Section III), we aggregated the

task force's data to the 4-digit industry level, by computing weighted

averages of (7-digit) product PPIs and UVRs, using value of product ship-

ments as weights. Suimnary statistics for the resulting sample of 238

industries for which data were available are presented in Table 2. The

average increase in prices between 1972 and 1977 (as measured by the dif-

ference in their logarithms) was somewhat higher according to the UVR

than it was according to the WI, 46.2 percent as opposed to 43.4 per-

cent. Moreover, the mean difference between the PPI and the UVR, -2.8

percent, is significantly different from zero at almost the five percent

level. The UVR exhibited substantially more variation across industries




       8Products for which both indicators are available are probably not
a random sample of all manufactured products, in terms of the extent of
quality change and measurement error. It is possible that the problem
of measurement error is less serious for products in our sample than for
those not in our sample. If that is the case, our estimates of error
variances and of the average rate of quality   change should be interpret-
ed   as lower bounds.
                                                                         8




                                   Table 2
    Swrmiary   Statistics: Logarithmic Changes in PH and UVR, 1972-71,
               Sample of 238 4-Digit Manufacturing Industries

                                         PPI                 UVR

Mean                                    .434                .462
Standard Deviation                      .178                .258
Minimum                                —.112               -.118
Maximum                                1.30                1.46
                                                                                                                                                 9




                                C
                                    C
                                                    C
                                                                                              C
                                        C

                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                       a
                                            C
                                                                     C
                                                                                                                   C

                                        C                                                                                                   p.

            C

                                CC
                                                C

                                                         CCC

                                                             U
                                                                             :                                                         •: i
                                                                                                                                            I
                    C                                   C CCU
                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                          CC
                                                                                                                   ::
                                                    C

I-.'                                                                                      'I                                                I
                                            C
rs.j                                                     C                                                 C            C
                                                         C                       C
                                                                                                           C
                                                                                                                    C
                        C
                                                                                 •tC                  C
                                                             CC                      CC
                                                                             C
                                                                                                          CCC                          N
                                                                     CC                       C
                                                                                                                    C                  a
       I
                                                                         C                        C
                                                                                                           C
       .1


       I                                                                                  C
       C                                                                                                                               •0
                                                                                                                                        a


                                                                                      C



       t                                                                                                                               N

                                                                                                                            C •Ilil•
                •           N



                        •tOIl-I
                                        •           N
                                                    a
                                                                 •
                                                                 a
                                                ufll). 3t.O. ICJ3N.l-It
                                                                                 •
                                                                                 a                0 at?
                                                                                                  •            0             N     •
                                                                              10




than the PPI: its standard deviation is about 45 percent greater. A

scatter plot of IJVR against ff1 is shown in Figure 1.

       We begin our econometric analysis of errors in the PPI and IJVR by

specifying the following extremely simple measurement model:9


                                    ff1 = P* +
                                                                        (1)
                                    UVR =   1* +

where l denotes true but unobserved industry price change and e1 and e2

are classical measurement errors assumed to have the following

properties:

                         E(e.) =   £(ee.)    = E(e..P*)      = Q




                                                   i,j =   1,2, ij




This model may be regarded as a factor analysis model, in which P is a

"connon      factor" and e1   and e2 are "specific factors." The model is

exactly      identified: there are three unknown parameters to be estimated --
the   variances of P*, e1, and e2 (deuoted by a, o, and o3, respectively)
-—    and   three sample moments (the variances and covariance of ff1 and IJVR)
which can provide (maximum likelihood) estimates of them.
        In   this model, PPI and UVR are both postulated to be unbiased

indicators of r.        Subtracting   the UVR equation from the PPI equation and

applying the expectation operator, we obtain


                          E(PPI—UVR) =   E(ei) - E(e2)      =   0.



        9lndustry   subscripts are suppressed to simplify notation.
                                                                          11




This model implies that the expected value of the difference between the

P1'I and the UVR is zero, whereas we noted above that the sample mean

difference is significantly different from zero. This inconsistency can

be eliminated by suitably generalizing the model (increasing the number

of parameters), but a larger model will be underidentified in the absence

of additional indicators. In the next section we develop an expanded

model which includes an indicator of product—quality change; that model

provides   an "explanation' of the nonzero mean difference between the two
measures of price change. We believe, however, that despite the incon-
sistency   noted, the above model provides a useful starting point for our

analysis, and we pursue it in the remainder of this section.

     Equations (1) constitute a purely measurement model of price change;

they do not embody any theory of long-run industry price determination.

Although our empirical analysis is not predicated on any specific theory

of price determination, we thought that it might be of interest, before

presenting our estimates, to briefly discuss our view of the process of

long—run industry price formation. We postulate that the long-run change
in an industry s output price is determined by exogenous changes in its
total factor productivity and input prices according to the formula:

                               p*p1*_TFP*

where P1* denotes the change in (a Divisia index of) input prices, and
¶7* denotes the change in total factor productivity. 10 This model of


      10This is the dual to the perhaps more familiar formula equating TPP'
to the change in output quantity minus the change in (a Divisia index of)
input quantity.
                                                                            12



price formation is based on the assumptions of constant returns to scale
technology and competitive (cost—minimizing) producer behavior. Indus-
tries might be thought of as drawing at random from a bivariate distribu-
tion   of P1* and TFP*   (which may or may not be independent). Industries
"lucky enough" to have extensive "technological    opportunities" will tend

to draw   high values of TFP*; those "unlucky enough" to rely on inputs
which are becoming increasingly relatively scarce (e.g., oil in the
1970s) will tend to draw high values of J*. We can think of reasons why
P1* and TPfl might be either negatively or positively correlated across

industries. Theories of "induced innovation" or "organizational     slack,"
for   example, may imply that industries faced with higher input price

increases may devote more resources to (factor-saving) research and

development, and hence (subsequently) experience higher productivity

growth.11 Mother hypothesis      is that an industry with high exogenous
productivity   growth will tend to exhibit either above- or below—average

(depending on the elasticity of demand for the industry's product) growth

in demand for factors of production, which may influence the prices of

inputs specialized to the industry.

       We now present estimates of the parameters underlying the measure-

ment model formulated above. That model implies that the "population"

variances and covariance of PPI and UVR are related to o,     a,   and   a3 as

follows:


                               var(PPI) =    +

                               var(UVR) =   4+

     "See Lichtenberg (1986) for evidence that industries experiencing
the largest energy cost increases during the 1970s maintained the highest
growth of R&D expenditures, conditional on output growth.
                                                                                  13




                                 cov(PPI,UVR) =

The sample moments are maximum likelihood estimates of the corresponding

population moments. The following is the computed sample moment matrix:


                                         PP1                UVR

                           PPI           .0316              .0231

                           UVR                              .0668


The parameter estimates implied by these sample moments are:


                                         = .0231

                                         = .0085

                                         = .0437


The UVR measurement-error variance is over five times as large as the ff1

error variance. From another perspective, the fraction of observed

interindustry   variance which is due to "noise" (measurement error) is 27
percent for the ff1 and 65 percent for the IJVR. The evidently greater
reliability of the PPI appears to offer some justification for the
decision   by the Interagency Task Force to give "more consideration to BLS

price   indexes than to census    unit   values"   when   comparing their merits as
indicators of (long-term) price change.
     Knowledge of the error variances (or          signal—to—noise ratios) of the
PPI and UVR is potentially useful in at least two respects. First, these
estimates can be used to construct an optimal (in the sense of minimum

variance, conditional on available information) index of price change.

DeLeeuw and HcKelvey (1983) have shown that when two indicators, each

hypothesized    to be a linear function of a single unobservable, are
                                                                            14




available,    an appropriately weighted average of the two indicators has a

lower mean squared error than the more reliable indicator alone. In the

case of our model, their formula for the index P which minimizes the mean

squared error reduces to


                           p = A    if! +     (1-k)   UVR,

                    where A =   a/(a1   +   c4).

Substituting the above estimates of the measurement-error variances

yields the value k =    .831.
       The second respect in which these estimates may be useful is in

identifying otherwise unidentified econometric models which include

error—ridden price- (or output-) growth variables on the right-hand side.

Suppose, for example, that we are interested in estimating the output-

elasticity of labor demand, and that we propose to do this by running the

regression of the change in labor input on the change in deflated (by the

PPI) output, using cross—sectional industry level data. Assuming that

the change in nominal output is measured without error, the measurement

error in the PPI will be transmitted, with an opposite sign, to the

measured change in real output. The probability limit of the least-

squares coefficient of measured output change is (1-y), where       is the

true output elasticity and y is the ratio of measurement-error variance

(ar)   to   the total variance of measured real output. In the absence of

extraneous information about y (or an instrument for real output growth),

  is not identified; only a lower bound is provided by the least—squares
                                                                            Is


coefficient.    The estimates presented above, however, would enable us to

compute an estimate of y, and hence identify

     It   is implicitly assumed in the above analysis that the error
variances   of both the PPI and the UVR   are constant across industries.
The Task Force, however, clearly believes that the "quality" or reliabil-

ity of both indicators varies considerably across products, and in fact

assigns "scores" to both   indicators for every product to reflect its
assessment of    data quality. Here is a brief description of the Task

Force's procedure for determining the score of a given product's ff1:


     Price data from a producer is direct and considered good. More
     indirect sources, such as trade journals, are given worse scores.
     If the reported data [sic) is the transaction price, it is consid-
     ered good. Other types of pricing, such as list price, are not as
     good, and therefore, are given worse scores. The two factors were
     used together to calculate a single score for each product priced...
     A score of "0" was assigned if the BLS index had no transaction
     problems and was directly priced by that agency."


Table SA shows the procedure used by the Task Force for assigning scores,

which range from zero to six, to PPI observations on the basis of the

source and type of price.

     The assignment of quality scores to the UVR was based on somewhat

different considerations. The logic underlying this procedure is de-

scribed below:


     Census unit values are based on product description[s] that often
     contain items which may vary in both quality and by price line.
     Thus, changes in unit values may result [from] changes in product
     mix and quality, as well as changes in pure price.




     12Estimates of y can also enable identification of parameters in
more complicated (i.e., multiple regression) models. See Griliches
(1984), p. 21 ff. for details.
                                                                                   16



Table 3A. Quality Scores for Producer Price Indexes of the Bureau
           of Labor Statistics


                                      List
                                      with             Other,              Not
                          Trans-      dig-              un-               avail-
Source                    action      count List Order known               able

Producer                     0           1           2        3       4        6
Buyer                        0         (NA)         (NA) (NA)         4        6
Government agency.           0           1           2        3       4        6
Importer                      1          3           4        5       6        6
Tradejournal                 0           2           3        4       5        6
Other,unknowu....             1          3           4        5       6        6
Not available                6           6           6        6       6        6




Table SB. Quality Scores for Census Unit Values Relatives


                                             Difference (points) between 1977
          1977 concentration                      and 1972 concentrations
     (Percent of 1977 shipments
     with unit values between 0.8               5.0       5.1     10.1    15.1
     and 1.2 multiplied by the                  or        to       to      or
          mean unit value)                     less      10.0     15.0 more
90-100                                          1         2       4       6
80-89.9                                         2         4       5       6
70—79.9                                         4         5       6        6
0—69.9                                          6         6        6      6
Not available                                   6         6        6       6


     Note: Unit values derived from Current Industrial Reports (dR
     series) were not analyzed. They were assumed to rate a socre
     of "1", but many were reviewed by the committee. Price relatives
     other than PPI, Census, and CIR unit value relatives were adopted
     only on recommendation of the committee.


Source:   U.S. Bureau of the Census (1983), pp. 141-142.
                                                                         17



The only available measure of homogeneity of the product category
and comparability in quality and product mix between censuses is the
cQncentration of the product's unit values reported by individual
establishments around the mean unit value based on the published
quantity and shipment aggregates. If a high percentage of the total
value of shipments of the product is associated with unit values
that are close to the mean, and if this percentage did not change
significantly between censuses, the unit value relative was assumed
to be a reasonably good measure of price change.


The decision rule adopted by the Task Force for assigning scores to UVR

observations is indicated by Table 38.

     We sought to determine whether the PPIs and UVRs of products (or

industries) receiving good scores tended to contain less measurement

error than those of products receiving poor scores. To test this hypoth-

esis, we perfortiied the following procedure. First, we computed for each

4-digit industry the weighted average of the PPI scores of the 7-digit

products sampled in that industry, using the product's share in the

industry's "covered" shipments as weights. Next, the industries were

classified into two groups: those with "low1' (essentially, below the

median) weighted PPI scores, and those with "high" scores. Finally, the

sample covariance matrix, and the implied model parameter estimates, were

computed separately for each group. This procedure was performed a

second time, partitioning the sample on the basis of INN score instead of

the PPI score.

     The parameter estimates produced by this procedure are displayed in

Table 4. The estimated values of both c$ and its ratio to var(PPI) are

much lower for the subset of industries with low ("good") ff1 scores than

they are for the high-PPI-score subset. Similarly, the subset of indus-

tries with high UVR scores has considerably larger values of a3 and its

ratio to var(UVR) than the subset with low UVR scores. These estimates
                                                                            18




                                 Table 4

                Estimates of PPI and UVR Error Variances,
           By Value of Industries' Weighted I'PI or IJVR Scores

   Quantile
   (mean score)                         o/var(PPI)      ____      a/var(UVR)
A. Industries classified by weighted PPI score

   Low PH score
   (mean score =    0.45)      .0010       .035         .0474        .631

   High PPI score
   (mean score = 2.33)         .0139       .428         .0392        .667



B. Industries classified by weighted UVR score

   Low IJVR score
   (mean score =    3.28)      .0030       .085         .0317        .493

   High UVR score
   (mean score = 5.98)         .0119       .492         .0560        .807
                                                                               19




are quite consistent with the proposition that the scores assigned to the

two measures of price change provide useful information about their

reliability.



                                      III

       In the model analyzed in the previous section it was assumed that

the PPI and IJVR measurement errors were uncorrelated both with one

another and with r.     Recall that in our introductory discussion of

problems in measuring price changes we distinguished (primarily long-run)

errors associated with changing product quality from (largely short—run)

sampling, reporting, and miscellaneous errors. It is probably reasonable

to   assume that the errors of the second type present in the PPI and the
UVR are distributed independently of one another and of everything else.
Both indicators, however, mis-measure       quality change --   although we
hypothesize    that the extent of mismeasurement differs. Since the same

unobservable product-quality change contributes to errors in both indica-
tors, the covariance between the errors should be allowed to differ from
zero. We therefore proceed to analyze a model in which both the PPI and
UVR measurement errors are specified as linear combinations of two
components, one of which (interpreted as "quality change") is common to
both indicators.
      We begin by defining the growth rate      of product quality, 2*, as the

difference   between the growth rate of the "effective quantity" of output
Q* and   the growth rate of number of units sold, Q:

                 Z*=Q*_Q.                                                (2)
                                                                              20




Defining the growth in the price of effective output as          VQ —

where VQ denotes the growth in nominal output, and the growth in the

price per unit sold as P E VQ     -
                                      Q yields    the identity


                 P=p*+z*.                                               (3)


The change in price per unit sold equals the sum of the change in price
per unit of effective output and the change in quality. The symbol *,
which we used earlier to denote "true" price change, is now interpreted

more precisely as "true, quality—adjusted" price change.
    Because the Census unit value is defined simply as the ratio of
value   of shipments to number of units, the IJVR is, in effect, an indica-

tor of P, not of P*:


            UVR = P +     = P*   +    Z   + e2.                         (4)

BLS' practice of "linking in" new products and discontinuing old products
suggests that the P21 "adjusts for" some, but not all., product quality
change. As Ruggles observes, "BLS adjusts the price observations only in
those cases where the change in the specification of the product is
directly associated with a change in price reflecting the cost change...
where there are design changes which affect the performance of the
product but are unrelated to the cost of production, there is no recogni-
tion of this fact other than the publication of the new specification.
                                                                              ,,13

We therefore postulate the following measurement model for the PPI:


            PPI=PktaiZ*+ej.                                             (5)




        13, cit., p. p.'-i.
                                                                                        21



           We expect the value of a1 to lie between zero and one. Substitut-

ing for 2* in (5) using (3), and rearranging,


              PPI =    I(1_ai)P*   +   aiPi   + e1.                               (6)



so the PPI may be interpreted as an error-ridden indicator of a weighted

average of P* and I', with weights determined by a1. We assume that E(e.)

=   E(e.      e.) =   E(e.   P) = E(e.          Z) =   0 for i,j =   1,2,   i   j. In
order to obtain the results derived below, we are also forced to assume

that E(P*        Z*) =   0, i.e., that quality change and quality—adjusted price
change are uncorrelated. We have some reservations about this assump-

tion, since both 2* and P* might be postulated to be functions of indus-

try R&D activity, for example.

       The system of equations (4) and (5) contains two more parameters ——

a1 and var(Z*) -— than the system (1) and is no longer identified. But

by adding an indicator for Z we can obtain estimates of both Oi and of

the mean change in product quality over the sample period. As noted

earlier, in constructing industry output deflators BLS both introduces,

or "links in," new products, and drops old products from the price index.

We hypothesize that the        relative       extent to which the statistical agency

introduces and drops products from price indexes over an extended period

is a reflection of the incidence of quality change. Data compiled by

Ruggles (1977) allow us to compute (unfortunately only at the 2-digit

level) the fraction of products which were ever used in constructing an

industry's price index during the period January 1967 -                 January 1975 that
were not used at the beginning of the period. We define this ratio of

the number of products introduced during the period to the total number
                                                                                22




of products ever included during the period as NEW, and postulate the

indicator equation


                  NEW = a2Z* + e3.                                      (7)


The value of NEW ranges from zero for the tobacco, furniture, and print-

ing and publishing industries, to 43 percent in electrical equipment and

supplies and 59 percent in rubber and plastic products.

       Because the NEW variable plays a key role in identifying an impor-

tant parameter of our model, we would like to provide some evidence that

NEW is a reasonable indicator of product—quality change. We believe that

the major    cause   of such quality change is product-oriented R&D expendi-

tures undertaken by industry. We therefore postulate a "quality-change

production    function" of the form

                     Z*=RD+u                                            (8)


where RD is a measure of R&D activity. Since Z is unobserved, equation

(8) cannot be estimated, even if we have data on R&D. By substituting

the equation (8) for 2* into the indicator equation (7), however, we

obtain a reduced-form equation which can be estimated from available

data:


             NEW =   a2(   RD + u) + e3 =   11   RD +   v

where   Ha   a2   and v E   (02u + e3).   The hypotheses that (at least some

part    of) R&D expenditures    cause product-quality change and that NEW     is an
indicator (or an "effect") of quality change suggest that NEW should be
an increasing function of RD. We tested this implication of our theory,
using the data on industry R&D expenditures developed by Scherer
                                                                                 23




(i984).' From Scherer's data it is possible to distinguish three

mutually exclusive categories of R&D      related    to a given industry:

product-oriented      R&D performed within the industry (OWNPROD); product-
oriented R&D "relevant" to the industry performed by its suppliers of
capital and materials (SUPPROD); and process—oriented R&D performed
within the industry (PROCESS). We hypothesized that OWNEROD, and perhaps
also   SUPPROD, would be significantly positively related to NEW (via       their
effects   on Z*), but that this would not necessarily be the case with

PROCESS. The estimated regression of NEW on the three components of

industry R&D (each divided by industry sales) confirmed our suppositions

(standard errors are reported in parentheses):


       NEW = .349 OWNPROD ÷ .878 SUPPROD - .064 PROCESS
             (.063)           (.341)         (.216)                     = .176


Consistent   with our expectations, we cannot       reject the hypothesis that

the coefficient on PROCESS equals zero, whereas both of the other coeffi-

cients are    significantly different from zero at about the one percent
level.    The finding that the coefficient on SUPPROD is much larger than

the coefficient on OWNPROD is rather surprising, but we cannot reject the

hypothesis of equality of the two coefficients at conventional signifi-

cance levels.

       The above analysis lends support to the view that NEW is a valid

indicator of (or instrument for) 2*. We now show how this instrument can

be used to identify an important parameter of our measurement model, a1.




     l4ior further discussion and analysis of these data, see Griliches
and Lichtenberg (1984).
                                                                                         24



The indicator equations (4), (5), and (7) imply that the population

covariances cov(PPI ,NEW) and cov(UVR,NEW) may be expressed as follows:


           cov(PPJ,NEW) =      a1a2var(z*)
           cov(UVR,NEW) =      a2var(z*)

Hence the ratio of these covariances is equal to a. The sample

covariances of PPI and UVR with NEW              are,   respectively, .0021 and .0037,

yielding an estimate of 01       of    .568. As expected, the ratio is less than

unity, suggesting that roughly half as much product—quality change is

erroneously   reflected in the       PPI as in the lAIR.

     The estimate of a1 enables us to compute an estimate of                the average
change in product quality in our sample, and of the extent to which the
PPI and UVR tend to overstate true price change (and productivity indices

based on the PFI understate          true productivity change) due to their
failure   to correctly account for quality change. To calculate the sample

mean change in product quality during the period 1972-77, subtract (4)

from (5), and denote this difference by DIET:


           111FF       PPI - UVR =    (a   -
                                               1)Z* + e1   -




Hence, the mean difference between the two price indices is (denoting

means by bar superscripts)



           DIfl (a -

                    = DIFF/(a1   -
                                      I)
                   =   -0.0282/(.S68-1)        = 0.0654.
                                                                          25



On average, product quality increased about 6.5 percent, or 1.3 percent

per annum, during this period. This implies that the sample mean values

of UVR and F?! overstated true price growth * by 16.5 percent and 10.9

percent, respectively. Estimates of total factor productivity based on

these output price indices are, of course, biased downward, since "effec-

tive"   output grew faster than measured output. Assuming for simplicity
that errors in output deflators are the only source of errors   in TFP

calculations,      TFP calculated   using the PPI,   is related to true

TIP,    TIPt, by

            TFPJJ =    TFP*   -   01Z*   -   e1



Given our sample mean values of !* and ¶Th1(r.0492), this implies that
                                                                     15
TFP1 underestimates true productivity change by about 43 percent.




     15The productivity data upon which this calculation is based are
described in Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984).
                                                                              26



                                       Iv

        In this paper we have investigated the incidence of measurement

errors in two independent estimates of long-tern price change, within the

framework of "multiple indicators" models of price measurement. We have

developed estimates of the measurement-error variances associated with

both the Producer Price Index and the Census Unit Value Relative. Our

estimates, based on a possibly nonrepresentative sample of products from

238 industries, provide support for the generally accepted view that the

PPI is a far more reliable indicator of long—term price change: the esti-

mated signal-to-noise ratios for the PPI and UVR are 2.72 and 0.53, re-

spectively. Our estimates should be useful for both constructing an

optimal indicator of price change, and for identifying econometric

models including error-ridden price— or output—growth terms as regres-

sors. Our    analysis   suggests that scorestt assigned to product deflators

provide useful information about their reliability. By extending our

model   to explicitly incorporate product-quality change, we   were able to

assess the importance of the problem posed by quality change for price

and productivity measurement. Less than half of quality change, which

we estimated to occur in our sample at an average annual rate of 1.3 per-

cent, appears to be adjusted for in the PPI. Consequently, estimates of

productivity growth based on the PPI underestimate "quality-adjusted't

productivity   growth by an estimated 43 percent.
                                                                         27




                              REFERENCES



deLeeuw, Prank, and Michael 3. McKelvey (1983), "A 'true' time series
     and its indicators," Journal of the American Statistical
     tion, Vol. 78, No. 381, March, pp. 37—46.

Garber, Steven (1985), "The reserve—labor hypothesis, short—run pricing
     theories and the employment-output relationship," unpublished
     manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon University, June 5.

Griliches, Zvi (ed.) (1971), Price indexes and quality change: studies
     in new methods of measurement (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).

Griliches, Zvi (1984), "Data problems in econometrics," NBER Technical
     Paper No. 39, July.

Griliches, Zvi, and Frank R. Lichtenberg (1984), "Interindustry tech-
     nology flows and productivity growth: a reexamination," Review of
     Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXVI, No. 2, May, pp. 324-329.

Lichtenberg, Prank R. (1986), "Energy prices and induced innovation,"
     Research Policy, forthcoming.

Ruggles, Richard (1977), The wholesale price index: review and
     tion, Executive Office of the President, Council on Wage and Price
     Stability Council Report, June (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
     Printing Office).

Scherer, P. H. (1984), "Using linked patent and R&D data to measure
     interindustry technology flows," in Zvi Griliches (ed.), R&D,
     patents, and productivity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Stigler, George 3., and James K. Icindahi (1970), The behavior of
     trial prices (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research).

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1983), 1977 census of manufactures, indexes
     of production, subject series MC77—SR-14, June (Washington, D.C.:
     U.S. Government Printing Office).
