NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMOCRACY DOES CAUSE GROWTH
Daron Acemoglu
Suresh Naidu
Pascual Restrepo
James A. Robinson
Working Paper 20004
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20004
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We thank Josh Angrist for helpful discussions, as well as seminar participants at NYU-Abu Dhabi,
Boston University and Harvard. Financial support from Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
is acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Daron Acemoglu, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Democracy Does Cause Growth
Daron Acemoglu, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 20004
March 2014
JEL No. O10,P16
ABSTRACT
We provide evidence that democracy has a significant and robust positive effect on GDP. Our empirical
strategy relies on a dichotomous measure of democracy coded from several sources to reduce measurement
error and controls for country fixed effects and the rich dynamics of GDP, which otherwise confound
the effect of democracy on economic growth. Our baseline results use a linear model for GDP dynamics
estimated using either a standard within estimator or various different Generalized Method of Moments
estimators, and show that democratizations increase GDP per capita by about 20% in the long run.
These results are confirmed when we use a semiparametric propensity score matching estimator to
control for GDP dynamics. We also obtain similar results using regional waves of democratizations
and reversals to instrument for country democracy. Our results suggest that democracy increases future
GDP by encouraging investment, increasing schooling, inducing economic reforms, improving public
good provision, and reducing social unrest. We find little support for the view that democracy is a
constraint on economic growth for less developed economies.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E18-269D
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
Suresh Naidu
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
MC 3328
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu

Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics, E18-776H
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
pascual@mit.edu
James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

With the spectacular economic growth under nondemocracy in China and the eclipse of the Arab
Spring, the view that democratic institutions are at best irrelevant and at worst a hindrance for
economic growth has become increasingly popular both in academia and policy discourse.1 For
example, prominent The New York Times columnist Tom Friedman argues:2
“One-party nondemocracy certainly has its drawbacks. But when it is led by a
reasonably enlightened group of people, as China is today, it can also have great advantages. That one party can just impose the politically difficult but critically important
policies needed to move a society forward in the 21st century,”
while Robert Barro succinctly summarizes the academic side in writing:
“More political rights do not have an effect on growth... The first lesson is that
democracy is not the key to economic growth” (Barro 1997, pp. 1 and 11).
A more recent summary of the academic literature by Gerring et al. (2005) also reaches a
similar conclusion: “the net effect of democracy on growth performance cross-nationally over the
last five decades is negative or null.”
In this paper we present evidence from a panel of countries between 1960 and 2010 challenging
this view. Our results show a robust and sizable effect of democracy on economic growth. Our
central estimates suggest that a country that switches from nondemocracy to democracy achieves
about 20 percent higher GDP per capita in the long run (or roughly in the next 30 years). Our results indicate no differential effect of democracy on economic growth by the initial level of economic
development, though there is some evidence that democracy is more conducive to higher GDP in
countries that start out with higher levels of education.3
There are several challenges in estimating the impact of democracy on economic growth. First,
existing democracy indices are typically subject to considerable measurement error, leading to
spurious changes in the democracy score of a country even though its democratic institutions
do not truly change. Second, because democratic and nondemocratic countries differ in many
institutional, policy, historical and cultural aspects, cross-country regressions are unlikely to reveal
1

This broad popular view notwithstanding, a number of papers have estimated positive effects of democracy on
growth and there are some theoretical reasons for expecting such positive effects, as we discuss below.
2
New York Times, September 8, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/09/opinion/09friedman.html Accessed February 25, 2014.
3
Our specifications focus on the effect of democracy on the level of log GDP per capita, so that democratization
affects growth in log GDP per capita. With some abuse of terminology, we will sometimes described this as “the
impact of democracy on economic growth” (rather than the impact of democratization on economic growth) or “the
impact of democracy on GDP” (rather than on log GDP per capita).

1

the causal effect of democracy on growth. Third, as shown in Figure 1, democratizations are
preceded by temporary movements in GDP (at least in the raw data). A reliable estimate of
the impact of democracy on future GDP needs to model and estimate the dynamics of the GDP
process. Fourth, even with year and country fixed effects, changes in democracy may be correlated
with other changes or respond to current or future economic conditions (Acemoglu et al., 2005,
Brückner and Ciccone 2011), raising obvious omitted variable bias concerns.
In this paper, we make progress in addressing all four of these challenges. First, we build on
the important work by Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008) to develop a dichotomous index of
democracy purged of spurious changes in democracy scores available in the standard datasets, and
rely on this measure for most of our analysis (in the Appendix we show robustness to many other
measures).
Second, we include country fixed effects in all specifications in order to remove the impact
on economic growth of fixed country characteristics potentially correlated with democracy. We
also include year fixed effects to remove any common global changes in democracy that may be
correlated with GDP.
Third, we allow for and estimate serially correlated dynamics in (log) GDP using a number of
different strategies. Our first strategy is to control for lags of GDP in linear regressions. Our second
strategy is to adapt to our panel context the semi-parametric time-series estimators proposed in
Angrist and Kuersteiner (2012) and Angrist, Jordà, and Kuersteiner (2013), which use propensityscore-based matching methods to correct for the effects of GDP dynamics.
Fourth, in addition to controlling for a full set of country and year fixed effects, we use an
instrumental-variables (IV) strategy to overcome omitted variable bias. Partially building on previous work on the effect of “democratic capital” on growth by Persson and Tabellini (2009), we
develop an instrument for democracy based on regional waves of democratizations and reversals.
Our identification assumption is that democratization in a country spreads to other nondemocratic
countries in the same region, but does not have a direct differential impact on economic growth
in these countries (at least conditional on lagged levels of country and regional GDP, and various
covariates that could be correlated with country-level GDP at the year, region and initial regime
level).
The importance of modeling the dynamics of GDP and a glimpse of the effect of democratization
on future GDP can be seen in Figure 1. The figure plots (log) GDP per capita in countries
that democratize relative to continuing nondemocracies, with year 0 corresponding to the year of
democratization. It shows that, on average, democracy is preceded by a sharp and persistent fall in
GDP. This pre-democratization GDP dip (the downward trend before year 0) makes it clear that
the failure to model the dynamics of GDP can lead to sizable bias in the estimates of the impact

2

of democracy on GDP growth. This figure also shows the higher level of future GDP following
a democratization, which is at the root of the positive estimates of the impact of democracy on
growth we report in the rest of the paper.
Our baseline strategy to deal with the confounding effects of GDP dynamics is to include a
sufficient number of lags of GDP in annual panel data regression with country and year fixed effects.
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) or Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimates lead to fairly
stable estimates of the dynamics of GDP. Similar results are obtained when we use semi-parametric
propensity score matching to control for the dynamics of GDP. Crucially for our inference, once
these dynamics are modeled, there is no differential GDP dip for democratizing countries. Figure 2
provides a preview by plotting the behavior of GDP around democratizations (relative to continuing
nondemocracies) when we control for GDP dynamics using the semi-parametric propensity score
matching (which is particularly conducive to a visual analysis). The lack of a significant downward
trend before year 0 in this figure is indicative of a more general pattern: our various strategies for
controlling for GDP dynamics ensure that democratizations are (conditionally) uncorrelated with
past GDP. The figure also shows that there is a significant and clearly-visible increase in GDP per
capita following a democratization relative to continuing non-democracies. Our baseline and semiparametric results suggest that modeling the dynamics of GDP is critical for obtaining the correct
counterfactual for the impact of democracy on economic growth—though the exact estimates are
not very sensitive to the details of the specification or estimation strategy.
Our instrumental-variables (IV) strategy uses our regression-based correction for GDP dynamics
and exploits exogenous variation in regional waves of democratization to identify the effect of
democracy (essentially comparing countries that are otherwise similar but are affected by differential
waves of regional democratization). This IV strategy also leads to sizable and (depending on the
specification) somewhat larger estimates of the impact of democracy on GDP than the non-IV
strategies.
We also investigate the channels through which democracy affects GDP. Though our findings
here are less clear-cut than our baseline results, they suggest that democracy contributes to future
GDP by increasing investment, increasing schooling, encouraging economic reforms, improving
public services and reducing social unrest.
At the end of the paper, we turn to the common claim that democracy becomes a particularly
powerful constraint on economic growth for countries with low levels of development (e.g., Aghion,
Alesina and Trebbi, 2008). Our results do not support the view that democracy becomes a hindrance
to economic growth below a certain threshold of development. But we do find some heterogeneous
effects by the level of education, suggesting that democracy has more positive effects for economies
with a greater fraction of the population with (secondary) schooling.

3

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the prior theoretical
and empirical literature on the relationship between democracy and growth. Section 3 describes
the construction of our democracy index, provides sources for our main variables and presents
descriptive statistics for our sample. Section 4 presents our baseline results, which use a linear
model for controlling for GDP dynamics. This model is estimated using the standard within
estimator and various GMM estimators. This section also presents a variety of robustness checks.
Section 5 presents results using the semi-parametric propensity score matching estimator. Section
6 presents our IV results using regional democratization and reversal waves, which yield similar
results to our two other strategies. Section 7 presents evidence on potential channels through
which democracy might be affecting economic growth. Section 8 investigates whether democracy
has heterogeneous effects depending on the level of economic development and education. Section
9 concludes, while the Appendix provides several additional robustness checks and results.

2

Literature

The link between democracy and economic development is the subject of a large literature in political science and economics. Theoretically, the relationship is ambiguous. A large literature has
argued that democracy and capitalist growth are contradictory (Lindblom 1977, Schumpeter 1942,
Wood 2007). In economics, Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1994), among
others, have argued that democratic redistribution (for example, from the mean to the median
voter) is distortionary and will discourage economic growth. March and Olsen (1984) have emphasized the possibility of political gridlock in democracy, while Olson (1982) suggested that interest
group politics in democracy can lead to stagnation, particularly after interest groups become sufficiently organized. Counterbalancing these, the literature has also pointed out several advantages
of democracy. For example, democratic redistribution may take the form of education or public
goods, and increase economic growth (Saint-Paul and Verdier, 1993, Benabou, 1996, Lizzeri and
Persico, 2004). Democracy can also have beneficial effects on economic growth by constraining
kleptocratic dictators, reducing social conflict or preventing politically powerful groups from monopolizing lucrative economic opportunities.4 Relatedly, Acemoglu (2008) argues that democratic
institutions may create distortions due to their redistributive tendencies, but may perform better
than nondemocracies (oligarchies) in the long run because they avoid the sclerotic entry barriers
that these other political systems tend to erect to protect politically powerful incumbents.
There is a substantial literature in political science investigating empirical linkages between
4
This is similar to the argument in Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), though they emphasize “inclusive political
institutions,” which involve significantly more than democratic institutions, in particular including checks and balances and constraints on executives, legislatures and bureaucrats to ensure a broad distribution of political power in
society.

4

democracy and economic outcomes, part of which is summarized in Przeworski and Limongi (1993).
One of the first empirical papers in economics to estimate the effect of democracy on economic
growth is Barro (1996), who finds that democracy has a small negative effect on economic growth,
with some evidence of a nonlinearity where democracy increases growth at low levels of democracy but reduces it at higher levels (see also Helliwell, 1994). Barro’s work focuses on repeated
cross-sections of countries and does not tackle the four empirical challenges we pointed out in the
Introduction.
Barro’s paper has triggered a subsequent literature employing a variety of strategies to shed light
on the same questions. Here we mention just a few. Tavares and Wacziarg (2001) also focus on crosscountry regressions and report a weak negative effect (adjusting for a variety of other channels),
while Persson and Tabellini (2008) find a positive effect using propensity score matching. Papers
focusing on panel data regressions include Rodrik and Wacziarg (2005) and Persson and Tabellini
(2008), who find a positive effect of recent democratization on growth, Bates, Fayad and Hoeffler
(2012), who find positive effects for Africa, and Burkhart and Lewis-Beck (1994) and Tabellini and
Giavazzi (2005), who find no significant effects on growth. These and other papers in this literature
all differ in their measure of democracy and choice of specifications, and neither systematically
control for the dynamics of GDP nor attempt to address the endogeneity of democratizations.5
Our work builds on the important paper by Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008). They construct
a new measure of permanent democratizations, and estimate a positive effect of democratization on
growth. We construct a similar measure of democratization, but with some important differences
as we explain in the next section. In addition, Papaioannou and Siourounis do not tackle the
empirical challenges related to the endogeneity of democracy and the modeling of the dynamics of
GDP (though they do report a robustness check related to this).
Our work also builds on and complements Persson and Tabellini (2009), who use a related IV
strategy based on neighbors’ democracy to estimate the effect of “democratic capital”, defined as
the sum of recency-weighted past democracy, on economic growth (see also Ansell, 2010, and Aidt
and Jensen, 2012). In addition to differences related to how the instruments are constructed and
the fact that Persson and Tabellini do not model GDP dynamics, a central difference is in the righthand side variable. Following an earlier literature in political science (e.g., Gerring et al. 2005),
5

A smaller literature looks at the effects of democracy on other growth-related economic outcomes. For example,
Grosjean and Senik (2011), Rode and Gwartney (2012), and Giuliano, Mishra, Spilimbergo (2013) look at the effect
of democracy on economic reforms; Ansell (2010) looks at its impact on educational spending; Gerring, Thacker
and Alfaro (2012), Blaydes and Kayser (2011), Besley and Kudamatsu (2006), and Kudamatsu (2012) investigates
its impact on health, infant mortality and nutrition outcomes; and Reynal-Querol (2005) and Sunde and Cervellati
(2013) look at its impact on civil war. A more sizable literature looks at the effects of democracy on redistribution
and inequality, and is reviewed and extended in Acemoglu et al. (2013). There is also a growing, and promising,
literature investigating the impact of democracy using within-country, intensive margin differences, see, among others,
Martinez-Bravo et al. (2012), Fujiwara (2012), and Naidu (2012).

5

Persson and Tabellini focus on the effect of democratic capital. One formidable challenge here is
the difficulty of identifying the impact of democratic capital separately from country fixed effects
(which is just a reflection of the difficulty of distinguishing duration dependence and unobserved
heterogeneity).
Another closely related literature investigates the effect of economic growth on democracy. This
literature, which was pioneered by Lipset (1959), was also partly revived by Barro (1996, 1999).
We do not focus on this relationship here, except to note that Acemoglu et al. (2008, 2009) show
no evidence of a statistical or causal effect from economic growth to democracy.6

3

Data and Descriptive Statistics

We construct an annual panel comprising 175 countries from 1960 to 2010, though not all variables
are available for all countries in all periods. In order to address the issue of measurement error
in democracy indices, we develop a consolidated dichotomous measure following Papaioannou and
Siourounis (2008). Our index of democracy combines information from several datasets, including
Freedom House and Polity IV, and only codes a country as democratic when several sources agree.
The full construction of our measure is explained in detail in the Appendix, and we just provide
an overview here. We code our dichotomous measure of democracy in country c at time t, Dct , as
follows. First, we code a country as democratic during a given year if: Freedom House codes it as
“Free”, or “Partially Free” and it receives a positive Polity IV score. If one of these two main sources
is missing, we verify that the country is coded as democratic by Cheibub, Ghandi and Vreeland
(2010) or Boix, Miller and Rosato (2012). These two datasets extend the popular Przeworski et al.
(2000) dichotomous measure. We also use these measures to code the few instances that are missing
in both Freedom House and Polity IV. Finally, many of the democratic transitions captured by this
algorithm are studied in detail by Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008), who code the exact date of
permanent democratizations using historical sources. When possible, we also draw on their data to
verify the date of democratization, as explained in detail in the Appendix. In all, our democracy
index is available for 183 countries, though we have GDP data for only 175 of those, which make
up our baseline sample.
The major difference between our index of democracy and that of Papaioannou and Siourounis
is that they focus on permanent changes in democracy status. One drawback of this approach is
that by only considering democratizations that are not reversed, their index encodes information on
the future state of democratic institutions, exacerbating endogeneity concerns when it is included
6
See, however, Barro (2012) for a dissenting view. See also Cervellati et al. (2014) for evidence that the effect
of income on democracy is heterogeneous by colonial status, with a positive effect in non-colonized countries and a
negative effect in colonized countries.

6

as a right-hand side variable in GDP regressions. Instead, we code all transitions to democracy and
reversals (transitions to nondemocracy).7 This procedure gives us 122 instances of democratization
and 71 reversals, which are shown in Appendix Tables A1 and A2. Out of 8,733 country/year
observations, 3,777 are coded as democratic while 4,956 are nondemocratic.
Our main outcome variable, log GDP per capita in 2000 constant dollars, is from the World
Development Indicators. When we examine mechanisms, we use investment, trade (exports plus
imports), secondary and primary enrollment, and infant mortality data, all from the World Development Indicators, as well as TFP data from the Penn World Tables and tax revenues from Hendrix
(2010). We also create a dichotomous measure of social unrest capturing the occurrence of riots
and revolts using Banks and Wilson’s (2013) Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive (CNTS).
We use the data on economic reforms coded by Giuliano, Mishra and Spilimbergo (2013), which
includes indices of product market, agriculture, trade, financial system, current account and capital
account reforms, to construct an aggregate (average) index of economic reform normalized between
0 and 100.
Descriptive statistics for all variables used in the main sample are reported in Table 1 separately
for democracies and nondemocracies for our sample period of 1960-2010. This table shows several
well-known patterns, for example, that democracies are richer and have more educated populations.

4

Results

In this section, we provide our baseline results using linear regression models.

4.1

Baseline Results

Our main linear regression model takes the form
yct = βDct +

p
X

γj yct−j + αc + δt + εct ,

(1)

j=1

where yct is the log of GDP per capita in country c at time t, and Dct is our dichotomous measure
of democracy in country c at time t, while the αc ’s denote a full set of country fixed effects and the
δt ’s denote a full set of year effects. The error term εct includes all other unobservable shocks to
GDP per capita. The specification includes p lags of log GDP per capita on the right-hand side to
control for the dynamics of GDP as discussed in the Introduction.
Until we consider IV models in Section 6, we will maintain the following assumption:
7

For example, we code Argentina as a democratization in 1973 and a reversal in 1975, and a democratization again
in 1983, whereas Papaioannou and Siourounis code only its “permanent” transition to democracy in 1983. We code
Belarus as having a brief democratic period from 1991 to 1994, whereas Papaioannou and Siourounis’s measure, by
construction, ignores this brief interlude of democracy.

7

Assumption 1 E[Dcs εct ] = 0 for all s ≤ t.
This assumption implies that democracy is orthogonal to the contemporaneous and lagged error
terms conditional on the lagged dependent variables and the country and year fixed effects already
included in equation (1).
Under Assumption 1, the simplest strategy is to estimate equation (1) using the standard within
estimator.8 Columns 1-4 of Table 2 report the results of this estimation controlling for different
numbers of lags on our baseline sample of 175 countries between the years of 1960 and 2010.
Throughout, the reported coefficient of democracy is multiplied by 100 to ease interpretation, and
standard errors are robust and clustered by country.
The first column of the table controls for a single lag of GDP per capita on the right-hand side.
In a pattern common with all of the results we present in this paper, there is a sizable amount
of persistence in GDP, with a coefficient on the lag of 0.973 (standard error = 0.006), but this
coefficient is still significantly less than 1 (which suggests there is no unit root in the empirical
process for log GDP per capita). More importantly for our focus, the democracy variable is also
estimated to be positive and highly significant, with a coefficient of 0.973 (standard error = 0.294).
This parameter estimate implies that in the year following democratization, GDP per capita is
higher by about 1%. However, the serially-correlated nature of GDP implies that this effect will
accumulate over time. For example, in the second year, GDP per capita will be higher by about
2%, and so on. To obtain the long-run impact (for a permanent change in democracy), we need to
compute the sum of these effects over time, which is given by

1−

βb
Pp

bj
j=1 γ

,

(2)

where ˆ denotes the parameter estimates, and this formula is written for the general case with
several lags on the right-hand side. Applying this formula to the estimates from column 1, we
find the long-run effect as 35.59, meaning democratization increases GDP per capita by 35.6% in
the long run (and the p-value underneath this number indicates that this estimate is statistically
different from zero at the 1.1% confidence level).
Column 2 adds a second lag of GDP per capita to this specification, and shows that both lags
are highly statistically significant and point to richer dynamics (with the first lag being positive and
greater than 1, while the second one is negative). But the sum of the two lags, shown also in the
8

For future reference, we note that this involves the following “within transformation,”
!
!
!
p
X
1 X
1 X
1 X
1 X
yct −
ycs = β Dct −
Dcs +
γj yct−j −
ycs−j + δt + εct −
εcs ,
Tc s
Tc s
Tc s
Tc s
j=1

with Tc the number of times a country appears in the estimation sample.

8

GDP persistence row at the bottom, is close to that found in column 1. The effect of democracy
is slightly lower but still highly significant, 0.651 (standard error =0.248). Correspondingly, the
long-run impact is now smaller and more plausible, indicating a 19.60% increase in GDP per capita
in the long run.
Column 3, which is our preferred specification, includes four lags of GDP per capita. The
overall pattern is very similar, with both the degree of persistence and the long-run effect being
very close to their estimates in column 2. In particular, the coefficient of democracy is 0.787
(standard error=0.226) and the long-run impact is a 21.24% (p-value=0.003) increase in GDP per
capita following a democratization.9
Column 4 includes four more lags of GDP (for a total of eight lags) and shows that these
additional lags are not significant. The overall degree of persistence and the long-run effect of
democracy on GDP per capita are very similar to the estimates in column 3.10 We do not report
the coefficients of these lags to save space, but present the p-value of a test for their joint significance.
This test suggests that including four annual lags of GDP per capita appears sufficient to capture
the rich dynamics of GDP in the linear regressions.
The problem with the estimates in columns 1-4 is the so-called Nickell bias which results when
panel data models with fixed effects and lagged dependent variables are estimated by the standard
within estimator and the time dimension, T , is finite. This bias is of the order 1/T and thus
disappears as T grows large (Nickell 1981, Alvarez and Arellano 2003). Since T is fairly large in
our panel (on average, each country is observed 38.8 times), the standard within estimator should
have at most only a small bias.11 This motivates our use of the models in columns 1-4 as the
baseline.
The rest of Table 2 reports various GMM estimators that are consistent for finite T . Under
Assumption 1 and the additional assumption that εct is serially uncorrelated, we have the following
moment conditions
E[(εct − εct−1 )(ycs , Dcs+1 )′ ] = 0 for all s ≤ t − 2.
Arellano and Bond (1991) develop a GMM estimator based on these moments. In columns 5-8, we
9

These robust, clustered standard errors are in fact quite close to non-robust, non-clustered standard errors (e.g.,
equal to 0.228 for column 3), which supports the conclusion that our estimates successfully model GDP dynamics.
More conservatively, we also computed standard errors robust to serial correlation within a region × initial regime
× year cell, which are similar but slightly larger than those reported here. For example, for column 3, the standard
error for the democracy coefficient in this case is 0.263.
10
Though columns 1-4 show that the exact lag length included on the right-hand side does not change the qualitative
results, the Appendix shows that not including any lags — a common strategy in the literature — does lead to
misleading results.
11
Returning to footnote 8, this bias can be understood as a consequence of the fact that for fixed Tc , the term
P
1
s εcs in the transformed error is mechanically correlated with yct−j and Dct (as long as γj 6= 0 for some j).
Tc
Clearly as Tc tends to infinity, this bias disappears. In the text, we simplify the discussion by referring to T , the
average number of times a country appears in the panel.
Monte Carlo studies by Judson and Owen (1999) suggest that the Nickell bias is of the order of 1% for T = 30.

9

report estimates from the same four models reported in columns 1-4 using this GMM procedure.12
Consistent with our expectations that the within estimator has at most a small bias, the GMM
estimates are very similar to our baseline results from columns 1-4. The only notable difference
is that GMM models have consistently slightly smaller persistence, leading to somewhat smaller
long-run effects. For example, column 7, corresponding to our preferred specification in column 3,
estimates a long-run impact of 16.45% increase in GDP per capita following a democratization.
In addition, the underlying identification assumption for this GMM procedure can be investigated directly. In particular, we can test the hypothesis that there is no serial correlation in the
residuals of equation (1)—or equivalently that there is no AR2 correlation in the differenced version
of this equation—which is used as a key exclusion restriction for the GMM estimator. The numbers
reported in Table 2 indicate that this assumption is rejected when we include only one or two lags,
which is not surprising, since a specification with one or two lags only fails to adequately control for
the dynamics in GDP per capita (recall the significance of the third and the fourth lags in columns
3 and 4). However, when four lags or more are included as in columns 7 and 8, there is no evidence
of further serial correlation in the residuals.
An alternative to Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator is proposed by Hahn, Hausman and
Kuersteiner (2002) and relies on forward orthogonal differences. Hahn et al. note that Arellano
and Bond’s GMM estimator is a minimum distance estimator combining T − 1 2SLS estimates.13
They propose replacing each 2SLS estimate with a Nagar-type estimator, which is robust to the use
of many instruments, and combine these estimates by weighting them by the number of observations
in year t times the inverse of their variances.14 We refer to this estimator as HHK throughout the
12

We use Arellano and Bond’s baseline ad hoc weighting matrix with 2’s on the main diagonal and -1’s on the two
main subdiagonals above and below. As shown in Arellano and Alvarez (2003) and Hayakawa (2008), the estimator
with the ad hoc weighting matrix is more reliable than the efficiently weighted GMM estimator when T is large. This
is related to the fact that because the number of moments is of the order of T 2 , there is a potential “many instrument
problem”. This problem affects the efficiently weighted estimator, but not the one we use, which remains consistent
under “large N , large T ” asymptotics.
13
More specifically, it is a combination of estimates of the model
∗
∗
yct
= βDct
+

p
X

∗
γj yct−j
+ ε∗ct ,

j=1

∗
obtained via 2SLS separately for t = 1, 2, . . . , T − 1 using {ycs , Dcs }t−1
s=1 as instruments. Here xct is the forward
orthogonal deviation of variable xct , defined as
!
r
T −t
1 X
x∗ct =
xct −
xcs .
T −t+1
T − 1 s>t

Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator is an efficiently weighted combination of these T − 1 2SLS estimates.
14
Returning to footnote 13, the equation for time t in forward orthogonal differences is estimated using a k-class
estimator with {ycs , Dcs }t−1
s=1 as instruments. The general k-class estimator is given by
βb = (X ′ (I − kMZ )X)−1 X ′ (I − kMZ )Y,

where X are the endogenous right-hand side variables, Z the instruments, and Y the dependent variable, and MZ

10

paper. The results using this estimator are reported in columns 9-12. Once we include four or
more lags, they are similar to the within estimates, though slightly larger. For example, in column
11, which corresponds to our preferred specification, the long-run effect, which is 24.51%, is about
50% larger than the GMM estimate in column 7 but only slightly larger than our baseline within
estimate in column 3.
In the rest of the paper we focus on the specification with four lags of GDP as our benchmark for
several reasons. First, Table A3 in the Appendix shows that, once four lags of GDP are included
on the right-hand side, the correlation between democratizations and transitory movements in
GDP disappears. Second, as Table 2 shows, there is also no further serial correlation in the
residuals. Third, Table A4 in the Appendix shows that the predicted residual εbct is uncorrelated

with lags of democracy. Therefore, there is no evidence of correlation between residual GDP (once
dynamics are taken into account) and past democracy, weighing against an interpretation in which
democratizations take place in anticipation of future changes in GDP.

4.2

Robustness

Table 3 probes the robustness of our results to the inclusion of various covariates. Notice that any
time-invariant covariate is already absorbed by the country fixed effects. Thus our focus will be on
time-varying variables, including various regional trends.
Table 3 comprises three panels: the top one using the within estimator, the middle one Arellano
and Bond’s GMM, and the bottom one the HHK estimator. We only report the coefficient estimates
on the democracy index to save space. Column 1 reproduces our baseline estimates for comparison.
In column 2, we report results from a specification in which we include a full set of interactions
between a dummy for the quintile of the GDP per capita rank of the country in 1960 and a full
set of year effects.15 This specification is useful for two reasons. First, it controls for potentially
time-varying effects of baseline differences across countries.16 Second, it only exploits differences
L
denotes orthogonal projections on Z. Nagar’s (1959) estimator is obtained by setting k equal to 1 + N
, with L being
the degree of overidentifying restrictions and N the number of countries. This estimator is robust to finite-sample
bias in the case of many instruments (in contrast to the traditional 2SLS estimator which sets k = 1). In particular,
as shown by Hahn, Hausman and Kuersteiner (2002). Because the 2SLS estimates described in footnote 13 are biased
when both T and N are large, Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator also has an asymptotic bias of the order 1/N . In
contrast, the Nagar estimate of each of the T − 1 cross-sectional equations in footnote 13 is unbiased when T is large.
The HHK estimator, obtained by efficiently combining these Nagar estimates, is thus also asymptotically unbiased.
We compute standard errors using 100 bootstrap repetitions.
15
To compute the GDP per capita rank in 1960 we use Angus Maddison’s estimates, since many more countries
are missing GDP per capita data in 1960 in the World Bank data.
16
We can also go further in this direction and control for interactions between (log) GDP per capita in 1960,
non-agricultural share of labor in 1968, urbanization in 1960 and share with secondary education in 1960 with a full
set of year effects. Though the sample becomes smaller given data availability, our within and 2SLS estimates remain
similar. In particular, the within estimate for democracy becomes 0.598 (standard error=0.283). The 2SLS estimate
for democracy becomes 1.307 (standard error=0.612). However, since the interactions with baseline characteristics
are correlated with the instruments in the Arellano-Bond GMM and HHK specifications, the results in Panels B and
C become highly imprecise.

11

within groups of countries with relatively similar levels of GDP per capita at the beginning of
the sample. These controls have relatively little effect on our estimates. For example, the within
estimate for the coefficient of democracy is 0.718 (standard error=0.249), and the long-run effect
is 22.17%. These estimates are remarkably close to our baseline specification presented in column
1. Arellano and Bond’s GMM and HHK estimates remain similar once these controls are included,
though slightly smaller.
Column 3 adds interactions between a dummy for Soviet and Soviet satellite countries and
dummies for the years 1989, 1990, 1991, and post-1992 to control for the effects of political and
economic changes following the fall of the Berlin wall in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (and
thus ensuring that our results are not driven by the experiences of these Soviets block countries).
This has little impact on the results. The long-run effect of democracy increases slightly to 24.86%
because the coefficient of democracy is larger in this specification.
Columns 4 and 5 add four lags of unrest and trade (import plus exports over GDP) as controls.
These covariates control for the potential effect of unrest before democratization on growth or for
the possibility that external shocks are driving both growth and democracy. These controls have a
limited impact on our estimates in all panels.
Finally, column 6 includes a full set of region × initial regime × year effects. This ensures that
the effect of democracy on GDP is identified from differences in GDP between countries undergoing
democratizations or reversals in democracy relative to other countries in the same region. This
estimate thus fully controls for any omitted variable varying at the region × initial regime level.
This specification is motivated by our IV strategy in Section 6, where we use regional democracy
waves as instruments. In this light, the specification in column 6 of this table exploits the variation
in the data that is orthogonal to the one our IV focuses on. Reassuringly, this specification leads
to very similar estimates to our baseline results (and also to our baseline 2SLS results contained in
Table 5 below).17
We also report several additional robustness checks in the Appendix. First, in Table A5 in the
Appendix, we explore the sensitivity of our baseline results to outliers. In particular, we re-estimate
our preferred specification without countries with a standarized residual above 1.96 or below -1.96.
In addition, we estimate our preferred specification without countries with a Cook’s distance above
a common rule-of-thumb threshold (four divided by the number of observations). Finally, we also
report results using a robust regression estimator following Li (1985) and Huber’s M -estimator. In
17

We have also explored (but do not report) several specifications partly motivated by the robustness checks on
our IV specifications reported in Section 6, where we use regional democracy waves as instruments. In particular, we
controlled for four lags of the average GDP per capita, average unrest and average trade (import plus exports over
GDP) among countries in the same region×initial regime cells (democracy or nondemocracy at the beginning of the
sample) to take into account regional shocks among countries with similar political characteristics. These controls
had practically no impact on our key estimates.

12

all cases, the results, especially the long-run effect of democracy, are very similar to our baseline
results, establishing that our findings are not driven by outliers.
Second, in Table A6 we present several alternative GMM estimators based on different sets
of moment conditions. In particular, given the possibility of finite-sample bias due to “too many
instruments”, we estimate models truncating the number of lags used to form moment conditions
in Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator. We also add Ahn and Schmidt’s (1995) nonlinear moment
conditions to those exploited by Arellano and Bond. The estimates are again very similar to those
in Table 2 and show that our results are not sensitive to the particular set of moment conditions
used.
Third, in Table A7 we explore if our results are robust to other measures of democracy that have
been used in the literature. In particular, we find similar qualitative results using a dichotomous
version of the Freedom House democracy index, Papaioannou and Siourounis’s and Boix, Miller
and Rosato’s measures of democracy. We also find positive, though imprecise estimates using
a dichotomous measure based on the Polity index and using Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland’s
democracy-dictatorship measure. Consistent with the presence of considerable measurement error
in these alternative democracy indices, the IV estimates they produce are much larger than the
OLS estimates compared to the results with our baseline measure (or with Pappaioannou and
Siourounis’s).
In Table A8, we explore separately the effect of democratizations and reversals (transitions
from democracy to nondemocracy) and different components of democracy. Both democratizations
and reversals in democracy yield consistent results—democratizations increase GDP and reversals
reduce it.
In Table A8 we also explore the role of different components of democracy coded by Freedom
House and Polity. We find that civil liberties are somewhat more important for GDP than political
rights. However, our estimates using the Polity dataset are too imprecise to draw any strong
conclusions. These results are subject to the caveat that these components may be measured with
greater error than the overall democracy indices, making unbundling the components of democracy
particularly challenging.

5

Semi-Parametric Control Strategies

In the previous section, we controlled for GDP dynamics using linear regression models (and various
different estimation strategies). An alternative is to adopt a semi-parametric correction for GDP
dynamics. In this section, we follow Angrist et al. (2013) and adapt their propensity score matching
estimator for time series models to our panel context. This framework enables us to estimate the
effects of democratizations and reversals in democracy separately, while flexibly controlling for GDP
13

dynamics and their correlations with changes in democracy. We explain the construction of the
estimator for the case of a democratization (the construction for a reversal is entirely analogous).
j
Let ∆yct
(d) denote “potential” change in (log) GDP per capita at time t + j of a country with

∆Dct = d, i.e., what the change in log GDP per capita would have been for country c if it did or
did not democratize (d = 1 and 0, respectively). With this notation, the effect of a democratization
j periods after it occurs on the change in GDP per capita is
j
j
β j = E[∆yct
(1) − ∆yct
(0)].

The assumption underlying the semi-parametric estimator used in this section is the following
conditional independence assumption (CIA):
j
Assumption 1′ ∆yct
(d)⊥∆Dct |Dct−1 , yct−1 , yct−2 , yct−3 , yct−4 , t for all c, t, j.

The focus on changes of GDP and democracy to eliminate persistent differences between countries (i.e., removes country fixed effects). In this light, the CIA simply states that once permanent
differences between countries, time effects, lagged democracy and GDP dynamics are taken into
account, further changes in democracy are as good as randomly assigned. We impose Assumption
1′ throughout this section.
Let Pct be the probability of a democratization in country c at time t conditional on Dct−1 ,
yct−1 , yct−2 , yct−3 , yct−4 . We refer to this probability as the propensity score following Angrist et
al. (2013). Let ∆yct+j be the actual change in log GDP per capita for country c at time t + j. In
the data, the effect of a democratization j periods after it occurs can be estimated as a weighted
average of growth rates, given by
βbj = E [∆yct+j w
bct ] ,

where E here denotes the sample average and the w
bct ’s are weights given by


1{∆Dct = 1} 1{∆Dct = 0}
w
bct ≡
−
.
Pbct
1 − Pbct

These weights correspond to Hirano, Imbens and Rider’s (2003) efficient weighting scheme. They
essentially reweight the data so that observations with a very high or very low propensity score get
a much larger weight. Intuitively, observations with a very high or very low propensity score are
those with changes in democracy that are not predicted by year effects and lags of GDP per capita,
thus corresponding to changes in democracy “orthogonal” to past levels of GDP per capita.
To estimate the weights, we first specify a model for the propensity score. We estimate Pbct

from a Probit model for whether ∆Dct = 1 or ∆Dct = 0 conditional on Dct−1 = 0, and using
yct−1 , yct−2 , yct−3 , yct−4 and δt as explanatory variables. This parametrization of the propensity
score is what makes the approach semi-parametric. Notice that the weights are only defined for
14

observations for which Dct−1 = 0, which are the relevant sample to study the effect of a democratization (otherwise the propensity score is zero by definition). In Table A1 in the Appendix, we list
all democratization in the sample, together with their propensity scores, while Table A2 does the
same for reversals.
Using this procedure, we compute estimates of βbj for j = −15, −14, . . . , 30, with year 0 cor-

responding to the year of democratization. The average treatment effect on GDP is computed as
the cumulative sum of these effects on the growth rate starting from a base year, in this case the
year before democratization (and this base year’s log GDP is normalized to zero). The top panel
of Figure 3 plots the full estimated effects of a democratization on GDP over time. Time runs
in the horizontal axis, and is normalized so that the democratization occurs at time t = 0. The
solid line plots the increase in GDP per capita caused by democracy, and the dotted lines plot a
95% confidence interval obtained by bootstraping. We see that following a democratization GDP
increases gradually, becoming about 15% higher between 25 and 30 years after a democratization.
The estimates for negative values of j can be computed and used to test if there are any significant
pre-trends before the democratization. These are also plotted in Figure 3, as the data points before
year zero. Reassuringly, they show no significant pre-trends before democratization. The absence of
pre-trends also suggests that this estimator is removing any GDP dynamics potentially correlated
with democratization (of the type visible in Figure 1 in the Introduction).
The estimates are also presented in Table 4. Panel A shows that during the five years before
the democratization (column 1), GDP per capita was on average 1.74% higher than in the baseline
year, but this difference is not only small, but also statistically insignificant.18 During the first five
years following democratization (column 2), GDP per capita is 1.43% higher. However, 25 to 30
years after the democratization (column 3), GDP per capita is 15.06% higher, and this increase is
significantly different from zero (p-value of 0.06).
If the propensity score is correctly specified and we have a large sample, the estimated weights,
w
bct should have mean zero and should be orthogonal to yct−1 , yct−2 , yct−3 , yct−4 , and δt . Thus,

as a specification and finite sample correction, we also construct estimates in which we replace
the weights with residualized weights, after partialling out the covariates, to compute the average
treatment effects. The bottom panel of Figure 3 plots the estimated effects on GDP per capita
relative to the base year. This adjusted estimator does a better job of controlling for the dynamics as
can be gauged from the flat pattern of GDP before the democratization. The effect of democracy on
GDP per capita now with these adjusted estimator is slightly larger and more precisely estimated:
a democratization now increases GDP by about 18% in 25-30 years. These results are presented
in Panel B of Table 4. Column 1 shows precisely estimated zero pre-trends. Column 2 shows that
18

Test p-values are constructed using 100 bootstrap repetitions clustering at the country level.

15

GDP increases by 2.14% in the first five years following democratization (p-value=0.058), and by
17.58% between 25-30 years following democratization (p-value= 0.013).
Notably, these effects are very similar to the long-run estimates in our baseline linear models,
suggesting that the specific parametrization of the GDP process imposed in equation (1) is a good
approximation to the actual dynamics.19
We follow an analogous procedure to compute estimates for the average effect of a reversal
from democracy to nondemocracy. The top panel of Figure 4 plots the baseline results and the
bottom panel plots the results using the residualized weights. The results without the adjustment
for weights do not appear to be reliable since they do not eliminate pre-trends in reversals as is
visible in the figure. This failure possibly reflects poor finite sample properties of our estimator
given the few reversals in our sample (relative to democratizations). The right panel shows that
adjusting the weights goes a long way in eliminating pre-trends in GDP. All the same, the estimates
in this case, summarized in Panels C and D of Table 4, are still less precise than the estimates for
a democratization, and we put less value on them.
Overall, our semi-parametric estimates confirm the sizable and statistically significant effect of
democratizations on economic growth, but also show that there is not enough information in the
sample to tightly pinpoint the impact of reversals in democracy on economic growth.

6

IV Estimates: Democratization Waves

The econometric strategies adopted so far control for GDP dynamics but impose Assumption 1
or 1′ , which imply that democracy, conditional on the correctly specified GDP dynamics, country
and year fixed effects and controls, is exogenous. This is clearly a restrictive assumption. First,
there could be concerns related to reverse causality from GDP to democracy. Though the timing
assumptions and the results in Acemoglu et al. (2008, 2009) are reassuring here, it may still be the
case that countries democratize when there is potential “good news” about future GDP. Second,
there are the usual omitted variable concerns. For example, bad policy decisions of nondemocratic
rulers may induce both a fall in GDP and demands for democratization, or political unrest paving
the way for democracy might also disrupt economic growth. Though many of these concerns,
conditional on correctly specified GDP dynamics, should lead to a downward bias in our estimates,
there could be other plausible candidates that might cause an upward bias. In addition, as discussed
in the Introduction, democracy indices are notoriously ridden by measurement error, even after our
construction of the dichotomous index, and this will naturally cause a downward attenuation bias
19
The long-run impact estimated here is unconditional in the sense that democracy could be reversed in subsequent
years, whereas the long-run effects in the linear models are computed assuming a permanent democratization (recall
equation (2)). This accounts for the difference between the long-run estimates in this section and the baseline
estimates.

16

in the estimate of democracy on economic growth.
In this section, we develop an instrumental-variables (IV) strategy, which can (at least partially)
correct for these reverse causality, omitted variable bias, and measurement error concerns.

6.1

First Stage and Exclusion Restrictions

The motivation for our IV strategy is that, as highlighted by the recent Arab Spring experience,
democratizations often occur in regional waves. For example, many countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean underwent a transition from democracy to nondemocracy in the 1970s, followed by
a wave of democratizations in the 1980s and early 1990s in what Huntington (1991) dubbed the
“The Third Wave” (see also Markoff, 1996). This also coincided with democratization in Eastern
Europe, Central Asia and Africa in the 1990s following the fall of the Soviet Union.20
Though there is no consensus on why there are such waves, they cannot be explained by regional
economic trends. Rather, they appear to be related to the demand for democracy (or dissatisfaction
with democracy) spreading from one country to another, reminiscent of models in which there is
cross-country learning (e.g., Ellis and Fender, 2010, Kuran, 1989, and Lohmann, 1994, for theoretical models, and Aidt and Jensen, 2012, Buera, Monge-Naranjo and Primiceri, 2011, and Persson
and Tabellini, 2009, for empirical evidence). This perspective suggests that regional waves could be
an attractive source of exogenous variation in democracy (see also Persson and Tabellini, 2009). We
introduce the formal exclusion restriction next after defining our parametrization of this instrument.
We start with a look at democratization waves and reversals in Figure 5. The top panel
depicts the evolution of average democracy among countries that were initially nondemocracies
within one of seven regions (Africa, East Asia, Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Latin American
and the Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, South Asia and in other categories including
Western Europe and other long-standing OECD countries) after the first democratization in the
region.21 For comparison, we show average democracy among initial nondemocracies in the other
regions (which start, by construction, having higher levels of average democracy). Following the
first democratization in a region, average democracy there rises faster than average democracy in
the comparison group, illustrating the existence of waves of democratization. The bottom panel
presents a similar figure for reversals, showing similar waves of reversals in democracy.
To formally investigate democratization and reversal waves and estimate our first-stage relationship, we define jack-knifed average democracy in a region× initial regime cell, Zct , which leaves
20
Przeworski et al. (2000) challenge the existence of democratization waves, but the consensus in political science
is that such waves are important, e.g., Doorenspleet (2000), Strand et al. (2012), Brinks and Coppedge (2006), and
Treisman (2013). Our first-stage results document the presence of robust waves.
21
Naturally, the first democratization that defines a wave is excluded from the average to avoid a mechanical
correlation.

17

out the own country (country c) observation as
Zct =

X

1
Nrinit − 1

D c′ t .

(3)

c′ ∈r,Dc′ init =Dcinit ,c′ 6=c

Here, r designates the seven regions mentioned above, Dcinit ∈ {0, 1} is a dummy variable indicating
if the country was initially democratic (Dcinit = 1) or nondemocratic (Dcinit = 0) during the first
years it appears in our sample, and Nrinit denotes the number of countries in that region× initial
regime cell at time t.22 This construction, which also conditions on the initial regime, is motivated
by the fact that democratization can only happen in nondemocracies, and conversely, reversals can
only happen among democracies. We use lags of Zct as our instruments.
The corresponding two-stage least squares (2SLS) model is given by
P
yct = βDct + pj=1 γj yct−j + αc + δt + εct
P
P
Dct = qj=1 πq Zct−q + pj=1 φj yct−j + θc + ηt + υct .

(4)

This is identical to our linear models above, except that democracy will be treated as endogenous,
instrumented by the lags of Zct .
Therefore, our exclusion restriction is that regional waves of democratizations and reversals
have no impact on a country’s GDP except through their influence on that country’s democracy,
conditional on lags of GDP and year and country fixed effects.
Assumption 2 E[Zcs εct ] = 0 for all s ≤ t − 1.
The economic justification for this assumption is that, conditional on covariates, switches to
democracy in neighboring countries should have no direct effect on GDP per capita in the region.
Though this exclusion restriction is plausible, there could be reasons why it might be violated (e.g.,
political instability may affect regional trade patterns or capital flows). Nevertheless, we show
below that controlling for such variables has little effect.
Note the importance of correctly specifying GDP dynamics. Even if Assumption 2 held, misspecified dynamics will lead to a violation of the exclusion restriction. If lags are not controlled for,
past GDP per capita of a country could be correlated with both current GDP and regional waves
of democracy.
The strong first-stage relationships underlying our 2SLS estimates are shown in Panel B of
Table 5. Jack-knifed regional democratization or reversal waves (by initial regime type) have a
strong predictive power on democracy, as shown by the first-stage F-statistics, which are always
above 16. In terms of time patterns, the largest impact is from the one-year lag, though the effects
continue for at least three years. Importantly, different columns of Table 5 show that the first-stage
22

That is, after 1960 for countries that were not colonies in 1960, or after independence for the rest.

18

relationship is very stable across specifications with different regional covariates, bolstering our
confidence in our exclusion restriction (if the regional correlation in democracy reflected the effect
of some correlated shocks on the democracy of countries in the region, then the inclusion of proxies
for these regional covariates would be expected to have a much more significant effect on the first
stages).

6.2

2SLS Estimates

Panel A of Table 5 presents our 2SLS estimates of the model in equation (4), with the first stages
given in Panel B as mentioned in the previous subsection. Panel C then presents a version of the
HHK estimator described in Section 4 using lags of regional democratization or reversal waves as
(external) instruments, and will be discussed later.23 This estimator is consistent and corrects for
the Nickell bias as long as Assumption 2 holds and εct is serially uncorrelated.24
Column 1 of Panel A gives the benchmark within estimate from column 3 of Table 2 for comparison. Column 2 presents the simplest 2SLS estimate using one lag of the instrument. The
democracy coefficient is estimated at 0.966 (standard error=0.558), which is slightly larger than
the within estimate in column 1. The long-run effect of democracy is also a little larger, 26.31%.
Column 3 uses four lags of Zct as instruments. This leads to a slightly larger 2SLS coefficient
of 1.149 (standard error=0.554) and a long-run effect of 31.52%. The increase in the estimated
impact of democracy on GDP in columns 2 and 3 may reflect the fact that some of the potential
downward biases mentioned above were in fact important or that there was attenuation due to
measurement error. The inclusion of several lags of Zct as instrument allows us to perform a
Hansen-type overidentification test which, under the Assumption that Zct−1 is exogenous, allows
us to test if Zct−2 , Zct−3 and Zct−4 are also exogenous. While this does not directly test Assumption
2, it does provide indirect support for it, since no past lags of the instrument are correlated with
the outcome variable once the first lag is included.
Columns 4 and 5 add the same country-specific controls as in Table 3, interactions between
1960 GDP per capita quintile and a full set of year effects and interactions between a dummy for
Soviet and Soviet satellite countries and dummies for the years 1989, 1990, 1991, and post-1992,
respectively. These have relatively modest effects on our 2SLS estimates.
23

In particular, using the notation from footnote 13, we estimate the model
∗
∗
yct
= βDct
+

p
X

∗
γj yct−j
+ ε∗ct ,

j=1

with the Nagar estimator separately for t = 1, 2, . . . , T − 1. We use {ycs }t−1
s=1 and Zct−1 , . . . , Zct−q as instruments.
These T − 1 estimators are consistent (even with many instruments) and are again combined with efficient weights.
24
We do not not present results from Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator in this case since asymptotic properties
of this GMM estimator with many external instruments are unknown.

19

More importantly, there are several reasons why regional waves could be correlated with the
structural error term in the GDP equation. For instance, our exclusion restriction would be violated
if there were regional shocks that simultaneously affect GDP in a country and lagged democracy in
the region. Or as already mentioned above, regional democracy could affect trade or financial flow
patterns. The rest of the table investigates how including various regional or country level controls
affects our 2SLS estimates.
In column 6 we add four lags of the average GDP in the region×initial regime cell, partly as
a control for the possibility that regional economic conditions could be the trigger for regional
democratization (rather than the other way around as assumed by our exclusion restriction). The
2SLS estimates are now larger but still highly significant (and the first stage remains stable).
Column 7 controls for four lags of the average unrest in the region×initial regime cell. This
controls for the possibility that unrest (not only democracy) may spread across countries (consistent
with Aidt and Jensen, 2012), and have a direct effect on growth. Column 8 controls for four lags
of the average share of trade in the region×initial regime cell, partly as a control for the possibility
of trade flows to the region being affected by the democratization wave. These controls leave our
results in all three panels fairly close to the baseline estimates.
Finally, column 9 controls for region-specific trends, which is also useful for probing further
whether our IV results are driven by region-specific trends correlated with the waves of democratization. Reassuringly, we obtain similar estimates for the impact of democracy, consistent with our
exclusion restriction that our instrument is not capturing differential secular trends across regions.
Observe also that, as already noted in the previous subsection, the first stages in columns 6-9
are quite stable, suggesting that these first stages are not being driven by correlated economic
shocks to countries in the same region×initial regime cell. Rather, this pattern is consistent with
our interpretation that democratization in one country increases the demand for democracy in the
region.
The HHK estimates in Panel C are broadly similar to our 2SLS estimates. In column 3, we
obtain a smaller (and perhaps more plausible) long-run effect of 22.37%. The coefficient estimate
and the long-run effect are significant only at 7% and 13%, respectively, in this column (and as
in Table 2, this estimator does not perform well when the lag structure is cut short as in column
2), but the HHK estimates are more precisely estimated and significant at 5% or less in all other
columns, except in column 5, where we include time interactions with a dummy for Soviet and
Soviet satellite countries.
We also conducted a number of further robustness checks for our results, focusing on the specification in column 3, which are presented in Table A9 in the Appendix. In particular, similar to our
robustness checks in Section 4, we explored the sensitivity of our 2SLS results to outliers in several

20

ways, and found that outliers have little effect on our estimates. In addition, we investigated the
sensitivity of our results to different constructions of the instrument in Table A10. For example,
constructing instruments using alternative codings of the initial regime or using finer distinctions
among initial regimes (e.g., British colonies, French colonies, civil dictatorships, military dictatorships, mixed and presidential democracies, parliamentary democracies, royal dictatorships and
socialist regimes) lead to similar results with somewhat larger estimates of the impact of democracy
on GDP. We also constructed an alternative instrument computed as a jack-knifed average democracy in each region interacted with a full set of region× initial regime dummies. This instrument
also produced similar results.
Overall, we conclude that exploiting the plausibly exogenous sources of variation in democracy
resulting from regional democratization (and reversal) waves leads to estimates of the impact of
democracy on GDP in the ballpark of our baseline non-IV results.

7

Mechanisms

In this section we explore the mechanisms through which democracy causes economic growth. With
this aim in mind, we estimate models of the form
zct = βDct +

p
X
j=1

γj yct−j +

p
X

ηj zct−j + αc + δt + εct ,

(5)

j=1

where zct is one of our potential channels described below. These models are thus very similar to
our main linear regression equation, (1), except that the left-hand side variable is different and we
also control for lags of GDP per capita (as well as lags of the dependent variable) on the right-hand
side.25
We estimate (5) using the within estimator (corresponding to column 3 of Table 2), our preferred
specification for the 2SLS estimator (corresponding to column 3 of Table 5, Panel A, with p = 4),
and our preferred specification for the HHK estimator with the same external instruments for
democracy (corresponding to column 3 of Table 5, Panel C).26 These results are presented in Table
6. In addition, Figure 6 presents the semi-parametric estimates (using the same estimator as in
Section 5. The variables we investigate are (log) investment share in GDP, (log) TFP, a measure
of economic reforms (corresponding to the mean index of the reforms considered in Giuliano et al.,
2013, normalized between 0 and 100), (log) trade share in GDP, (log) taxes share in GDP, primary
school enrollment, secondary school enrollment, log child mortality, and the social unrest variable
already used above.
25

Excluding the lags of GDP per capita on the right-hand side leads to broadly similar results. We prefer to control
for GDP, since some of the variables we focus on may respond to democracy precisely because GDP responds to
democracy, in which case they are unlikely to be the main mechanisms through which democracy affects GDP.
26
For the HHK estimator, we first partialled out the lags of GDP.

21

The results for most of these variables are not as clear-cut as our baseline findings for GDP
per capita. In several cases, there are noteworthy differences between the four estimators (the
three in Table 6 and the semi-parametric one in Figure 6). The only variables for which we have
consistent results with all four estimators are the index for economic reforms and child mortality.
We also obtain broadly consistent positive estimates for the effect of democracy on tax to GDP ratio
and primary enrollment rates, though the HHK estimates are not precise and the semi-parametric
estimates show a smaller and imprecise response for the tax to GDP ratio and a tapered effect for
primary enrollment. In addition, for investment to GDP ratio, secondary enrollment and social
unrest, we have two of the estimators showing precisely-estimated results and two of them showing
less well estimated effects.
Overall, we take these results as suggesting that democracy might be working through a number
of channels, in particular, by encouraging economic reforms, increasing human capital (especially
primary schooling), and raising state capacity and some aspects of public services (especially related to health) as well as, to some degree, increasing investment and reducing social unrest. Of
course, our strategy does not allow us to conclusively establish that these are the most important
mechanisms, but the fact that these variables increase following a democratization even controlling
for lags of GDP per capita suggests they are prime candidates for the channels through which
democracy might be causing higher GDP.

8

Does Democracy Need Development?

As already hinted at in the Introduction, many critics of the view that democracy is good for economic performance suggest that democracy will be economically costly when certain preconditions,
especially related to economic development and high human capital, are not satisfied. For example,
in Richard Posner’s words:27
“Dictatorship will often be optimal for very poor countries. Such countries tend not
only to have simple economies but also to lack the cultural and institutional preconditions to democracy,”
while David Brooks argued in the wake of the Egyptian coup of 2013 that:28
“It’s not that Egypt doesn’t have a recipe for a democratic transition. It seems to
lack even the basic mental ingredients.”
27

http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2010/10/autocracy-democracy-and-economic-welfareposner.html
Accessed February 4, 2014.
28
New York Times, July 4, 2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/05/opinion/brooks-defending-the-coup.
html

22

We next investigate this hypothesis by considering interactions between democracy and the level
of economic development (as proxied by log GDP per capita) and human capital (as proxied by the
share of the population with secondary schooling from the Barro-Lee dataset). If this hypothesis
is valid, we would expect the interaction terms to be positive and significant in each case, and
the main effect to be such that the impact of democracy for low economic development or for low
schooling countries is negative.
The results of this exercise are presented in Table 7. We focus on the same three estimators
as in Table 6 (the within estimator, the 2SLS estimator and the HHK estimator instrumenting for
democracy). The first four columns are for log GDP per capita and the second four for share of the
population with secondary schooling. In each case, we evaluate the main effect of democracy at the
bottom 25th percentile of the interaction variable (so that it indicates whether democracy has a
negative effect for countries at a low level of economic development or with low levels of schooling).
For the interaction variable we use the baseline values in 1960, 1970 or 1980, or the current value
of the variable.29
The patterns in Table 7 are fairly clear. There is no significant interaction between democracy
and the level of economic development in any of the specifications. Thus the impact of democracy
does not seem to depend on the level of development. Moreover, in contrast to popular claims in
the literature, democracy does not have a negative effect for countries with low levels of economic
development. In fact, all of the main effects of democracy for the lowest 25th percentile country
reported in columns 1-4 are positive and some are significant.
The only set of interactions that appears to be significant are those with the share of the population with secondary schooling, which are reported in columns 5-8. Nevertheless, these interactions
are not large enough to make democracy have any significant negative effect for low human capital countries, but they indicate that the positive effects of democracy are greater for high human
capital countries (though we do not find a similar pattern when we look at primary and tertiary
education).
Our strategy does not reveal what drives the interaction with secondary schooling. It may
be because, as some experts believe, democracy works better with a more literate, modernized
population (though Acemoglu et al. 2005, and 2009, find no evidence that democracies are more
stable or more likely to emerge when human capital is high) or, as suggested in Acemoglu and
Robinson (2006) and Galor and Moav (2006), high human capital softens the distributional conflicts
in society, making democracy more stable. Our preferred interpretation is the latter, partly because
29
For log GDP per capita, “current” means its lagged level, since contemporary GDP appears on the right-hand
side. For share of the population with secondary schooling, this means the value of this variable in the corresponding
five-year interval. When we use interactions with the current value of the share of the population with secondary
schooling, we also include this variable in the regression so that its possible main effect does not load onto the
interaction term.

23

we do not find any evidence of significant interactions with other modernization-related variables
as noted above.

9

Conclusion

Skepticism about the performance of democratic institutions is as old as democracy itself. Plato,
for example, denigrated democracy as the second worst form of government after tyranny. The
view that democracy is a constraint on economic growth has recently been gaining ground. In this
paper, we show that once the dynamics of GDP are controlled for in a fixed effects OLS regression,
there is an economically and statistically significant positive correlation between democracy and
future GDP per capita. This result remains true in GMM estimates that account for any bias due
to lagged dependent variables, as well as with semi-parametric estimators based on a propensity
score for democratic transitions estimated using past lags of log GDP. Our preferred specifications
imply that long-run GDP increases by about 20% following a democratic transition.
We also document regional waves of democratization, and use this fact to generate a new
instrument for democracy. We show that the probability of a country transitioning to democracy or
nondemocracy is strongly correlated with the same transition recently occurring in other countries
in the same region. Using this instrument, we find that democracy again increases GDP, controlling
for lags of GDP and a variety of regional controls.
The channels via which democracy raises growth include greater economic reforms, greater
investment in primary schooling and better health, and may also include greater investment, greater
taxation and public good provision, and lower social unrest. In contrast to the equally popular
claims that democracy is bad for growth at early stages of economic development, we find no
heterogeneity by level of income. There is some heterogeneity depending on the level of human
capital, but these effects are not large enough to lead to negative effects of democracy for low
human capital countries.
These results taken together suggest that democracy is more conducive to economic growth than
its detractors have argued, and that there are many complementarities between democratic institutions and proximate causes of economic development. Work using cross-country and within-country
variation to shed more light on how democracy changes economic incentives and organizations and
pinpointing what aspects of democratic institutions are more important for economic success is an
obvious fruitful area for future research.

24

References
Acemoglu, Daron (2008) “Oligarchic Vs. Democratic Societies” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 6 (1), 1–44.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2005)
“Income and Democracy,” NBER Working Paper No 11205.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2008)
“Income and Democracy,” American Economic Review, 98 (3), 808–842.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2009)
“Reevaluating the Modernization Hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56 (8), 1043–1058.
Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo and James A. Robinson (2013)
“Democracy, Redistribution and Inequality,” NBER Working Paper No. 19746.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York: Crown.
Aghion, Phillipe, Alberto Alesina, and Francisco Trebbi (2008) “Democracy, Technology, and Growth ”in Elhanan Helpman (ed.) Institutions and Economic Performance, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Ahn, Seung C. and Peter Schmidt (1995) “Efficient Estimation of Models for Dynamic
Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 68 (1), 5–27.
Aidt, Toke and Peeter Jensen (2012) “Workers of the World, Unite! Franchise Extensions
and the Threat of Revolution in Europe, 1820-1938 ” CESifo working paper No. 3417.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (2), 465–490.
Alvarez, Javier and Manuel Arellano (2003) “The Time Series and Cross-Section Asymptotics of Dynamic Panel Data Estimators,” Econometrica, 71 (4), 1121–1159.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Guido M. Kuersteiner (2011) “Causal Effects of Monetary
Shocks: Semi- parametric Conditional Independence Tests with a Multinomial Propensity Score,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (3), 725–747.
Angrist, Joshua D., Òscar Jordà, and Guido Kuersteiner (2013) “Semiparametric
Estimates of Monetary Policy Effects: String Theory Revisited,” NBER Working Paper No. 19355.
Ansell, Ben W. (2010) From the Ballot to the Blackboard: The Redistributive Political Economy of Education, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond (1991) “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies,

25

58 (2), 277–297.
Banks, Arthur S. and Kenneth A. Wilson (2013) “Cross-National Time-Series Data
Archive,” Databanks International.
Barro, Robert J. (1996) “Democracy and Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1(1), 1–27.
Barro, Robert J. (1997) Getting it Right: Markets and Choices in a Free Society, The MIT
press.
Barro, Robert J. (1999) “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy,
107(S6), 158–183.
Barro, Robert J. (2012) “Convergence and Modernization Revisited,”NBER working paper
No. 18295.
Bates, Robert H., Ghada Fayad and Anke Hoeffler (2012) “The State of Democracy in
Sub-Saharan Africa,”International Area Studies Review, 15 (4), 323–338.
Benabou, Roland (1996) “Inequality and Growth ” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996,
11, 11-92.
Besley, Timothy and Masayuki Kudamatsu (2006) “Health and Democracy,” American
Economic Review, 2006, 96 (2), 313–318.
Blaydes, Lisa and Mark Andreas Kayser (2011) “Counting Calories: Democracy and
Distribution in the Developing World,” International Studies Quarterly, 55(4), 887–908.
Boix, Carles and Michael Miller and Sebastián Rosato (2012) “A Complete Data Set
of Political Regimes, 1800–2007,”Comparative Political Studies, 46(12), 1523 - 1554.
Daniel Brinks and Coppedge, Michael (2006), “Diffusion Is No Illusion: Neighbor Emulation in the Third Wave of Democracy ”Comparative Political Studies, 39(4), 463–489.
Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone (2011) “Rain and the Democratic Window of
Opportunity,” Econometrica, 79(3), 923–947.
Buera, Francisco J., Alexander Monge-Naranjo, Giorgio E. Primiceri (2011) “Learning the Wealth of Nations,” Econometrica, 79 (1), 1–45.
Burkhart, Ross E. and Michael S. Lewis-Beck (1994) “Comparative Democracy: The
Economic Development Thesis,” The American Political Science Review, 88 (4), 903–910.
Cervellati, Matteo, Florian Jung, Uwe Sunde, and Thomas Vischer (2014) “Income
and Democracy: Comment.”American Economic Review, 104(2), 707–19.
Cervellati, Matteo and Uwe Sunde. (2013) “Democratizing for Peace? The Effect of
Democratization on Civil Conflicts ” Oxford Economic Papers, 65(4), 1-24.
Cheibub, José Antonio, Jennifer Gandhi, and James R. Vreeland (2010) “Democracy
and Dictatorship Revisited,” Public Choice, 143(1-2), 67–101.
Doorenspleet, Renske (2000) “Reassessing the Three Waves of Democratization,” World

26

Politics, 52(3), 384-406.
Ellis, Christopher J. and John Fender (2011) “Information Cascades and Revolutionary
Regime Transitions,” The Economic Journal, 121 (553), 763–792.
Fujiwara, Thomas (2012) “Voting Technology, Political Responsiveness, and Infant Health:
Evidence from Brazil. ” Mimeo, University of British Columbia.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav (2006) “Das Human-Kapital: A Theory of the Demise of
the Class Structure.”The Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 85-117.
Gerring, John, Philip Bond, William Barndt, and Carola Moreno (2005) “Democracy
and Growth: A Historical Perspective,” World Politics, 57 (3), 323-64.
Gerring, John, Strom C. Thacker, and Rodrigo Alfaro (2012) “Democracy and Human
Development,” Journal of Politics, 2012, 74 (01), 1–17.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Guido Tabellini (2005) “Economic and Political Liberalizations,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 52 (7), 1297–1330.
Giuliano, Paola, Prachi Mishra and Antonio Spilimbergo (2013) “Democracy and
Reforms: Evidence from a New Dataset,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(4),
179–204.
Grosjean, Pauline and Claudia Senik (2011) “Democracy, Market Liberalization, and
Political Preferences,”The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (1), 365–381.
Hahn, Jinyong, Jerry A. Hausman, and Guido Kuersteiner (2001) “Bias Corrected
Instrumental Variables Estimation for Dynamic Panel Models with Fixed Effects,”MIT Dept. of
Economics Working Paper No. 01-24.
Hayakawa, Kazuhiko (2008) “On the Effect of Nonstationary Initial Conditions in Dynamic
Panel Data Models,” Hi-Stat DP series, 2008, (245).
Helliwell, John F (1994) “Empirical Linkages Between Democracy and Economic Growth,”
NBER working paper No. 4066.
Hendrix, Cullen S. (2010) “Measuring State Capacity: Theoretical and Empirical Implications for the Study of Civil Conflict,” Journal of Peace Research, 47 (3), 273–285.
Hirano, Keisuke, Guido W Imbens, and Geert Ridder (2003) “Efficient Estimation
of Average Treatment Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71(4), 1161–
1189.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1991) The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth
Century, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Judson, Ruth A. and Ann L. Owen (1999) “Estimating Dynamic Panel Data Models: A
Guide for Macroeconomists, ” Economic Letters, 65 (1), 9–15.
Kudamatsu, Masayuki (2012) “Has Democratization Reduced Infant Mortality in Sub-

27

Saharan Africa? Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10.
1294–1317.
Kuran, Timur (1989) “Sparks and Prairie Fires: A Theory of Unanticipated Political Revolution,” Public Choice, 61, 41–74.
Li, Guoying (1985) “Robust Regression,” in Exploring Data Tables, Trends, and Shapes, pp.
281–343.
Lindblom, Charles E. (1977) Politics and Markets: The World’s Political Economic Systems, Basic Books Inc.
Lipset, Seymour M. (1959) “Some Social Requisites of Democracy,” American Political
Science Review, 53(1), 69-105.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage?
Democracy and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s “Age of Reform”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2), 707–765.
Lohmann, Susanne (1994) “Dynamics of Informational Cascades: The Monday Demonstrations in Leipzig, East Germany, 1989-1991,” World Politics, 47, 42–101.
March, James G. and Johan P. Olsen (1984) “The New Institutionalism: Organizational
Factors in Political Life,” American Political Science Review, 734–749.
Markoff, John (1996) Waves of Democracy: Social Movements and Political Change, Thousands Oaks: Pine Forge Press.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Gerard Padró-i-Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao (2012)“The
Effects of Democratization on Public Goods and Redistribution: Evidence from China,” NBER
Working Paper No. 18101.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert Topel (1985) “Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
Econometric Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3(4), 88–97.
Nagar, A.L. (1959) “The Bias and Moment Matrix of the General k-Class Estimators of the
Parameters in Simultaneous Equations,” Econometrica, 27 (4), 575–595.
Naidu, Suresh (2012) “Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum US South,”
NBER Working Paper No. 18129.
Nickell, Stephen (1981) “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica,
1417–1426.
Olson, Mancur (1982) The Rise and Decline of Nations, Yale University Press.
Papaioannou, Elias and Gregorios Siourounis (2008) “Democratisation and Growth,”
Economic Journal, 118(532), 1520–1551.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful to Growth?” American Economic Review, 84, 600–621.

28

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2006) “Democracy and Development: The Devil
in the Details,” American Economic Review, 96 (2), 319–324.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2008) “The Growth Effects of Democracy: Is
it Heterogenous and How Can It Be Estimated?,” in Elhanan Helpman (ed.) Institutions and
Economic Performance, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2009) “Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political
and Economic Change,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2), 88–126.
Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1993) “Political Regimes and Economic
Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1993, 7 (3), 51–69.
Przeworski, Adam, Michael E Alvarez, José Antonio Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi
(2000) Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World, 19501990, New York: Cambridge Universiy Press.
Reynal-Querol, Marta.(2005 “Does Democracy Preempt Civil Wars?.”European Journal of
Political Economy 21(2), 445–465.
Rodrik, Dani and Romain Wacziarg (2005) “Do Democratic Transitions Produce Bad
Economic Outcomes?,” American Economic Review, 95(2), 50–55.
Rode, Martin and James D. Gwartney (2012) “Does Democratization Facilitate Economic Liberalization?” European Journal of Political Economy, 28 (4), 607–619.
Saint-Paul, Gilles and Thierry Verdier (1993) “Education, Democracy, and Growth,”
Journal of Development Economics, 42, 399–407.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1942) Socialism, Capitalism and Democracy, New York: Harper.
Stefanski, Leonard A., and Boos, Dennis D. (2002) “The Calculus of M-Estimation,”
The American Statistician, 56, 29–38.
Strand, Håvard, Håvard Hegre, Scott Gates and Marianne Dahl (2012) “Why Waves?
Global Patterns of Democratization, 1816-2008,” Mimeo, PRIO.
Sunde, Uwe and Matteo Cervellati (2013) “Democratizing for Peace? The Effect of
Democratization on Civil Conflicts,” Oxford Economic Papers.
Tavares, José and Romain Wacziarg (2001) “How Democracy Affects Growth,” European
Economic Review, 45 (8), 1341–1378.
Treisman, Daniel (2013) “Democratization Over Time,” Unpublished, Department of Political Science, UCLA.
Wood, Ellen Meiksins (2007) Democracy Against Capitalism: Renewing Historical Materialism, New York: Cambridge University Press.

29

APPENDIX
A1

Construction of the Democracy Index

This Appendix explains in detail the construction of the democracy measure used in the paper.
We construct a consolidated democracy measure using Freedom House and Polity IV as our main
sources.30 We also use secondary sources to resolve ambiguous cases or those without data coverage
from Freedom House or Polity IV. This is particularly important for years before 1972 when only
the Polity dataset is available, and for small countries that are in the Freedom House but not in
the Polity sample. The secondary sources are two dichotomous measures that extend Przeworski et
al.’s (2000) work. These are Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland (2010)—henceforth CGV—and BoixMiller-Rosato’s (2012)—henceforth BMR.31 Finally, we use Papaioannou and Siourounis’s (2006)
— henceforth PS — measure to date the exact timing of some of the democratic episodes that we
identify based on historical sources. In total, there are 183 countries for which one of these sources
is available. Our dichotomous democracy index is available for these 183 countries and covers their
post-independence period since 1960. In our empirical exercises we restrict attention to the sample
of 175 countries for which we also have GDP data.
Our democracy variable, Dct ∈ {0, 1} for country c at time t, is coded as follows:
1. We code a country/year observation as democratic (Dct = 1) if its Freedom House status is
“Free” or “Partially Free” and its Polity score is positive. This gives the core variation in our
democracy measure.32
2. For small countries which only appear in the Freedom House sample, we code an observation
as democratic if its Freedom House status is “Free” or “Partially Free,” and either CGV or
BMR code it as democratic. There is overwhelming agreement between Freedom House, CGV
and BMR in all of these cases.33
30
We use Freedom House and Polity as our main sources for two reasons. First, these datasets have been used
extensively in the literature. Second, they are based on experts assessments which combine important de jure and
de facto elements of democracy. In contrast, our secondary sources are procedural and are based solely on de jure
components. We view the correct notion of democracy as comprising a bundle of both de jure and de facto elements.
31
CGV code a period as democratic when the chief executive is chosen by popular election (directly or indirectly),
the legislature is popularly elected, there are multiple parties competing in the election, and an “alternation in power
under electoral rules identical to the ones that brought the incumbent to office must have taken place.” BMR update
Przeworski et al. (2000) and add the additional qualification that only instances in which more than 50% of the male
population are allowed to vote are coded as democracies.
32
Using the “Free” or “Partially Free” and the positive Polity scores to define dichotomous democracy indices is a
relatively common practice in the literature. For instance, this is the approach used by Papaioannou and Siourounis
(2006) to identify the transitions they then analyze in more detail using historical sources. Giavazzi and Tabellini
(2005) and Persson and Tabellini (2006) use similar cutoffs for the Polity score to define dichotomous democracy
indices.
33
The only ambiguous case is Samoa, which is coded as “Free” since 1989 by Freedom House, while CGV and BMR
both code it as nondemocratic. We follow the latter coding since rulers in Samoa have a long tenure and are appointed

30

3. There is no information from Freedom House before 1972, and for these years, we code a
country as democractic if it has a positive Polity score and either CGV or BMR code it as
democratic.34
4. Soviet and Ex-Yugoslav countries are taken as independent throughout, and we use the USSR
and Yugoslavia scores for them in years before these countries’ dissolution, so they are all
nondemocracies before 1990.
5. Finally, when both Freedom House and Polity are missing, we rely on our secondary sources.
We have 174 observations for 16 countries that are only covered by CGV and BMR for which
we code our measure manually.35 In all of these cases, both sources provide a consistent view
of these countries.
We perform two additional refinements. First, we use PS’s democratization dates when there is
overlap with their sample (which is the case for 68 transitions to democracy), and then we modify
our coding to reflect PS dates of democratization based on historical sources.36
Second, we check for spurious transitions created by countries entering and leaving the Freedom
House, Polity, or our secondary datasets. We only detect such transitions for Cyprus, Malaysia,
to office for life. Besides this particular case, there are some countries for which only Freedom House provides
information for the years 2009 and 2010 (the CGV and BMR sample ends in 2008 and 2009 respectively). These
include Afghanistan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Dominica, Grenada,
Iceland, Iraq, Kiribati, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Seychelles, St. Kitts and Nevis, St.
Lucia, St. Vincent & Grens., Suriname, São Tomé & Prı́ncipe, Tonga and Vanuatu. In all of these cases, the Freedom
House indicator remains the same since 2008, so we just code a continuation of the regime that was in place in 2008.
34
There are a few cases coded as nondemocracies by CGV and BMR with a positive Polity score. In these cases,
the Polity score is always near zero and we code the observation as a nondemocracy.
35
The first country is Antigua and Barbuda, which is coded as democratic following its independence in 1981.
Barbados is set as democratic from its independence in 1966. It enters the Freedom House sample in 1972 and is still
coded as democratic. Germany is set as always democratic based on West Germany. Iceland and Luxembourg are
coded as always democratic. This matches the Freedom House coding once they enter into its sample. Kuwait is set
to nondemocratic in 1961 and 1962. In 1963 it enters the Polity sample where it is also coded as nondemocratic. The
Maldives are set as nondemocratic from its independence in 1965 until it enters the Freedom House sample in 1972,
where it continues being nondemocratic. Malta is set as democratic from its independence in 1964 until it enters the
Freedom House sample in 1972, where it is also democratic. Nauru is set as democratic from its independence in 1968
until it enters the Freedom House sample in 1972, remaining democratic. Syria is coded as nondemocratic in 1960
when it was not in Polity’s sample. It remains nondemocratic in the Polity sample. Tonga is coded as nondemocratic
since its independence. This matches the Freedom House coding when it enters the sample. Vietnam and Yemen
are always nondemocratic, but they are not in Polity and Freedom House prior to their unification. However, they
were nondemocratic according to all secondary sources. Samoa is nondemocratic since its independence based on
CGV and BMR for years in which Polity and Freedom House are missing. Finally, Zimbabwe is also nondemocratic
in 1965-1969 according to our secondary sources.
36
For five countries, our algorithm did not produce transitions close to PS official dates of democratization. These
countries are Guatemala, El Salvador, Iran, Tanzania and South Africa. For Guatemala, we code a democratization
in 1986 based on all of our sources, while PS code a permanent transition at the end of the civil war in 1996. For El
Salvador, we code the democratization episode in 1982 based on Freedom House and Polity, while PS code it in 1994.
We do not detect any transition to democracy for Iran and Tanzania, while PS do. In all of these cases we keep our
original coding. Our algorithm produces a permanent transition to democracy in South Africa during the early 80s
based on Freedom House and Polity. However, PS and all secondary sources agree that the official democratization
was in 1994, so we use this date.

31

Gambia and Guyana, which we handled on a case-by-case basis. The particular coding of these
countries does not affect our results.37
It is important to note that, in contrast to Papaioannou and Siourounis, we do not impose any
“stability criteria” and also code “temporary” transitions. Though some temporary switches in
and out of democracy may be driven by measurement error, focusing only on “permanent democratizations” (or permanent reversals) would create an obvious bias because the democracy index
would be a function of future events, thus potentially correlated with future GDP.
Overall, our democracy index covers the post-independence period for 183 countries from 1960
to 2010. Out of the 8,733 country/year observations, we code 3,777 instances of democracy and
4,956 instances of non-democracy. Out of the 183 countries, 45 are always democratic, 45 are
always nondemocratic and the rest transition in and out of democracy. There are a total of 122
democratizations and 71 reversals, suggesting large within country variation in our democracy
measure.
Figure A1 presents time-series plots, for the whole world and also separately for each of our
regions, our measure and the alternative indices. Freedom House and Polity are shown in blue and
are normalized to lie between 0 and 1. The figures are presented for the whole world and then by
geographical region. As can be seen, all measures show very similar patterns in all regions and are
highly correlated (the correlation between our measure and PS’s measure is 0.9054; with CGV it
is 0.8880, and with BMR it is 0.9050).
In Tables A1 and A2, we list all democratizations and reversals in our sample. We also present
the estimated propensity scores from our semi-parametric analysis in Section 5. The estimated
propensity score is missing for countries for which lags of GDP are not in the sample. Countries
that do not appear in these tables are always nondemocracies or democracies in our sample.

A2

Specification Tests

As a first check on our baseline AR4 specifications, we estimate models with democracy as dependent variable on different lags of GDP per capita as explanatory variables. These models test
whether, once we control for four lags of GDP per capita as well as country and year fixed affects,
democracy is (conditionally) uncorrelated with past GDP dynamics. Table A3 presents our results.
In column 1 we only include four lags of GDP. As anticipated by Figure 1, these four lags are jointly
significant. In particular, this specification predicts that democratizations are particularly likely to
37

In particular, we follow most sources and code Cyprus as democratic after 1974. Malaysia is coded as nondemocratic throughout. Guyana is coded as nondemocratic between 1966 and 1990 and democratic in all other years.
Finally, Gambia is coded as democratic between 1965 and 1993 only. None of the results reported in the paper
change if we exclude these countries.

32

occur following temporary declines in GDP.38
Column 2 adds lags 5-8 of GDP. Column 3 adds lags 9-12 of GDP. Column 4 adds up to the
16th lag and finally, column 5 adds up to the 20th lag of GDP. As shown by the p-values reported at
the bottom rows, the first four lags of GDP are strong joint predictors of contemporary democracy.
Deeper lags are only marginally significant in one specification, making us conclude that a specification with only four lags of GDP successfully models GDP dynamics before a democratization or
a reversal.
As an additional check on our specification, we test if the estimated error term εbct is uncorrelated

with lags of democracy. Table A4 presents our results. In column 1, we find that lagged democracy
does not predict future GDP residuals. Columns 2 to 4 show the same pattern for lags 2-4 of
democracy. Finally, column 5 shows that all these lags of democracy do not jointly predict future
GDP residuals.

A3

Robustness to Outliers

We investigate the robustness of our baseline within estimates to outliers in Table A5. Column
1 shows estimates for our baseline model for comparison. In column 2 we remove points with a
standardized residual (in our baseline) above 1.96 or below -1.96. In column 3 we remove points
with a Cook’s distance (in our baseline) above the rule-of-thumb value of 4 over the number of
observations. In column 4 we compute a robust regression estimator following Li (1985). Finally,
in the last column we present a Huber M -estimator which is more resilient to outliers.39
Overall, the results in Table A5 show that our within estimates are not driven by outliers.
Though the point estimates for the coefficient on democracy are generally smaller, the estimated
GDP persistence is greater, leaving the long-run effect of democracy broadly unchanged from our
baseline.

A4

Additional GMM Estimates

Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator exploits a full set of moment conditions derived from Assumption 1 and the additional assumption of no serial correlation in the error term. We now explore the
robustness of our results to using different sets of moments in Table A6.
Column 1 presents the baseline within estimator and column 2 repeats the baseline GMM
estimator from Table 2. Column 3 replaces the moments formed using lags of democracy with the
38

This is consistent with the findings in Acemoglu, et al. (2005) and Brückner and Ciccone (2011) that temporal
negative income shocks tend to increase the likelihood of democracy.
39
This estimator is similar to the robust regression estimator used in column 4, but avoids the biweight weighting
which creates convergence problems in some cases.

33

single moment E[(εct − εct−1 )Dct−1 ] = 0. This brings the number of moments down by half. The
estimated long-run effect of democracy is now 17.93%, which is slightly larger than the baseline
GMM estimate and closer to our within estimate. Column 4 uses up to the 25th lag of GDP
when forming the GMM conditions. The results are again similar but less precise. Column 5 uses
a different approach and, instead of taking first differences of the data, eliminates country fixed
effects by taking orthogonal forward deviations. Moment conditions can then be constructed as in
our baseline GMM estimator. The advantage of this strategy is that fewer moments are needed to
estimate the GDP per capita process, allowing us to use up to the fifth lag of GDP when forming the
moment conditions.40 Both the estimated persistence and the coefficient of democracy are greater
in this case, implying a larger long-run effect of 37.56%. But this effect is imprecisely estimated
because the persistence term is close to 1, so the delta method used to construct standard errors
performs poorly.
As an additional check, we add Ahn and Schmidt’s (1995) moment conditions. These conditions
are nonlinear—and this is why they are ignored in many cases—but they follow from the same
assumptions required by Arellano and Bond’s baseline GMM estimator. The additional moments
take the form (in a balanced panel)
E[εcT (εct − εct−1 )] = 0∀t = 2, . . . , T − 1.
Columns 6, 7 and 8 present GMM estimators adding these additional Ahn and Schmidt moment
conditions to the moment conditions exploited in columns 2, 3 and 4, respectively.41 Comparing
the estimates in columns 2-4 with their counterparts in columns 6-8 shows that these additional
nonlinear moment conditions improve the fit to GDP dynamics. In particular, GDP persistence
in these columns is 0.96, which is closer to our baseline within estimates, but the coefficient of
democracy is greater, leading to a larger estimate of the long-run effect on democracy.

A5

Other Measures of Democracy

In this section we study whether our results hold using different measures of democracy. These measures include dichotomous versions of Freedom House and Polity, PS, CGV and BMR democracy
measures already described above.42
40
The results using this transformation are equivalent to Arellano and Bond’s baseline GMM estimator when all
moment conditions are exploited, but when only a subset of moment conditions is exploited, they may differ.
41
We incorporate these additional conditions using an iterative procedure: We start with the estimates obtained
using the linear conditions. At each step, we add the nonlinear conditions computed with the previous estimated
coefficients. We iterate the procedure 15 times, which in practice leads to convergence.
42
The dichotomous version of Freedom House is obtained by coding as democratic countries that are “Free” or
“Partially Free”. For Polity, we code as democratic countries with a positive score. Some of these alternative data
sources do not assign any score for former Soviet countries before 1991. We follow our procedure and code them as
nondemocracies before 1991 (this is also the coding given by all these sources to the former Soviet Union).

34

Table A7 presents our results using these alternative measures. Panel A presents within estimates of our baseline model using all these alternative measures of democracy. In Panel B we
present 2SLS estimates using the specification in column 3, Panel A, Table 5. Finally, in Panel
C we present within estimates that do not control for GDP dynamics. Column labels specify the
measure of democracy used in each specification.
All estimates in Panels A and B show uniformly positive effects of democracy on growth. Our
within estimates in Panel A are all significant except for the Polity dummy and the CGV measure
of democracy. This could reflect the possibility that these measures are noisier, or that procedural
measures like CGV and BMR are missing important de facto elements of democracy.
Moreover, our 2SLS results in Panel B are always significant except for the BMR democracy
measure. In this case they are still positive and of a reasonable size, but less precisely estimated.
The 2SLS estimates are larger than their OLS counterparts (except for our measure and PS),
suggesting that these alternative measures are more heavily affected by measurement error than our
baseline measure. This provides support for our approach of constructing a consolidated measure
to mitigate attenuation bias. The 2SLS results using the Freedom House dichotomous measure
stands out for being considerably larger than the others. However, the first stage is somewhat weak
in this particular case as shown by the low F-statistic of 3.87.
As discussed in the Introduction, a reliable estimate of the effect of democracy needs to control
for GDP dynamics. This is confirmed in Panel C, which shows that not controlling for serial correlation in GDP at all has a significant impact on the results. In this case, the estimates of the effect
of democracy on economic growth vary considerably depending on the measure used. If anything,
most measures produce a misleading negative effect of democracy on GDP by falsely attributing
the lower GDP before a democratization and its subsequent impact on GDP to democracy. These
results suggest that the impact of the failure to adequately control for GDP dynamics on the relationship between democracy and economic growth explains, at least in part, the difference between
our robust and consistent results and lack of such results in several papers in the literature.

A6

The Effects of Components of Democracy

In this section we estimate the effect of different components of democracy on growth. Column 1 in
Table A8 shows within estimates of the effect of democratizations and reversals separately. These
models suggest that democratizations have an immediate impact on GDP per capita, increasing it
by 0.8% (standard error=0.235), and a long-run effect of 21.77%. A reversal, on the other hand,
reduces GDP per capita by 0.7% (standard error=0.335) in the short run and by 19% in the long
run. The estimates for reversals are less precise given the limited number of such transitions in our
data, but still statistically significant.
35

The Polity dataset codes its democracy variable based on several components. The first component is whether there are constraints on the executive. We code a dummy that takes the value
of 1 for country/years in which there is a substantial limitation on executive authority, or parity
or subordination to accountability groups, as captured by a polity score greater than or equal to
5 in this component. The second component is the competitiveness and openness of the executive recruitment process. We code a dummy that takes the value of 1 for country/years in which
the executive authority is chosen in competitive elections, as captured by a Polity score greater
than or equal to 8 in this component. The last component we explore is the competitiveness of
participation, or the extent to which several political backgrounds or groups can influence policy.
We code a dummy that takes the value of 1 for country/years in which political participation is
open to different political groups, as captured by a polity score greater than or equal to 5 in this
component.
Columns 2-5 present estimates for the Polity components of democracy. Our within estimates
suggest that executive constraints are not the key component of democratizations associated with
future economic growth. Though the estimates are imprecise, they suggest that the two components that are more strongly associated with growth are openness and competitiveness of executive
recruitment, and especially the competitiveness of political participation. The long-run effects reported at the bottom suggest that the competitiveness of participation has the largest impact on
GDP per capita, increasing it by 9.68% (though this is far from being statistically significant). In
column 5 we add all components simultaneously. The estimates are even less precise due to the
high correlation between all components, but still show similar qualitative results.
Likewise, Freedom House also reports two components. The first one, termed political rights, is
the component of democracy encompassing the electoral process, political pluralism and functioning
of the government. The second one, termed civil liberties, is the component of democracy related
to freedom of expression and belief, associational and organizational rights, rule of law, personal
autonomy and individual rights. We code dummies for both of them that take a value of one when
the respective score is below 4 in the 1 to 7 Freedom House scale. Columns 6-8 present estimates for
the different components of the Freedom House index. Our results suggest that both components,
especially civil liberties, matter for economic growth. An improvement in political rights increases
GDP per capita by 6.65% (p−value 0.159) in the long run; while an improvement in civil liberties
increases it by 10.25% (p−value 0.049). When both components are entered simultaneously, the
point estimates become imprecise but their sum still has a significant long-run effect on GDP per
capita, increasing it by 10.82% (p−value 0.056).

36

A7

Robustness to Outliers (2SLS Estimates)

We explore the robustness of our 2SLS estimates to outliers in Table A9. We focus on our preferred
2SLS specification presented in column 3, Panel A of Table 5. Column 1 reproduces these 2SLS
estimates for comparison. Columns 2-4 show estimates in which we identify outliers in the second
stage. In column 2 we identify observations whose second-stage standardized residual is above 1.96
or below -1.96, and re-estimate the 2SLS model without these observations. In column 3 we identify
observations whose second stage Cook’s distance is above 4 over the number of observations, and
re-estimate the 2SLS model without these observations. In column 4 we compute robust regression
weights for the second stage following Li (1985) and re-estimate the 2SLS model using these weights.
Overall, our results are similar to our main results, suggesting that our 2SLS estimates are not driven
by outliers in the second stage. Only the model in column 4 produces a larger long-run effect, but
this is mostly driven by the larger GDP persistence estimated in this model.
In the remaining columns, we present estimates in which we eliminate the influence of outliers
in both the first and second stage. To do so, we replace the first stage by an estimator robust to
outliers; compute the predicted values using this robust estimator for the whole estimation sample;
and estimate the second stage with the same robust estimator.43 Column 5 presents results in
which we remove observations with standardized errors above 1.96 or below -1.96 at each stage.
Column 6 presents results in which we remove observations with a Cook’s distance above 4 over the
number of observations at each stage. Column 7 presents results estimating each stage using Li’s
(1985) procedure. Finally, column 8 presents results using a Huber M −estimator at each stage.
We find similar long-run effects of democracy on growth. Only the model in column 7 produces
a smaller long-run effect, which is close or to our baseline within estimate. Overall, the evidence
suggests that outliers have little effect on our estimates.

A8

Alternative Regional Instruments

In this section, we show that our 2SLS results are robust to different constructions of the regional
instruments.
Our baseline instrument is constructed by defining Dcinit as 1 for countries that were democratic
during the first five years they appear in our sample (recall that our estimation sample excludes
periods in which countries were not independent). Though we find this definition intuitive, we
explore the robustness of our results to using three different definitions of the initial regime Dcinit .
Columns 1-4 of Table A10 present the results.
43

We compute standard errors using a Sandwich estimator formula similar to the one in Murphy and Topel (1985)
and presented in Stefanski and Boos (2002). This adjusts for the fact that we are using a generated regressor in the
second stage.

37

In the first column, we code Dcinit = 1 if a country is democratic from 1960-1964. In this
coding, non-independent countries are coded as nondemocracies Dcinit = 0. Column 2 presents our
2SLS estimates using four lags of the instrument obtained with this alternative coding of the initial
regime cells. The coefficient on democracy and the estimated long-run effect are larger than our
baseline estimates in column 1, but still plausible.
Our second alternative is to code Dcinit = 1 for countries that are always democratic in our
sample. This has the drawback of using future information in the construction of the instrument,
but has the advantage of putting together in one region× initial regime cell countries that eventually
had transitions, increasing the predictive power of the instrument. Column 3 presents our 2SLS
estimates using four lags of the instrument obtained with this alternative coding of the initial regime
cells. The coefficient of democracy and the estimated long-run effect are larger than our baseline
estimates in column 1, but still plausible and more precisely estimated.
Finally we explored more complex definitions of initial regimes based on country characteristics
in 1960. In particular we classified countries as British colonies, French colonies, civil dictatorships,
military dictatorships, mixed and presidential democracies, parliamentary democracies, royal dictatorships and socialist regimes. We constructed the instrument as in equation (3), using this
alternative region× initial regime classification (in this case we have 34 region/regime cells). The
results using four lags of this alternative instrument are presented in column 4, and are similar, if
somewhat larger, but still plausible effects of democracy.
We also explore an alternative way of capturing regional waves other than the one presented in
equation (3). In particular, we construct a set of instruments of the form
ar
Zct
= 1{Dcinit = a, c ∈ r} ×

1
N −1

X

D c′ t .

c′ ∈r,c′ 6=c

This makes the number of instruments equal to the number of region× initial regime cells. The
motivation for this construction is that regional democracy waves may have a differential effect on
each region× initial regime cell.
Columns 5-8 of Table A10 present results using these alternative constructions of the instrument.
We use four lags of the instruments as in our baseline results. Column 5 presents 2SLS estimates
obtained using our baseline definition of initial regimes. The results are similar to our baseline
2SLS estimates, though slightly smaller and less precisely estimated. Columns 6-8 present results
using this alternative construction of the instrument and each of the three alternative definitions
of initial regime used in columns 2-4, respectively. All these 2SLS estimates produce results in the
ballpark of our baseline 2SLS results.
Overall, the results suggest that our 2SLS results are not driven by the particular details or
construction of our regional democratization and reversal waves instrument.
38

A9

Appendix: Additional Heterogeneous Effects

Table A11 presents estimates interacting democracy with other measures of education. Columns
1-4 focus on the share of the population with primary education from the Barro-Lee dataset, while
columns 5-8 present results using the share with tertiary education. We do not find evidence of a
consistent interaction between democracy and these alternative measures of education.

39

−10

GDP per capita log points
−5
0
5

10

FIGURE 1: GDP PER CAPITA ARROUND A DEMOCRATIZATION.

−15

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around democratization

20

25

30

Notes: figure plots GDP per capita in log points around a democratic transition. We normalize the average log GDP
per capita in a country to zero. Time (in years) relative to the year of democratization runs on the horizontal axis.

40

0

GDP per capita log points
5
10
15

20

FIGURE 2: GDP PER CAPITA IN A DEMOCRATIZATION IN REWEIGHTED DATA.

−15

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around democratization

20

25

30

Notes: The figure plots GDP per capita in log points around a democratization. The reweighting controls
semi-parametrically for the GDP dynamics before a democratization. We normalize the log GDP per capita in a
country in the year before the democratization to zero. Time (in years) relative to the year of democratization runs
on the horizontal axis.

41

FIGURE 3: SEMI-PARAMETRIC ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF A DEMOCRATIZATION
ON GDP PER CAPITA.

−10

GDP per capita log points
0
10
20

30

GDP around a democratization

−15

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around democratization

20

25

30

25

30

−10

GDP per capita log points
0
10
20

30

GDP around a democratization

−15

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around democratization

20

Notes: The figure plots estimates of the effect of democratizations on GDP per capita in log points. The estimates
report the change in GDP per capita relative to a continuing nondemocracy, normalizing the difference in the year
before the event to zero. The estimates are obtained after reweighting the data using an inverse propensity score
weighting. The reweighting controls semi-parametrically for lags of GDP per capita as explained in Section 5. The
bottom figure uses a finite sample correction in the estimation of the weights. Time (in years) relative to the year of
democratization runs on the horizontal axis.

42

FIGURE 4: SEMI-PARAMETRIC ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF A REVERSAL ON GDP
PER CAPITA.

−40

GDP per capita log points
−20
0
20

40

GDP around a reversal

−15

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around reversal

20

25

30

20

25

30

−20

GDP per capita log points
−10
0
10

20

GDP around a reversal

−15

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around reversal

Notes: The figure plots estimates of the effect of reversals on GDP per capita in log points. The estimates report
the change in GDP per capita relative to a continuing democracy, normalizing the difference in the year before the
event to zero. The estimates are obtained after reweighting the data using an inverse propensity score weighting.
The reweighting controls semi-parametrically for lags of GDP per capita as explained in Section 5. The bottom
figure uses a finite sample correction in the estimation of the weights. Time (in years) relative to the year of
reversal runs on the horizontal axis.

43

0

.1

Mean democracy
.2
.3

.4

.5

FIGURE 5: DEMOCRATIZATION AND REVERSAL WAVES.

−10

−5

0
5
10
15
Years around first democratization in the region

20

.8

.85

Mean democracy
.9
.95

1

Nondemocracies in the same region
Other nondemocracies in other regions

−10

−5

0
5
10
Years around first reversal in the region

15

20

Democracies in the same region
Other democracies in other regions

Notes: The top figure plots average democracy among initial nondemocracies in a region around the first
democratization in the same region. For comparison it also plots average democracy among other initial
nondemocracies in other regions. The bottom figure plots average democracy among initial democracies in a region
around the first reversal in the same region. For comparison it also plots average democracy among other initial
democracies in other regions.

44

FIGURE 6: SEMI-PARAMETRIC ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF A DEMOCRATIZATION
ON POTENTIAL MECHANISMS.
Market reforms index

−10

0

10
Years around democratization

20

30

−5

−10

−30

0

−5

TFP log points
0

5

Reform index (0−100)
5
10
15

20
Investment share log points
−20
−10
0
10

20

Total factor productivity
10

Investment share of GDP

−10

10
Years around democratization

20

30

10
Years around democratization

20

30

20

30

20

30

20

30

Primary enrollment log points
−10
0
10
−20
−10

0

10
Years around democratization

20

30

−10

0

10
Years around democratization

Unrest

−40

−20

−30

Child mortality log points
−20
−10
0

Likelihood of unrest (0−100)
−20
0
20

40

Child mortality rate
10

Secondary enrollment rate
Secondary enrollment log points
−10
0
10
20

10
Years around democratization

20

30
−20
0

0

Primary enrollment rate

Tax revenue share log points
−10
0
10
20

Trade share log points
−10
0
10
−20
−10

−10

Tax revenue share of GDP

20

Trade share of GDP

0

−10

0

10
Years around democratization

20

30

−10

0

10
Years around democratization

20

30

−10

0

10
Years around democratization

Notes: The figures plot estimates of the effect of democratizations on different potential mechanisms specified in the
titles. The estimates report the change in the outcome relative to a continuing nondemocracy, normalizing the
difference in the year before the event to zero. The estimates are obtained after reweighting the data using an
inverse propensity score weighting. The reweighting controls semi-parametrically for lags of the outcome variable
and lags of GDP per capita as explained in Section 5. All figures use the finite sample correction in the estimation
of the weights. Time (in years) relative to the year of democratization runs on the horizontal axis.

45

FIGURE A1: DEMOCRACY ACROSS REGIONS
Democracy 1960−2010 in Africa

0

.2

Democracy index average
.3
.4
.5
.6

Democracy index average
.2
.4
.6

.7

Democracy 1960−2010 in the World

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

Year

1990

2000

2010

Year

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

Democracy 1960−2010 in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
Democracy index average
.2
.4
.6
0

0

Democracy index average
.2
.4

.8

.6

Democracy 1960−2010 in East Asia and the Pacific

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

Year

1990

2000

2010

Year

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

Democracy index average
.4
.6
.8

1

Democracy 1960−2010 in Latin America and the Caribbean

.2

.85

Democracy index average
.9
.95

1

Democracy 1960−2010 in Western Europe and Offshoots

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

Year

1990

2000

2010

Year

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

Democracy 1960−2010 in South Asia

0

.2

Democracy index average
.4
.6
.8

Democracy index average
.1
.2

1

.3

Democracy 1960−2010 in Middle East and North of Africa

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

Our democracy measure
CGV democracy measure
Polity IV index

PS democracy measure
BMR democracy measure
Freedom house index

Notes: The figures present the average of our dichotomous democracy index in each of the seven geograohic regions
used in the paper and defined by the World Bank. It also presents the average for the whole sample of countries.
For comparison we plot the average Polity IV score and Freedom House index (both normalized between 0 and 1),
Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008), Cheibub, Gandhi, and
46 Vreeland (2010) and Boix, Miller and Rosato’s (2012)
democracy measures.

TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS

Non-Democracies

Democracies

Variable

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev

GDP per capita
Investment share of GDP
TFP
Trade share of GDP
Primary Enrollment rate
Secondary Enrollment rate
Tax Revenue share of GDP
Child Mortality Per 1000 births
Unrest dummy
Market Reforms index (0-100)

3376
3225
1863
3175
2861
2424
3122
4142
3739
3476

2074.46
0.2182
1.0676
0.7162
90.29
45.76
0.1587
77.29
0.2870
21.89

3838.65
0.1023
0.4056
0.5106
29.51
31.77
0.0948
49.64
0.4524
23.26

3558
3340
2744
3485
2823
2538
2564
3615
3610
2829

8149.97
0.2328
0.9345
0.7715
101.60
75.40
0.2075
33.26
0.2191
52.11

9334.83
0.0741
0.1646
0.4104
15.86
29.78
0.0955
32.65
0.4137
24.75

Notes: See the text for a full description of the variables and their corresponding sources. The table presents the
statistics separately for nondemocracies (country/years for which our dichotomous democracy measure is 0) and
democracies (country/years for which our dichotomous democracy measure is 1).

47

TABLE 2: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA.
Within estimates

Democracy
log GDP first lag

HHK estimates

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.973
(0.294)
0.973
(0.006)

0.651
(0.248)
1.266
(0.038)
-0.300
(0.037)

0.787
(0.226)
1.238
(0.038)
-0.207
(0.046)
-0.026
(0.028)
-0.043
(0.017)

0.959
(0.477)
0.946
(0.009)

0.797
(0.417)
1.216
(0.041)
-0.270
(0.038)

0.875
(0.374)
1.204
(0.041)
-0.193
(0.045)
-0.028
(0.028)
-0.036
(0.020)

0.585
(0.355)
1.154
(0.045)
-0.214
(0.042)

1.181
(0.355)
1.146
(0.047)
-0.126
(0.055)
-0.029
(0.026)
-0.039
(0.017)

0.967
[0.000]
19.60
[0.023]

0.963
[0.000]
21.24
[0.003]

0.940
[0.000]
9.82
[0.108]

0.952
[0.000]
24.51
[0.005]

6336
175

5688
175

0.947
[0.000]
16.45
[0.051]
0.51
6161
175

0.937
[0.000]
12.61
[0.100]

6642
175

0.946
[0.000]
14.88
[0.104]
0.08
6467
175

1.701
(0.316)
1.151
(0.038)
-0.120
(0.042)
-0.039
(0.024)
-0.027
(0.029)
[ 0.082]
0.951
[0.000]
34.73
[0.000]

6790
175

0.946
[0.000]
17.61
[0.097]
0.01
6615
175

0.659
(0.378)
1.204
(0.038)
-0.205
(0.042)
-0.020
(0.027)
-0.038
(0.033)
[ 0.478]
0.944
[0.000]
11.81
[0.131]
0.95
5513
175

0.788
(0.466)
0.937
(0.009)

0.973
[0.000]
35.59
[0.011]

0.887
(0.245)
1.233
(0.039)
-0.214
(0.043)
-0.021
(0.028)
-0.039
(0.034)
[ 0.565]
0.960
[0.000]
22.01
[0.004]

6615
175

6467
175

6161
175

5513
175

log GDP second lag
log GDP third lag

48

log GDP fourth lag
p-value lags 5 to 8
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
AR2 test p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

Arellano and Bond estimates

Notes: The table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on log GDP per capita. The reported coefficient on democracy is multiplied by 100. Columns 1-4
present results using the within estimator. Columns 5-8 present results using Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator. Columns 9-12 present results using the HHK
estimator. In all specifications we control for a full set of country and year fixed effects. Columns 4, 8 and 12 include 8 lags of GDP per capita as controls, but we
only report the p-value of a test for joint significance of lags 5 to 8. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level
are in parentheses. We report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run
effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0. The AR2 row reports the p-value for a test of serial correlation in the residuals.

TABLE 3: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (ROBUSTNESS).
Panel A: Within estimates

Country controls:
(1)
Democracy
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

0.787
(0.226)
0.963
[0.000]
21.24
[0.003]
6336
175

GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
AR2 test p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

Unrest
(4)

Trade
(5)

0.718
0.911
0.705
0.595
(0.249)
(0.251)
(0.224) (0.264)
0.968
0.963
0.959
0.959
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000] [0.000]
22.17
24.86
17.00
14.59
[0.011]
[0.001]
[0.004] [0.040]
5523
6336
5643
5750
149
175
171
172
Panel B: Arellano and Bond estimates

(1)
0.875
(0.374)
0.947
[0.000]
16.45
[0.051]
0.51
6161
175

0.730
(0.387)
0.951
[0.000]
14.86
[0.099]
0.90
5374
149

(1)

GDP in 1960
quintiles ×
year effects
(2)

Soviet
dummies
(3)

1.181
(0.355)
0.952
[0.000]
24.51
[0.005]
6161
175

0.693
(0.367)
0.953
[0.000]
14.90
[0.079]
5374
149

1.069
(0.353)
0.950
[0.000]
21.47
[0.008]
6161
175

Covariatess:
Democracy

Soviet
dummies
(3)

GDP in 1960
quintiles ×
year effects
(2)

Covariates:
Democracy

GDP in 1960
quintiles ×
year effects
(2)

Soviet
dummies
(3)

1.073
(0.403)
0.946
[0.000]
20.01
[0.026]
0.28
6161
175
Panel C: HHK

Region ×
regime ×
year effects
(6)
0.834
(0.264)
0.950
[0.000]
16.65
[0.003]
6336
175

Unrest
(4)

Trade
(5)

Region ×
regime ×
year effects
(6)

0.693
(0.396)
0.930
[0.000]
9.87
[0.128]
0.62
5467
171
estimates

1.034
(0.469)
0.942
[0.000]
17.93
[0.047]
0.72
5570
172

1.217
(0.420)
0.933
[0.000]
18.21
[0.007]
0.70
6161
175

Unrest
(4)

Trade
(5)

Region ×
regime ×
year effects
(6)

1.214
(0.385)
0.951
[0.000]
24.90
[0.009]
5414
171

1.091
(0.345)
0.954
[0.000]
23.79
[0.014]
5578
172

1.448
(0.488)
0.938
[0.000]
23.37
[0.005]
6161
175

Notes: The table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on log GDP per capita. The reported coefficient
of democracy is multiplied by 100. Panel A presents results using the within estimator. Panel B presents results
using Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator. The AR2 row reports the p-value for a test of serial correlation in
the residuals. Panel C presents results using the HHK estimator. In all specifications we control for a full set
of country and year fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Additionally, we control for the covariates
specified in each column label and described in the text. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity
and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. We report the estimated persistence of the GDP
process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run effect of democracy
and the p−value for this being different from 0.

49

TABLE 4: SEMI-PARAMETRIC ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF DEMOCRATIZATIONS
AND REVERSALS ON GDP PER CAPITA.
Panel A: Transition to democracy
Five years
before
GDP per capita log points (relative to year before event)
p-value

GDP per capita log points (relative to year before event)
p-value

Five years
after

25-30 years
after

0.03
2.14
17.58
[0.905]
[0.058]
[0.013]
Panel C: Transition to autocracy
Five years
before

GDP per capita log points (relative to year before event)
p-value

25-30 years
after

1.74
1.43
15.06
[0.117]
[0.235]
[0.060]
Panel B: Transition to democracy with
finite sample correction
Five years
before

GDP per capita log points (relative to year before event)
p-value

Five years
after

Five years
after

25-30 years
after

2.23
-4.12
-24.21
[0.224]
[0.027]
[0.000]
Panel D: Transition to autocracy with
finite sample correction
Five years
before

Five years
after

25-30 years
after

-0.02
[0.959]

-2.12
[0.111]

-4.05
[0.439]

Notes: The table presents semi-parametric estimates of the short run (five years after), and long run (25-30 years after)
effects of democracy on log GDP per capita, as well as estimates for pretrends in GDP (five years before). The estimator
follows Angrist, Jordà and Kuersteiner (2013) and is described in the text. Panel A presents estimates of a transition from
nondemocracy to democracy. Panel B presents estimates of a transition from nondemocracy to democracy using a finite
sample correction in the estimation of the weights as described in the text. Panel C presents estimates of a transition
from democracy to nondemocracy. Panel D presents estimates of a transition from democracy to nondemocracy using
a finite sample correction in the estimation of the weights as described in the text. Below each estimate we report the
p−value for a test of it being different from zero. The p-values are obtained via bootstrapping.

50

TABLE 5: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES).
Within

Panel A: 2SLS estimates

Covariates:
Democracy
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Hansen p-value
Observations
Countries in sample
Exc. Instruments F-stat.

GDP in 1960
quintiles×
year effects
(4)

Regional
Unrest
(7)

Regional
Trade
(8)

Region
Trends
(9)

(2)

(3)

0.787
(0.226)
0.96
[0.000]
21.24
[0.003]

0.966
(0.558)
0.96
[0.000]
26.31
[0.123]

6336
175

6312
174
119.1

1.149
(0.554)
0.96
[0.000]
31.52
[0.070]
0.21
6309
174
33.2

1.125
1.292
2.570
1.272
(0.689)
(0.651)
(0.762)
(0.597)
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
35.23
35.72
59.36
31.88
[0.140]
[0.074]
[0.005]
[0.059]
0.18
0.32
0.19
0.62
5496
6309
6309
6309
148
174
174
174
16.8
26.7
29.6
33.1
Panel B: First-stage regression:

0.955
(0.576)
0.96
[0.000]
23.22
[0.130]
0.21
6309
174
33.2

1.697
(0.885)
0.95
[0.000]
36.79
[0.075]
0.28
6309
174
23.7

0.547
(0.101)
0.133
(0.081)
0.227
(0.067)
-0.087
(0.110)

0.503
(0.130)
0.109
(0.094)
0.270
(0.077)
-0.119
(0.126)
Panel C:

0.543
(0.102)
0.123
(0.081)
0.232
(0.068)
-0.084
(0.113)

0.498
(0.092)
0.129
(0.081)
0.228
(0.070)
-0.123
(0.106)

0.800
(0.073)

Democracy wave t-2
Democracy wave t-3
Democracy wave t-4

Base

0.480
0.537
(0.099)
(0.100)
0.133
0.133
(0.080)
(0.079)
0.223
0.223
(0.065)
(0.069)
-0.075
-0.091
(0.110)
(0.110)
HHK estimates:

0.530
(0.098)
0.128
(0.081)
0.228
(0.067)
-0.067
(0.110)

External democracy instruments

(1)

(2)

(3)

GDP in 1960
quintiles×
year effects
(4)

1.181
(0.355)
0.952
[0.000]
24.51
[0.005]
6161
175

0.550
(0.658)
0.951
[0.000]
11.27
[0.425]
6110
174

0.865
(0.503)
0.961
[0.000]
22.37
[0.130]
6110
174

1.339
(0.568)
0.970
[0.001]
45.06
[0.070]
5374
148

Covariates:

GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

Regional
GDP
(6)

(1)

Democracy wave t-1

Democracy

Soviet
dummies
(5)

Soviet
dummies
(5)

Regional
GDP
(6)

Regional
Unrest
(7)

Regional
Trade
(8)

Region
Trends
(9)

0.656
(0.540)
0.960
[0.000]
16.59
[0.253]
6110
174

1.347
(0.476)
0.943
[0.000]
23.82
[0.011]
6110
174

1.112
(0.486)
0.962
[0.000]
28.90
[0.047]
6110
174

0.974
(0.499)
0.963
[0.000]
26.08
[0.080]
6080
174

1.018
(0.486)
0.952
[0.000]
21.18
[0.062]
6110
174

Notes: The table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on log GDP per capita. The reported coefficient of
democracy is multiplied by 100. Panel A presents 2SLS estimates instrumenting democracy with up to four lags of
regional democracy waves and the p-value of a Hansen overidentification test. Panel B presents the corresponding
first stage estimates and the excluded instruments F statistic. Panel C presents results using the HHK estimator
instrumenting democracy with up to four lags of regional democracy waves. In all specifications we control for a full
set of country and year fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Additionally, we control for the covariates
specified in each column label and described in the text. Column 1 in Panels A and C present the baseline estimates
without instrumenting democracy. Column 2 presents estimates instrumenting democracy with the first lag of
regional democracy. In the remaining columns democracy is instrumented using four lags of regional democracy.
Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. We
report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the
estimated long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0.

51

TABLE 6: EFFECTS OF DEMOCRACY ON POTENTIAL MECHANISMS.
Mechanism:

Investment
share in GDP
(1)

TFP
(2)

Economic
reforms
(3)

Trade
share in GDP
(4)

Tax revenue
share in GDP
(5)

Primary
enrollment
(6)

Secondary
enrollment
(7)

Child
mortality
(8)

Riots and
revolts
(9)

2.391
(1.114)
0.74
[0.000]
9.11
[0.032]
5665
169

-0.205
(0.276)
0.93
[0.000]
-2.88
[0.455]
3879
107

0.687
(0.348)
0.88
[0.000]
5.58
[0.053]
4692
150

0.689
3.311
(0.676)
(1.409)
0.87
0.79
[0.000]
[0.000]
5.45
16.06
[0.300]
[0.016]
5738
4511
172
131
Panel B: 2SLS estimates

1.042
(0.338)
0.95
[0.000]
21.91
[0.004]
3714
166

1.345
(0.610)
0.93
[0.000]
18.96
[0.028]
2883
158

-0.253
(0.063)
0.99
[0.000]
-34.26
[0.001]
6084
173

-7.832
(2.185)
0.34
[0.000]
-11.94
[0.000]
5646
171

2.211
(2.852)
8.44
[0.430]
0.74
[0.000]
21.7
0.29
5640
168

-0.941
(0.667)
-12.74
[0.150]
0.93
[0.000]
27.7
0.06
3871
107

3.224
(0.863)
23.77
[0.000]
0.86
[0.000]
43.7
0.22
4670
149

5.512
8.088
(2.005)
(3.021)
40.59
38.61
[0.003]
[0.007]
0.86
0.79
[0.000]
[0.000]
21.5
31.8
0.09
0.69
5714
4489
171
130
Panel C: HHK estimates

1.757
(0.721)
36.69
[0.018]
0.95
[0.000]
12.1
0.09
3710
164

4.116
(1.626)
57.07
[0.009]
0.93
[0.000]
10.4
0.12
2879
156

-0.715
(0.164)
-95.73
[0.000]
0.99
[0.000]
26.3
0.02
6057
172

-5.569
(5.682)
-8.47
[0.323]
0.34
[0.000]
28.6
0.84
5619
170

3.500
(2.078)
13.92
[0.098]
0.75
[0.000]
5125
168

0.232
(0.546)
3.29
[0.672]
0.93
[0.000]
3557
107

2.947
(1.091)
19.86
[0.140]
0.85
[0.119]
4236
149

2.583
(1.191)
26.07
[0.033]
0.90
[0.000]
4866
171

0.756
(0.526)
28.52
[0.153]
0.97
[0.000]
3579
164

-0.125
(0.885)
-3.63
[0.888]
0.97
[0.002]
2683
156

-0.700
(0.122)
-198.64
[0.050]
1.00
[0.045]
5454
172

-13.968
(4.761)
-23.95
[0.004]
0.42
[0.000]
5233
170

Panel A: Within estimates.
Democracy
Outcome persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample
Democracy
Long-run effect
p-value
Outcome persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Exc. instruments F-stat.
Hansen p-value
Observations
Countries in sample
Democracy
Long-run effect
p-value
Outcome persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Observations
Countries in sample

2.929
(2.904)
12.00
[0.301]
0.76
[0.000]
4045
130

Notes: The table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on the different channels specified in the columns
labels. The reported coefficient of democracy is multiplied by 100. Panel A presents within estimates. Panel B
presents 2SLS estimates instrumenting democracy with four lags of regional democracy waves, the F statistic for
the excluded instruments and the p-value of a Hansen’s overidentification test. Panel C presents results using the
HHK estimator instrumenting democracy with four lags of regional democracy. In all specifications we control for
a full set of country and year fixed effects, four lags of GDP per capita and four lags of the dependent variable.
Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. We
report the estimated persistence of the outcome process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also report
the estimated long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0.

52

TABLE 7: HETEROGENEOUS EFFECTS OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA.
Interaction with:
Measured at:

1960
(1)

log GDP per capita:
1970
1980
Current
(2)

(3)

(4)

1960
(5)

Share with secondary:
1970
1980
Current
(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Within estimates:
Democracy
Interaction
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample
Democracy
Interaction
Long-run effect
p-value
Exc. instruments F-stat.
Hansen p-value
Observations
Countries in sample
Democracy
Interaction
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

0.432
(0.275)
0.001
(0.002)
16.23
[0.146]
4281
93

0.572
(0.248)
0.001
(0.001)
18.63
[0.040]
4909
109

0.687
0.744
0.446
0.340
(0.248) (0.246) (0.254) (0.253)
0.002
0.001
0.046
0.049
(0.002) (0.002) (0.028) (0.020)
20.49
19.84
13.79
10.48
[0.017]
[0.016]
[0.107] [0.205]
5525
6336
5300
5300
131
175
138
138
Panel B: 2SLS estimates:

0.385
(0.246)
0.038
(0.014)
11.84
[0.145]
5300
138

0.495
(0.241)
0.020
(0.013)
14.60
[0.083]
5300
138

0.500
(1.088)
-0.002
(0.005)
18.84
[0.665]
6.6
0.81
4273
93

0.155
(0.961)
0.000
(0.004)
4.98
[0.874]
6.1
0.73
4901
109

0.645
1.326
-0.119
-0.484
(0.929) (0.887) (0.662) (0.665)
-0.000
-0.003
0.174
0.156
(0.004) (0.004) (0.060) (0.047)
19.28
36.12
-3.65
-14.59
[0.523]
[0.227]
[0.855] [0.443]
7.0
14.0
18.5
17.6
0.54
0.33
0.44
0.41
5517
6153
5292
5292
131
174
138
138
Panel C: HHK estimates:

-0.474
(0.639)
0.116
(0.033)
-14.14
[0.435]
16.0
0.25
5292
138

0.600
(0.576)
0.049
(0.023)
17.37
[0.351]
12.4
0.50
5218
138

0.299
(0.450)
0.003
(0.003)
11.99
[0.535]
4180
93

0.451
(0.452)
-0.002
(0.003)
17.87
[0.349]
4792
109

0.411
(0.382)
0.001
(0.003)
14.83
[0.338]
5386
131

1.001
(0.565)
0.056
(0.028)
33.29
[0.118]
5154
138

1.915
(0.499)
0.010
(0.012)
60.85
[0.016]
5154
138

1.647
(0.515)
0.004
(0.004)
47.70
[0.033]
6110
174

1.157
(0.584)
0.094
(0.041)
38.92
[0.075]
5154
138

0.916
(0.570)
0.101
(0.036)
29.01
[0.140]
5154
138

Notes: The table presents estimates of the effect of democracy interacted with other country characteristics on
growth. The column labels specify the variable interacted with democracy in each model. The reported coefficients
of democracy and the interaction are multiplied by 100. Main effects and the long-run effects are evaluated at the
25th percentile of the interacted variable. Panel A presents within estimates. Panel B presents 2SLS estimates
instrumenting democracy and the interaction term with four lags of regional democracy waves and their interactions
with the interacted variable. It also reports the F statistic for the excluded instruments and the p-value of a
Hansen’s overidentification test. Panel C presents results using the HHK estimator instrumenting democracy with
four lags of regional democracy waves and their interactions with the interacted variable. In all specifications we
control for a full set of country and year fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Standard errors robust
against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. We report the estimated
persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run
effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0.

53

TABLE A1: DEMOCRATIZATIONS IN OUR SAMPLE.
Country

Year

Propensity
score

Albania
Albania
Argentina
Argentina
Armenia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Burundi
Benin
Burkina Faso
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Bulgaria
Belarus
Bolivia
Brazil
Bhutan
Central African Rep.
Chile
Côte d’Ivoire
Congo, Republic of
Comoros
Comoros
Comoros
Cape Verde
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Djibouti
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Spain
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Georgia
Ghana
Ghana
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guinea-Bissau

1992
1997
1973
1983
1991
1998
1992
2003
1991
1977
1991
2009
1991
1991
1982
1985
2008
1993
1990
2000
1992
1990
1996
2002
1991
1974
1993
1999
1978
1979
1978
1992
1995
1990
1995
1970
1979
1996
2010
1994
1999

0.1687
0.0169
0.0279
0.0411
n.a.
0.0129
n.a.
0.0195
0.1196
0.0149
0.0975
0.0167
0.1115
n.a.
0.0498
0.0263
0.0410
0.1439
0.0513
0.0514
0.0758
0.0866
0.0561
0.0383
0.0868
n.a.
n.a.
0.1158
0.0531
0.0443
0.0529
0.0955
0.0191
0.0642
0.1025
0.0193
0.0453
0.0435
0.0564
0.0900
0.1559

Country

Year

Propensity
score

Guinea-Bissau
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Croatia
Haiti
Haiti
Haiti
Hungary
Indonesia
Kenya
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz Republic
Cambodia
Korea
Lebanon
Liberia
Lesotho
Lesotho
Lithuania
Latvia
Moldova
Madagascar
Mexico
Macedonia, FYR
Mali
Mongolia
Mozambique
Mauritania
Malawi
Niger
Niger
Niger
Nigeria
Nigeria
Nicaragua
Nepal
Nepal

2005
1975
1984
1966
1986
1992
1982
2000
1990
1994
2006
1990
1999
2002
2005
2010
1993
1988
2005
2004
1993
1999
1993
1993
1994
1993
1997
1991
1992
1993
1994
2007
1994
1991
1999
2010
1979
1999
1990
1991
2006

0.0669
0.0126
0.0117
0.0194
0.0283
0.0725
0.0462
0.0453
n.a.
n.a.
0.0505
0.0669
0.1128
0.0386
0.0434
0.0449
n.a.
0.0200
0.0426
0.0689
0.1022
0.0909
n.a.
0.2413
0.2090
0.1503
0.0395
n.a.
0.0866
0.1734
0.1031
0.0131
0.0973
0.1173
0.0958
0.0581
0.0539
0.1001
0.1258
0.0955
0.0394

Country

Year

Propensity
score

Pakistan
Pakistan
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Peru
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Paraguay
Romania
Russia
Sudan
Sudan
Senegal
Serbia & Montenegro
Solomon Islands
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone
El Salvador
São Tomé & Prı́ncipe
Suriname
Suriname
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Taiwan
Thailand
Thailand
Thailand
Thailand
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
Uruguay
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1972
1988
2008
1994
1963
1980
1993
1987
1990
1976
1993
1990
1993
1965
1986
2000
2000
2004
1996
2001
1982
1991
1988
1991
1993
1992
1992
1974
1978
1992
2008
1961
1973
1983
1980
1994
1985
1994
1991
1978

0.0158
0.0351
0.0523
0.0595
n.a.
0.0160
0.1107
0.0195
n.a.
0.0180
0.1052
0.0836
0.1532
0.0292
0.0439
0.0467
n.a.
0.0361
0.0553
0.0267
0.0823
n.a.
0.0592
0.0755
0.1690
n.a.
n.a.
0.0143
0.0473
0.0454
0.0485
n.a.
0.0275
0.0266
n.a.
0.1402
0.0356
0.0890
0.1177
0.0888

Notes: The table summarizes all democratization events in our sample. Democratizations are identified as transitions from nondemocracy to democracy using our dichotomous measure. For each democratization we report the
country and the year in which it took place. The table also reports the estimated propensity score of each event
based on lags of GDP. The estimation of the propensity score is fully explained in section 5. n.a. indicates that the
propensity score is not available because of the availability of sufficient GDP data. The overall sample probability of
a democratization following a period of nondemocracy is 0.0184.

54

TABLE A2: REVERSALS IN OUR SAMPLE.

Country

Year

Propensity
score

Albania
Argentina
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Burkina Faso
Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Belarus
Brazil
Central African Rep.
Chile
Côte d’Ivoire
Congo, Republic of
Congo, Republic of
Comoros
Comoros
Comoros
Djibouti
Ecuador
Ethiopia
Fiji
Fiji
Ghana
Ghana
Gambia, The
Guinea-Bissau
Guinea-Bissau
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Haiti
Haiti
Kyrgyz Republic
Cambodia
Korea

1996
1976
1996
1993
1980
1974
2007
1995
1964
2003
1973
2002
1963
1997
1976
1995
1999
2010
1961
2010
1987
2006
1972
1981
1994
1998
2003
1967
1979
1974
1991
2000
2010
2009
1995
1961

0.0252
0.0365
0.0777
n.a.
0.3021
0.1664
0.0189
0.0268
0.0393
0.0592
0.0459
0.0261
n.a.
0.0251
n.a.
0.0484
0.0654
0.0354
n.a.
0.0984
0.0224
0.0140
0.2532
0.0721
0.0344
0.0842
0.0927
0.0289
n.a.
0.0858
n.a.
0.0462
0.0608
0.0970
n.a.
n.a.

Country

Year

Propensity
score

Lebanon
Lesotho
Madagascar
Myanmar
Mauritania
Niger
Niger
Nigeria
Nigeria
Nepal
Pakistan
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Peru
Peru
Philippines
Russia
Sudan
Sudan
Solomon Islands
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Suriname
Suriname
Thailand
Thailand
Thailand
Turkey
Turkey
Uganda
Uruguay
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Zimbabwe

1975
1998
2009
1962
2008
1996
2009
1966
1984
2002
1977
1999
1968
1962
1968
1992
1965
2004
1969
1989
2000
1967
1997
1969
1980
1990
1976
1991
2006
1971
1980
1985
1972
2009
1987

n.a.
0.0537
0.1156
n.a.
0.0286
0.1383
0.1274
0.1026
0.1212
0.0696
0.1151
0.0365
0.0626
n.a.
0.0934
0.0143
0.0758
0.0050
0.1589
0.1178
0.0237
0.2412
0.0449
n.a.
0.0657
0.0276
0.1459
0.0207
0.0100
0.0340
0.0526
n.a.
0.0408
0.0090
0.1505

Notes: The table summarizes all reversal events in our sample. Reversals are identified as transitions
from democracy to nondemocracy using our dichotomous measure. For each reversal we report the
country and the year in which it took place. The table also reports the estimated propensity score of
each event based on lags of GDP. The estimation of the propensity score is fully explained in section
5. n.a. indicates that the propensity score is not available because of the availability of sufficient GDP
data. The overall sample probability of a reversal following a period of democracy is 0.0121.

55

TABLE A3: EFFECT OF LAGS OF GDP PER CAPITA ON DEMOCRACY.
GDP lags:

4 lags
(1)

8 lags
(2)

12 lags
(3)

16 lags
(4)

20 lags
(5)

log GDP first lag

0.130
(0.068)
-0.222
(0.054)
0.007
(0.048)
-0.053
(0.062)
[0.000]

0.130
(0.076)
-0.218
(0.056)
-0.020
(0.055)
-0.071
(0.051)
[0.001]
[0.201]
5699
175

0.137
(0.088)
-0.217
(0.069)
-0.032
(0.064)
-0.069
(0.066)
[0.019]
[0.121]
5031
173

0.214
(0.095)
-0.260
(0.072)
-0.057
(0.072)
-0.074
(0.074)
[0.012]
[0.052]
4359
170

0.297
(0.127)
-0.290
(0.095)
-0.081
(0.083)
-0.080
(0.086)
[0.052]
[0.115]
3692
165

log GDP second lag
log GDP third lag
log GDP fourth lag
p-value first four lags
p-value additional lags
Observations
Countries in sample

6347
175

Notes: The table reports within estimates of the effect of lagged GDP per capita on
democracy. In each column we add a different number of lags of GDP as specified in
the columns labels. The table only reports the coefficients of the first four lags. Below
each model we report the p-value for a test of joint significance of the first four lags,
and the p-value of the additional lags. In all specifications we include a full set of
country and year fixed effects. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses.

56

TABLE A4: CORRELATION BETWEEN ESTIMATED RESIDUALS IN EQUATION (1) AND
LAGGED DEMOCRACY
(1)
Democracy first lag

(2)

(3)

(5)

-0.029
(0.123)
[0.814]
6234

0.584
(0.389)
-0.874
(0.522)
-0.095
(0.520)
0.344
(0.385)
[0.372]
6234

-0.039
(0.124)

Democracy second lag

-0.085
(0.123)

Democracy third lag

-0.067
(0.123)

Democracy fourth lag
P-value lags of democracy
Observations

(4)

[0.755]
6315

[0.487]
6292

[0.587]
6265

Notes: The table reports estimates of the lagged democracy on the estimated residual in
equation (1). The shock in the GDP equation is estimated after partialling out democracy
and four lags of GDP. In each column we add different lags of democracy and report their
joint p-value at the bottom of each model. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity
and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses.

57

TABLE A5: EFFECTS OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (CONTROLLING FOR
OUTLIERS).

Democracy
log GDP first lag
log GDP second lag
log GDP third lag
log GDP fourth lag
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.787
(0.226)
1.238
(0.038)
-0.207
(0.046)
-0.026
(0.028)
-0.043
(0.017)
0.963
[0.000]
21.24
[0.003]
6336
175

0.558
(0.178)
1.225
(0.015)
-0.197
(0.022)
-0.028
(0.018)
-0.029
(0.010)
0.971
[0.000]
19.42
[0.006]
6046
175

0.596
(0.173)
1.234
(0.016)
-0.212
(0.022)
-0.020
(0.016)
-0.029
(0.010)
0.973
[0.000]
21.98
[0.003]
6027
175

0.397
(0.143)
1.229
(0.011)
-0.205
(0.017)
-0.034
(0.014)
-0.013
(0.009)
0.978
[0.000]
18.09
[0.010]
6160
175

0.490
(0.171)
1.240
(0.009)
-0.209
(0.015)
-0.031
(0.014)
-0.026
(0.009)
0.974
[0.000]
19.00
[0.006]
6336
175

Notes: The table presents within estimates of the effect of democracy on GDP
per capita. The coefficient of democracy is multiplied by 100. Column 1 presents
our baseline within estimates. Column 2 removes countries with a a standardized
residual estimated above 1.96 or below -1.96. In Column 3 we remove points with
a Cook’s distance above the rule of thumb value of 4 over the number of
observations. In Column 4 we compute a robust regression estimator that takes
care of outliers by assigning them a lower weight following Li (1985). In Column 5
we present a Huber M estimator. In all specifications we control for a full set of
country and year fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Standard errors
robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in
parentheses. We report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the
p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run effect of
democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0.

58

TABLE A6: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (ALTERNATIVE GMM ESTIMATES)
Within
Democracy
log GDP first lag
log GDP second lag
log GDP third lag
log GDP fourth lag
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
AR2 test p-value
Moments
Observations
Countries in sample

Arellano & Bond moments

Ahn & Schmidt moments

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.787
(0.226)
1.238
(0.038)
-0.207
(0.046)
-0.026
(0.028)
-0.043
(0.017)
0.963
[0.000]
21.24
[0.003]

0.875
(0.374)
1.204
(0.041)
-0.193
(0.045)
-0.028
(0.028)
-0.036
(0.020)
0.947
[0.000]
16.45
[0.051]
0.51
2509
6161
175

0.994
(0.554)
1.204
(0.047)
-0.193
(0.047)
-0.027
(0.028)
-0.039
(0.020)
0.945
[0.000]
17.93
[0.125]
0.45
1266
6161
175

1.034
(0.700)
1.176
(0.048)
-0.183
(0.046)
-0.026
(0.027)
-0.038
(0.022)
0.929
[0.000]
14.53
[0.179]
0.53
941
6161
175

1.268
(0.607)
1.238
(0.051)
-0.207
(0.049)
-0.027
(0.028)
-0.039
(0.017)
0.966
[0.023]
37.56
[0.225]
0.32
231
6161
175

1.107
(0.336)
1.230
(0.039)
-0.202
(0.046)
-0.029
(0.028)
-0.039
(0.019)
0.960
[0.000]
27.93
[0.010]
0.46
2555
6161
175

1.257
(0.508)
1.241
(0.043)
-0.204
(0.047)
-0.029
(0.029)
-0.045
(0.020)
0.962
[0.000]
33.32
[0.052]
0.38
1312
6161
175

1.461
(0.661)
1.237
(0.043)
-0.203
(0.047)
-0.030
(0.028)
-0.045
(0.021)
0.960
[0.000]
36.39
[0.070]
0.39
987
6161
175

6336
175

Notes: The table presents different GMM estimates of the effect of democracy on GDP per capita. The coefficient of
democracy is multiplied by 100. Column 1 presents our baseline within estimates. Columns 2-4 remove the country
fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and estimates the model by GMM. Column 2 uses Arellano and
Bond’s moment conditions, while columns 3 and 4 use different subsets of moment conditions described in the
appendix. In Column 5 we remove fixed effects using forward orthogonal differences, and estimate the model using
fewer moment conditions. In Columns 6-8 we add Ahn and Schmidt (1995) non-linear moment conditions to the
models in columns 2-4. In all specifications we control for a full set of country and year fixed effects and four lags
of GDP per capita. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are
in parentheses. We report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this being less than
1. We also report the estimated long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0. The
AR2 row reports the p-value for a test of serial correlation in the residuals. The number of moments used by each
estimator is reported below it.

59

TABLE A7: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (ALTERNATIVE DEMOCRACY MEASURES).
Measure of democracy:

Ours
(1)

P&S
(2)

FH
(3)

POL
(4)

CGV
(5)

BMR
(6)

Panel A: Within estimates with GDP dynamics.
Democracy
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries
Democracy
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Exc. instruments F-stat.
Observations
Countries in sample
Democracy
Observations
Countries in sample

0.787
0.813
0.649
0.152
0.315
0.521
(0.226) (0.291) (0.223) (0.251) (0.258) (0.270)
0.963
0.963
0.951
0.966
0.963
0.964
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]
21.24
22.24
13.28
4.41
8.61
14.44
[0.003] [0.010] [0.004] [0.555] [0.246] [0.068]
6336
5736
5587
5630
5994
5783
175
153
174
153
175
174
Panel B: 2SLS estimates with GDP dynamics.
1.149
1.040
(0.554) (0.424)
0.964
0.964
[0.000] [0.000]
31.52
28.60
[0.070] [0.038]
33.21
64.26
6309
5736
174
153
Panel C: Within

4.179
1.139
(1.594) (0.537)
0.942
0.967
[0.000] [0.000]
72.04
34.51
[0.018] [0.074]
3.87
29.80
5185
5577
174
151
estimates without

-10.112
(4.316)
6934
175

5.468
(3.151)
5840
174

-8.388
(6.700)
6328
153

-11.017
(3.988)
6179
154

1.440
1.088
(0.760) (0.668)
0.964
0.964
[0.000] [0.000]
40.41
30.40
[0.092] [0.141]
9.22
9.27
5962
5775
174
174
GDP dynamics.
-7.106
(4.715)
6588
175

-4.214
(4.485)
6372
174

Notes: The table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on GDP per capita, using alternative
measures of democracy listed in the top row. The coefficient of democracy is multiplied by 100.
Panel A presents within estimates controlling for four lags of GDP per capita. Panel B presents 2SLS
estimates instrumenting democracy with four lags of regional democracy waves and the F statistic for
the excluded instruments. Panel C presents within estimates that do not control for GDP dynamics.
In all specifications we control for a full set of country and year fixed effects. Standard errors robust
against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. We report
the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also
report the estimated long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0.

60

TABLE A8: EFFECT OF COMPONENTS OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA.
Polity components
(1)
Democratizations
Reversals

(2)

(3)

FH components

(4)

(5)

0.361
(0.318)

-0.542
(0.406)
0.424
(0.353)
0.379
(0.333)

(6)

(8)

0.497
(0.245)
0.951
[0.000]
10.24
[0.048]
5585
174

0.077
(0.264)
0.449
(0.297)
0.952
[0.000]
10.86
[0.053]
5585
174

0.803
(0.235)
-0.705
(0.335)

Constraints on the executive

-0.243
(0.261)

Executive recruitment

0.132
(0.214)

Competitiveness of participation
Political rights

0.323
(0.219)

Civil Liberties
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

(7)

0.963
[0.000]
21.77
[0.004]
6336
175

0.963
[0.000]
-6.50
[0.340]
5487
153

0.963
[0.000]
3.58
[0.533]
5487
153

0.963
[0.000]
9.68
[0.240]
5487
153

0.962
[0.000]
6.89
[0.456]
5487
153

0.952
[0.000]
6.70
[0.153]
5585
174

Notes: The table presents within estimates of the effect of different components of democracy on GDP per capita.
The coefficients of the component are multiplied by 100. Column 1 presents separately the effect of a democratization
and a reversal. Columns 2-5 present estimates of the effect of the different components reported by Polity. Columns
6-8 present estimates of the effect of the different components reported by Freedom House. The components and
their construction are described in the appendix. In all specifications we control for a full set of country and year
fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation
at the country level are in parentheses. We report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value
for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run effect of democracy (computed as the sum of all
components) and the p−value for this being different from 0.

61

TABLE A9: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES CONTROLLING FOR OUTLIERS).
Robust
second stage
Democracy
log GDP first lag
log GDP second lag
log GDP third lag
log GDP fourth lag
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

Robust first
and second stage

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1.149
(0.554)
1.238
(0.038)
-0.205
(0.046)
-0.029
(0.028)
-0.040
(0.018)
0.964
[0.000]
31.52
[ 0.070]
6309
174

0.869
(0.446)
1.228
(0.015)
-0.195
(0.021)
-0.034
(0.017)
-0.027
(0.010)
0.972
[0.000]
30.74
[ 0.069]
6015
174

0.813
(0.454)
1.235
(0.016)
-0.207
(0.022)
-0.032
(0.016)
-0.022
(0.010)
0.974
[0.000]
31.23
[ 0.104]
6000
174

0.836
(0.395)
1.231
(0.011)
-0.204
(0.017)
-0.039
(0.013)
-0.009
(0.008)
0.979
[0.000]
39.70
[ 0.052]
6133
174

1.098
(0.500)
1.332
(0.020)
-0.307
(0.033)
-0.023
(0.024)
-0.032
(0.015)
0.970
[0.000]
36.86
[ 0.059]
5967
174

0.716
(0.388)
1.244
(0.017)
-0.219
(0.024)
-0.029
(0.018)
-0.021
(0.011)
0.975
[0.000]
28.68
[ 0.112]
5612
173

0.507
(0.257)
1.232
(0.008)
-0.206
(0.013)
-0.038
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.008)
0.978
[0.000]
23.53
[ 0.059]
6309
174

0.843
(0.385)
1.242
(0.009)
-0.209
(0.015)
-0.035
(0.015)
-0.022
(0.009)
0.975
[0.000]
33.76
[ 0.041]
6309
174

Notes: The table presents different 2SLS estimates of the effect of democracy on GDP per capita instrumenting
democracy with four lags of regional democracy. The coefficient of democracy is multiplied by 100. Column 1
presents our baseline 2SLS estimates. Column 2 removes countries with a standardized residual estimated above 1.96
or below -1.96 in the second stage. In Column 3 we remove points with a estimated Cook’s distance above the rule
of thumb value (4 over the number of observations) in the second stage. In Column 4 we compute robust regression
weights for the second stage following Li (1985), and re-estimate the model by 2SLS using these weights. In Column
5 we estimate the first and second stage manually excluding at each step countries with a a standardized residual
estimated above 1.96 or below -1.96. In Column 6 we estimate the first and second stage manually excluding at each
step countries with a a Cooks’ distance above 4 over the number of observations. In Column 7 we estimate each stage
using a robust estimator following Li (1985). In Column 8 we estimate each stage using a Huber M estimator. In all
specifications we control for a full set of country and year fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Standard
errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. Standard
errors for our two step procedures in columns 5 to 8 are obtained following the adjustments proposed by Stefanski
and Boos (2002) and Murphy and Topel (1985). We report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the
p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for
this being different from 0.

62

TABLE A10: EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES WITH ALTERNATIVE INSTRUMENTS).
Instrument construction:
Initial regime:
Democracy
GDP persistence
p-value (test < 1)
Long-run effect
p-value
Exc. instruments F-stat.
Observations
Countries in sample

Base

Baseline
1960-65 All years

Multiple

Base

Alternative
1960-65 All years

Multiple

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1.149
(0.554)
0.964
[ 0.000]
31.52
[ 0.070]
33.2
6309
174

1.598
(0.674)
0.964
[ 0.000]
44.57
[ 0.050]
12.3
6270
173

1.672
(0.552)
0.964
[ 0.000]
46.12
[ 0.018]
45.1
6330
175

1.996
(0.909)
0.965
[ 0.000]
56.72
[ 0.079]
8.3
5906
164

0.849
(0.512)
0.963
[ 0.000]
23.03
[ 0.147]
965.4
6309
174

0.988
(0.606)
0.963
[ 0.000]
26.93
[ 0.143]
130.6
6270
173

1.041
(0.547)
0.963
[ 0.000]
28.03
[ 0.105]
513.6
6330
175

0.939
(0.539)
0.963
[ 0.000]
25.65
[ 0.118]
303700.1
5906
164

Notes:
The table presents 2SLS estimates of the effect of democracy in GDP per capita using alternative
constructions of the regional democracy instrument. The coefficient of democracy is multiplied by 100. In all
models we instrument democracy using four lags of the alternative instruments. In columns 1-4, we use the baseline
construction of the instrument. In columns 5-8 we use the alternative instruments described in the appendix. In
columns 1 and 5 we use the baseline definition of initial regimes. In columns 2 and 6 we define initial regimes based
on whether they were democratic during 1960-64. In columns 3 and 7 we define initial regimes based on whether
they were democratic throughout the sample. In columns 4 and 8 we use a richer set of initial regimes described in
the text to construct the instrument. In all specifications we control for a full set of country and year fixed effects
and four lags of GDP per capita. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the
country level are in parentheses. We report the estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this
being less than 1. We also report the estimated long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different
from 0. The F statistic for the excluded instruments is reported below each estimate.

63

TABLE A11: HETEROGENEOUS EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GDP PER CAPITA (ADDITIONAL ESTIMATES).
Interaction with:
Measured at:

Democracy
Interaction
Long-run effect
p-value
Observations
Countries in sample

1960

Share with primary:
1970
1980
Current

1960

Share with tertiary:
1970
1980
Current

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.573
(0.271)
0.008
(0.007)
17.73
[0.062]
5300
138

0.537
(0.279)
0.008
(0.007)
16.56
[0.087]
5300
138

0.537
(0.268)
0.010
(0.007)
16.49
[0.076]
5300
138

0.443
(0.257)
0.016
(0.008)
13.48
[0.121]
5300
138

0.531
(0.252)
0.182
(0.099)
16.53
[0.054]
5300
138

0.507
(0.253)
0.136
(0.070)
15.75
[0.066]
5300
138

0.537
(0.260)
0.073
(0.046)
16.62
[0.061]
5300
138

0.660
(0.269)
0.031
(0.042)
20.04
[0.027]
5300
138

Notes: The table presents within estimates of the effect of democracy interacted with other country characteristics
on growth. The columns label on each panel specify the variable interacted with democracy in each model. The
reported coefficients of democracy and the interaction are multiplied by 100 to ease their interpretation. Main effects
and lon-run effects are evaluated at the 25th percentile of the interacted variable. Interactions in columns 4 and 8
are done with the closest available observation before each year (education data is available every five years). In all
specifications we control for a full set of country and year fixed effects and four lags of GDP per capita. Standard
errors robust against heteroskedasticity and serial correlation at the country level are in parentheses. We report the
estimated persistence of the GDP process and the p−value for this being less than 1. We also report the estimated
long-run effect of democracy and the p−value for this being different from 0.

64

