NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GLOBAL VIEW OF CROSS-BORDER MIGRATION
Julian di Giovanni
Andrei A. Levchenko
Francesc Ortega
Working Paper 20002
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20002
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We are grateful to the editor (Fabrizio Zilibotti), anonymous referees, Antonio Ciccone, Frederic Docquier,
Luca Opromolla, Giovanni Peri, and seminar and conference participants at various institutions for
helpful suggestions, and to Lin Ma and Rishi Sharma for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Julian di Giovanni, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Francesc Ortega. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Global View of Cross-Border Migration
Julian di Giovanni, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Francesc Ortega
NBER Working Paper No. 20002
March 2014
JEL No. F12,F15,F22,F24
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the global welfare impact of observed levels of migration using a quantitative
multi-sector model of the world economy calibrated to aggregate and firm-level data. Our framework
features cross-country labor productivity differences, international trade, remittances, and a heterogeneous
workforce. We compare welfare under the observed levels of migration to a no-migration counterfactual.
In the long run, natives in countries that received a lot of migration – such as Canada or Australia –
are better off due to greater product variety available in consumption and as intermediate inputs. In
the short run the impact of migration on average welfare in these countries is close to zero, while the
skilled and unskilled natives tend to experience welfare changes of opposite signs. The remaining
natives in countries with large emigration flows – such as Jamaica or El Salvador – are also better
off due to migration, but for a different reason: remittances. The welfare impact of observed levels
of migration is substantial, at about 5 to 10% for the main receiving countries and about 10% in countries
with large incoming remittances. Our results are robust to accounting for imperfect transferability
of skills, selection into migration, and imperfect substitution between natives and immigrants.
Julian di Giovanni
Department of Economics and Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
julian.digiovanni@upf.edu
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

Francesc Ortega
Queens College CUNY
Economics department,
300A Powdermaker Hall,
65-30 Kissena Blvd
Flushing, New York 11367
fortega@qc.cuny.edu

1

Introduction

International migration has risen steadily over the last three decades. By the 2000s, substantial
fractions of the total population in many receiving countries were foreign-born. For instance,
immigrants account for 8−12% of the population in several G7 countries such as the United States,
the United Kingdom, and France, and some 20% of the population in other wealthy countries such
as Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. By the same token, some developing countries have lost
a substantial fraction of their population to emigration. Emigrants account for some 10% of the
population of Mexico, and as much as 20−30% in smaller countries such as El Salvador or Jamaica.
The sheer scale of the cross-border movements of people has led to a growing interest in understanding their welfare effects. However, compared to the attention paid to the welfare analysis of
international trade, very few estimates of the welfare effects of international migration are available.
This paper provides a quantitative assessment of the global welfare impact of the observed levels of
migration on both origin and destination countries, taking explicitly into account the consequences
of international trade and remittances. Our multi-country general equilibrium model is calibrated
to match the world income distribution and world trade patterns. It incorporates several first-order
features of the world economy that are important for obtaining reliable estimates of the welfare impact of migration. First, we calibrate labor productivity differences between and within countries.
In order to develop reliable estimates of migrants’ impact on the host economies, our framework
accounts for a great deal of worker heterogeneity, with worker productivity varying by skill level,
country of origin, and country of residence. In addition, we match the levels of remittances observed
in the data. Remittances transfer some of the gains from the increased productivity of migrants
back to the natives that remained in the home country.
Second, our model incorporates the insights of the recent literature on firm heterogeneity under
monopolistic competition (e.g., Melitz, 2003). In recent years, a great deal of evidence has shown
that these models are highly successful at replicating both the key macro features (total trade
flows, the gravity relationship) and key micro features (firm size distributions, systematically larger
exporters) of the economy, making them especially suitable for quantitative analysis. Economically,
the key mechanism linking migration and welfare in this framework is product variety. Inflows of
immigrants increase market size, and thus the range of varieties available for consumption and as
intermediate inputs. Importantly, in the presence of large labor productivity differences between
countries, the impact of migration on equilibrium variety depends not only on changes in population,
but also the size of the productivity gap between source and destination countries.
Third, we take explicit account of the role of goods trade in affecting the gains from migration.
In our model an increase in a country’s market size due to immigration will affect other countries
through an increase in export variety. To capture the quantitative importance of this effect, the

1

model features both traded and non-traded sectors with intermediate input linkages between the
two, and matches the overall levels of goods trade relative to GDP. The model is solved on a sample
of 60 developed and developing countries comprising some 98% of world GDP, taking into account
all the multilateral trade relationships between them.
Finally, we distinguish between the short-run and the long-run impact of migration. In the
short run equilibrium, the set of potential varieties available in the economy is fixed, and thus it
corresponds to the framework of Chaney (2008) and Eaton et al. (2011). In this case, migration has
an impact on product variety by affecting the entry and exit decisions of only the marginal firms
(i.e. those near the productivity cutoff for operating a firm). Since these are the least productive
firms in the economy, their economic impact is very limited. In the long run equilibrium, the set
of potential varieties will change in response to migration to dissipate net aggregate profits (free
entry) as in Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003). Because some of those new firms will be quite
productive, they can have a large impact on welfare. Thus, the difference in the welfare impact of
migration between the short and the long run depends crucially on the relative productivity of the
marginal firms compared to the inframarginal ones. Our quantitative analysis calibrates the key
parameters of the model that determine equilibrium variety in both the short and the long run:
relative country size and the firm size distribution.1
The main use of our calibrated model is to compute welfare in the baseline under the observed
levels of bilateral migration and in the counterfactual scenario in which global migration is undone.
Our findings can be summarized as follows. In the long run the average natives in practically
every receiving country would have been worse off in the absence of migration, and this welfare
loss increases in the observed share of the non-native population. Natives in the countries with the
largest stocks of immigrants relative to population such as Australia, New Zealand, and Canada,
have 5−10% higher welfare under the current levels of migration compared to the no-migration
counterfactual. This welfare effect is driven by the general equilibrium response of domestic variety.
A lower population in the absence of migration implies a smaller equilibrium mass of varieties
available in the home market, and thus lower per-capita welfare.
In the short run, the welfare impact of immigration on the receiving countries is much smaller,
at less than 0.5% on average, and not always positive. This is because the general equilibrium
effect of increased variety is only of limited importance in the short run. At the same time, the
welfare impacts of migration on the skilled and the unskilled are frequently of opposite signs, and
1
Our quantitative framework features a (long-run) scale effect. That is, other things equal, a larger labor force
increases per capita welfare in the long run. Appendix B.3 presents a detailed treatment of both the relevance and
the quantitative importance of the scale effect in our model. First, it reviews the existing empirical literature on the
scale effect, and provides a comparison of the size and nature of the scale effect implied by our model to the available
empirical estimates. Though our model is not calibrated to match the observed magnitude of the scale effect, the
model-implied scale effect is in line with the existing empirical estimates. Second, it reports alternative welfare results
under a weaker scale effect corresponding to the bottom of the range of estimates found in the literature.

2

tend to be an order of magnitude larger than the overall impact. Thus, in the short run the main
welfare impact of migration on receiving countries is distributional, and driven by the changes in
the relative supply of skills associated with migration. This distributional impact is limited in
the long run, as the increased variety effect predominates and the welfare changes of the two skill
groups tend to be similar.
For the sending countries, the welfare impact on the staying natives depends on a trade-off. Symmetrically to the main migration receiving countries, these source countries would ceteris paribus
be better off without emigration because a larger labor force implies greater variety in production
and consumption. On the other hand, absent emigration there would be no remittances. For countries such as El Salvador or the Philippines, where remittances account for more than ten percent
of GDP, the latter effect dominates and the average native stayer is about 10% better off under the
current levels of migration. Underlying these results is the fact that the typical migrant moves from
a low to a high TFP region, leading to an overall increase in the efficiency units of labor worldwide.
Part of the welfare benefit of that reallocation is enjoyed by the native stayers through remittances.
However, the remittance effect is not always larger than the general equilibrium variety effect. Some
important emigration countries, such as Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, and Turkey, would actually
be 1−5% better off in the no-migration counterfactual.
For the sending countries, the short-run impact tends to be similar to the long-run impact. This
is because for these countries welfare changes are driven primarily by the loss of remittances, which
is the first-order effect in both the short and the long run. By the same token, the distributional
impact of migration is also limited in the sending countries, as the impact of emigration on the
skill premium is small compared to the remittance effect.
The finding that the receiving countries are better off with immigration may seem unappealing
because it appears at odds with the widespread opposition to immigration in high-income countries.
However, observed opposition to migration is not evidence against our approach. First of all, even
within the model, the receiving countries are better off only in the long run. In the short run, there
is nothing in our model that guarantees gains from immigration. Thus, it could be that political
opposition is driven by the short-run considerations. Second, our framework features distributional
effects, that are especially pronounced in the short run. In many countries, the unskilled experience
short-run welfare losses due to immigration, and thus would be expected to oppose it.2 Finally, the
fact that restrictive migration policies are observed in the data is by no means evidence that those
policies are welfare-improving, much less optimal. Indeed, there is generally no presumption that
observed economic policies are optimal, in any area of economic activity.
The seminal early treatment of the welfare consequences of migration is Berry and Soligo (1969).
2

For work on the determinants of immigration restrictions see Benhabib (1996), Ortega (2005, 2010), Facchini et
al. (2011), or Facchini and Steinhardt (2011). For empirical work on individual attitudes toward immigration see
Mayda (2006) and Facchini and Mayda (2009), and Ortega and Polavieja (2012) in the European context.

3

The existing literature on the quantitative welfare impact of migration has focused almost exclusively on the implications of cross-country labor productivity differences in a neo-classical framework
with a fixed set of goods. Hamilton and Whalley (1984), Klein and Ventura (2007, 2009), Benhabib and Jovanovic (2012), and Docquier et al. (2012) develop analyses of this type in one-sector
models without international trade. Davis and Weinstein (2002) and Kennan (2013) investigate
the welfare effects of migration in the presence of labor-augmenting productivity differences in Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin models of trade, respectively. The key consequence of employing a
neo-classical framework is that immigration always weakly reduces the welfare of the native workers
(i.e., suppliers of the labor input) in the receiving countries.
Our framework incorporates the driving force in these studies – labor productivity differences.
The main departure of our analysis from the neo-classical migration literature is endogeneous
product variety. This is the key feature qualitatively as well as quantitatively, because it opens
the possibility that immigration may improve the native workers’ welfare. To our knowledge, the
only existing study of migration with endogenous product variety is Iranzo and Peri (2009a), who
explore migration between Eastern and Western Europe in a two-country model. Our paper shares
with Iranzo and Peri (2009a) the emphasis on market size and endogenous variety, but differs from
it in several important respects. First and foremost, our model features bilateral remittances, which
we show to be crucial for evaluating the overall welfare effect of migration in a number of sending
countries. While both studies find that welfare in the emigration country is higher in the migration
equilibrium, the mechanism is different: in Iranzo and Peri (2009a) the main reason is the increase
in imported varieties, in our analysis it is mainly due to remittances. Second, our framework is
implemented on 60 countries, and incorporates many important aspects of the world economy, such
as heterogeneous country-pair specific trade costs, a non-traded sector, and two-way input-output
linkages, among others. This allows for both greater realism, as well as a range of outcomes on
how migration affects a wide variety of countries depending on their characteristics. And third, our
analysis distinguishes between the short-run and the long-run effects of migration.
More broadly, our paper complements the small but growing empirical literature on the firmlevel responses to migration and remittances. Lewis (2011) finds that unskilled immigration led
to significantly lower rates of adoption of new automation techniques that substitute for unskilled
labor. Using data on the universe of German firms, Dustmann and Glitz (2011) find that migration
led to an increase in the size of firms that use the abundant factor more intensively, to a greater
adoption of production technologies that rely on the more abundant factor, and to firm entry.
Yang (2008) finds a positive effect of remittances on the number of household entrepreneurs in
the Philippines. Our analysis shares with these papers the emphasis on the interaction between
migration and firm decisions, but focuses on the general equilibrium perspective in which migration
affects firm entry and exit through changes in overall size of the market and the labor force.

4

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the migration and remittance
data sources, and describes the basic patterns. Section 3 presents the theoretical framework, while
Section 4 discusses the quantitative implementation of the model economy. Section 5 presents counterfactual experiments and the main welfare results. Section 6 discusses extensions and sensitivity,
and Section 7 concludes.

2

Migration and Remittances: Data Sources and Basic Patterns

To construct the labor force disaggregated by skill level, origin, and destination country we rely
on two sources: the aggregate migration stocks for the year 2006 from the OECD International
Migration Database and the data for the year 2000 on the labor force for each country in the world
by education level, origin, and destination produced by Docquier et al. (2009) and Docquier et
al. (2010a). The OECD International Migration Database contains information on the stocks of
immigrants by both destination and origin country. We use data for 2006, the most recent year
these data are available with comprehensive coverage. An important feature of these data is that
they only contain information on 26 OECD destination countries. Thus, while we have data on
nearly all origin countries, we only have immigration information for rich country destinations.
As a result, strictly speaking, our counterfactual exercise analyzes the consequences of undoing
migration to developed countries. Any migration to developing countries will be left unchanged.3
The shares of skilled individuals among migrants in 2000 (for ages 25 and above) by origin and
destination country are sourced from Docquier et al. (2010a), and the shares of skilled among the
native stayers from Docquier et al. (2009). These shares are then applied to the 2006 aggregate migration stocks for each origin-destination country pair. Skilled individuals are those that completed
at least one year of college.4 Remittances data are sourced from Ratha and Shaw (2007).
To calibrate the parameters governing the relative demand for skilled labor in production in
each country we estimate skill premia following the approach of Docquier et al. (2010b). First, we
use the Barro and Lee (2010) data to compute the average years of education in the two skill groups
(individuals with some college education and individuals without) for each country in our sample
for the year 2005.5 Second, to compute the country skill premium we multiply the gap in average
3
The OECD DIOC-E database contains information on immigrants to both developing and developed countries.
The disadvantage of these data is that they are only available up to the year 2000. We made the choice to use the
most recent data, at the cost of not being able to evaluate migration into the non-OECD. The reason we took this
route was the large migration inflows experienced by the European countries post-2000. For Europe in particular,
using data for 2000 would mean that we are missing a large share of current migration. In the 2000 data, the receiving
countries in our analysis account for 47% of the global stock of cross-border migrants. The new borders erected after
the collapse of the Soviet Union are partly responsible for the high observed migration into the non-OECD. Excluding
the former Soviet Union our receiving countries account for 55% of the global migrant stock.
4
There is a small discrepancy in how the two datasets define a skilled individual. Namely, a skilled native stayer is
defined in Docquier et al. (2009) as someone who completed college, rather than had some college. We do not believe
this discrepancy to have a material impact on the results.
5
There is a great deal of variation in the average years of schooling among the unskilled workers across countries.

5

years of schooling between the two groups by the country-specific return to a year of schooling.
Hendricks (2004) has collected Mincerian returns to schooling for a large set of countries that were
estimated from micro data.6 The median return per year of schooling in these data is 7.3%, and
the 10th and 90th percentiles are 4.2% and 12.6%. The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles for the
wage skill premium we obtain are 26%, 43%, and 106%.
We carry out the analysis on the sample of the largest 49 countries in the world by total GDP,
plus a selection of 11 smaller countries that have experienced migration outflows of 10% or more
of the native labor force. These 60 countries together cover 98% of world GDP. There is a 61st
rest of the world category. We exclude the entrepôt economies of Hong Kong and Singapore, both
of which have total trade well in excess of their GDP due to significant re-exporting activity, and
place them into the rest-of-the-world category. The sources and details for the other data used in
the quantitative exercise are described when we discuss the calibration.
Table 1 lists the OECD countries in the sample and reports the share of immigrants (foreignborn), the share of emigrants, the counterfactual population change, the size of net remittances
relative to GDP, and the share of skilled workers among stayers, immigrants, and emigrants. These
are the countries for which data on immigrant stocks for 2006 are available.7 Table 2 reports
the shares of emigrants and remittances as a share of GDP for the non-OECD countries. The
population change in the counterfactual in the non-OECD coincides with the share of emigrants.
Several points are worth noting. First, the data reveal a great deal of dispersion in immigration
and emigration shares. At one extreme there are countries such as Australia and New Zealand,
where 25% of the population are foreign-born. At the other, El Salvador, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Jamaica display emigration shares in the 20−30% range.8 Second, some of the OECD countries
have large gross stocks of both immigrants and emigrants. As a result, if migration had never
taken place their population would be roughly the same (the third column). Ireland is the clearest
example: its share of immigrants is 13%, but the share of emigrants is 16%. In a world without
migration, its population would only be 3% higher.
The table also reports the net remittances in each country as a share of GDP. Negative values
In the U.S. the average years of schooling among individuals that did not attend college was 10.95. The cross-country
variation in this variable is from 1.01 (Mali) to 12.80 years (Czech Republic). By contrast, among the skilled the
cross-country variation in the years of schooling is much smaller, ranging from 14.15 to 15.94 in the Barro and Lee
(2010) data.
6
We try to use estimates based on 1995 data, which is the most recent period reported by Hendricks (2004). If
the Mincerian coefficient estimate is not available for a country we follow Docquier et al. (2010b) and impute that
value on the basis of estimates from neighboring countries with similar levels of income per capita.
7
Throughout the paper we use the shorthand “OECD” to refer to the group of the 26 countries for which immigration data are available in our database, and “non-OECD” to describe the rest of the country sample. The
“OECD” group is predominantly the wealthy, net immigration countries. Formally, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development has additional member countries, such as Mexico and Turkey.
8
Once again, for these countries we are reporting data on emigration to OECD countries only. In the counterfactual
these countries only experience a return of their emigrants, but not the exit of the immigrants residing in these
countries.

6

mean that a country is a net sender of remittances. Clearly, most OECD countries send more remittances than they receive, but the total net remittances are only a small share of GDP, ranging from
−1% (Australia) to +1% (Portugal). In contrast, remittances are large relative to GDP for several
non-OECD countries. For instance, Colombia, India, Mexico, and Nigeria report remittances of 3%
of GDP. However, these are small compared to Jamaica (20%), Serbia and Montenegro (19.1%),
El Salvador (17.8%), Philippines (15.5%) and the Dominican Republic (14.3%). Hence, for these
countries it will be important to take remittances into account when evaluating the welfare impact
of migration.
Across all origin-destination pairs, the share of skilled is 0.25, with a standard deviation of 0.24.
There is large heterogeneity in the share of skilled among immigrants relative to the natives of the
host country. For instance, U.S. immigrants are relatively unskilled, by our measure of educational
attainment: 52% of U.S.-born stayers are skilled, compared to 42% of immigrants into the U.S..
By contrast, in Canada immigrants are relatively skilled (58%) compared to native stayers (49%).

3

Theoretical Framework

Our framework augments an otherwise standard multi-country heterogeneous-firm model of production and trade with three elements that are crucial for a global quantitative assessment of the
gains from migration: cross-country labor productivity differences, worker heterogeneity (across
skills as well as between natives and immigrants), and remittances. We consider a monopolistically
competitive setup with endogenous product variety and fixed costs of production and exporting.
Production uses skilled and unskilled labor and intermediate inputs.

3.1

Preferences, Welfare, and Love for Variety

The world is comprised of C countries, indexed by i, j = 1, . . . , C. In each country there are two
broad sectors, the tradeable T and the non-tradeable N . In country i, a consumer with income yi
maximizes
Z
max

{yiN (k),yiT (k)}

JiN

Z
JiN

yiN (k)

εN −1
εN

!α

εN
εN −1

Z

dk
JiT

yiT (k)

εT −1
εT

!(1−α)

εT
εT −1

dk

s.t.
Z
N
N
pi (k) yi (k) dk +
pTi (k) yiT (k) dk = yi ,
JiT

where yis (k) is consumption of good k belonging to sector s = N, T in country i, psi (k) is the price
of this good, Jis is the mass of varieties available in sector s in country i coming from all countries,
and εs is the elasticity of substitution between varieties in s. Standard steps yield an expression for

7

welfare – that is, the indirect utility function – of an individual with income yi living in country i:
Wi (yi ) =

yi
α
PiN

PiT

1−α ,

(1)

where Pis is the ideal price index in sector s = N, T in country i:
Pis

"Z
=
Jis

#
psi (k)1−εs dk

1
1−εs

.

(2)

Welfare is thus simply equivalent to real income. In our model, an individual’s nominal income yi
may be composed of (i) labor income, (ii) profits of firms, and (iii) remittances, though some of
these may be zero in some cases. Thus migration will have an impact on welfare through nominal
income to the extent that it affects any of these three terms for an individual, either directly or
through general equilibrium effects.
Welfare falls in the consumption price level PiN

α

PiT

1−α

. We assume that εs > 1, s = N, T

(Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977). The key consequence of this assumption is that preferences exhibit love
for variety: holding nominal expenditure and individual goods prices fixed, the agent attains higher
utility when the set of goods JiN and JiT available for consumption increases. Thus, to the extent
that migration affects the equilibrium set of varieties available in economy i, it will have a welfare
impact through that channel as well.
In our framework, incomes differ across individuals within each country. However, preferences
are identical and homothetic, and thus admit a representative consumer. Total income Yi in country
T
i is the sum of labor income wi Li , net profits (if any) in the two sectors ΠN
i +Πi , and net remittances
T
received from abroad Ri : Yi = wi Li + ΠN
i + Πi + Ri . Since consumer preferences are Cobb-Douglas

in the CES aggregates of N and T , it is well known that consumption expenditure on sector N is
equal to αYi , and on T sector, (1 − α)Yi .

3.2

Migration, Productivity, and Labor Force Composition

Each country’s labor force is composed of natives and immigrants, who can be unskilled or skilled,
e the number of workers with skill level e born
indexed by e = `, h respectively. Denote by Nji

in country i that live in country j (throughout the paper, we adopt the convention that the first
subscript denotes the destination country, and the second subscript, the source). As in Trefler
(1993, 1995), the effective labor endowment is a combination of the number of people that live
in a country and their efficiency units. We build on this approach by taking explicit account of
migration. Workers of skill level e born in country i and working in country j have Aeji efficiency
units of labor. Skilled and unskilled labor are imperfect substitutes in production. Specifically, the

8

total effective labor in country j, Lj , is given by the CES aggregate:

Lj = 

C
X

σ

! σ−1
σ
`
A`ji Nji

+ ζj

i=1

C
X

 σ−1
! σ−1
σ
h
Ahji Nji

,



(3)

i=1

where σ is the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor, ζj captures the relative
importance of skilled labor in production, and, of course, the endowments of labor of each type
e , e = `, h.
include the native workers and their efficiency, Aejj Njj

This approach to modelling the labor force is flexible enough to capture a number of features
that are important for evaluating the impact of migration. First and foremost, the framework
accommodates the (large) observed cross-country labor productivity differences through differences
in the Aeji ’s. Second, skilled workers are more productive than unskilled workers. And third,
conditional on skill level, immigrants may differ from native workers in how many efficiency units of
labor they possess. To streamline notation and link the productivity parameters more transparently
to observed wages, it is useful to denote the skilled-unskilled productivity gap among natives by
Ahjj
A`jj

≡ µj ≥ 1,

(4)

and native-immigrant productivity gaps for immigrants of origin i 6= j and skill level e by
Aeji
≡ φeji .
Aejj

(5)

The latter feature allows us to account for native-immigrant wage differences conditional on educational attainment. The quantitative implementation uses several empirically relevant parameterizations of the productivity differential φeji , that can capture a number of reasons for migrant-native
productivity differences, such as imperfect skill transferability or selection into migration.
Combining (3), (4), and (5), Lj can be rewritten as:

Lj = Ajj 

C
X

σ

! σ−1
σ
`
φ`ji Nji

+ ζj

µj

i=1

C
X

 σ−1
! σ−1
σ
h
φhji Nji



,

(6)

i=1

where to simplify notation we relabelled the unskilled native productivity as A`jj = Ajj , which can
be interpreted as the economy-wide productivity level.
In this framework, immigrants are not the same as natives in two ways that will condition
the impact of immigration. First, the share of skilled among immigrants can differ from the
share of skilled among the natives. Since the skilled and the unskilled are imperfect substitutes
in production, the skill composition of the immigrant population will have an effect on both the
aggregate supply of labor, and on the relative wages of the skilled compared to the unskilled.
Second, immigrants may have different productivity than the natives within the same skill category.
9

This distinction has an impact on how much a given stock of foreign-born individuals changes the
effective supply of labor of a particular skill level.
The baseline framework makes a number of simplifying assumptions, some of which will be
relaxed in the extensions. First, immigrant and native labor of the same skill level are perfect
substitutes. Appendix B.2 develops an extension in which immigrants and natives are imperfectly
substitutable in production (Manacorda et al., 2012; Ottaviano and Peri, 2012), and shows that
the main results are robust. Second, the productivity terms Aeji , while calibrated to data, are
exogenous. Appendix B.4 relaxes this assumption and allows worker productivity to be a function
of the share of skilled in the population (see, e.g., Jones, 2002).

3.3

Technology

Importantly in our framework, the sets of available goods JiT and JiN will differ across countries due
to trade costs, and will be affected by migration. The market structure is monopolistic competition
as in Melitz (2003). Each country j is populated by a mass nsj of entrepreneurs in sector s. Each
entrepreneur k in each sector s = N, T and j = 1 . . . , C has the ability to produce a unique variety
and thus has some market power. Productivity is heterogeneous: entrepreneur k needs a(k) input
bundles to produce one unit of its good (thus more productive firms have lower a(k)). Since each
entrepreneur is able to produce only one good with a particular productivity, we use the terms
“entrepreneur” and “project” interchangeably.
s to start production,
Each entrepreneur in country j and sector s must incur a fixed cost fjj

and as a result not all entrepreneurs decide to produce. We reserve the term “firm” for those
entrepreneurs that actually undertake production. In sector T , to start exporting from country j
to country i, a firm must pay a fixed cost fij , and an iceberg per-unit cost of τij > 1, with the
iceberg cost of domestic sales normalized to one: τjj = 1. We assume that trade costs are infinite
in the non-traded sector, and thus firms in sector N only sell domestically.
Production uses skilled labor, unskilled labor, and intermediates from sectors N and T . The
production function is Cobb-Douglas in the labor, T , and N composites. The labor composite is
a CES aggregate of skilled and unskilled workers as in (3). The sector s = N, T composites are
CES aggregates of sector s varieties available in the country. The minimized cost of one unit of the
input bundle in country j is given by
csj = wjβs

h

PjN

ηs

PjT

1−ηs i1−βs

,

(7)

where wj is the composite wage (i.e., the price of one unit of L) in country j, and Pjs is the price of
sector s CES composite, given by (2). Parameters βs and ηs correspond, respectively, to the share
of labor in total sales and the share of non-tradeable inputs in total input usage in each sector s.
Thus, firm k in sector s from country j has a marginal cost τij csj a(k) of serving market i. Firms
10

and consumers in country i have a demand for an individual variety k from sector s that is given
by
xsi (k) =

Xis
psi (k)−εs ,
(Pis )1−εs

(8)

where Xis denotes the total spending – final plus intermediate – on sector s in country i.
Productivity heterogeneity combined with fixed costs of production and trade imply that not all
firms will decide to serve all markets. As is well known, profit maximization yields a price that is a
constant markup εs /(εs − 1) over marginal cost, and the total ex-post variable profits from selling
to market i are a constant multiple 1/εs of revenue. Given the price level and total spending, there
is a cutoff unit input requirement asij above which firms in country j do not serve market i. This
cutoff is found as the unit input requirement at which the firm obtains zero profits from serving
market i, and is given by:
εs − 1 Pis
asij =
εs τij csj

Xis
εs csj fijs

!

1
εs −1

.

(9)

We adopt the standard assumption that firm productivity in sector s, 1/a, follows a Pareto(bs , θs )
distribution: Pr(1/a < y) = 1 − (bs /y)θs , where bs is the minimum value labor productivity can
take, and θs regulates dispersion. It is then straightforward to show that the unit input requirement, a, has a distribution function G(a) = (bs a)θs . Under this distributional assumption, we can
combine (2) and (9) to derive expressions for the price indices:

Pis =


C Z
X


j=1

s
Jij



εs
τ s cs a(k)
εs − 1 ij j

1−εs
dk

 1
 1−εs


Z
C
X
=
nsj



j=1

− 1
 s − θs −(εs −1)

θs
θs (εs −1)
1
εs
Xi
θs
=
bs θs − (εs − 1)
εs − 1 εs

0

asij



εs
εs − 1

 1
1−εs
1−εs
s s
dG(a)
τij cj a

(10)

− 1
θs
C
X

 θs −(εs −1)
s
s s −θs
s s − εs −1 

,
nj τij cj
cj fij
j=1

(11)
where Jijs is the set of varieties from country j that gets exported to country i.9
Trade is not balanced because of remittances. Let Ri denote the net remittances received by
country i, which can be positive (for countries receiving remittances), or negative (for countries
sending them).10 Remittance-receiving countries will be able to afford imports above the value of
their exports, while the opposite will be true for countries with negative net remittances.
9

N
It is understood that in the non-traded sector τij
= ∞ ∀i 6= j, and thus the summations are in effect over one
non-zero element, j = i.
P
10
Of course, for the world as a whole, remittances sum to zero:
i Ri = 0. The data on remittances used below
to implement the model satisfy this requirement.

11

3.4

Short-Run and Long-Run Equilibria

In assessing the welfare impact of migration, we consider two types of equilibria. The two equilibria
differ in their assumptions on the mass of projects nsi in each country and sector.
The short-run equilibrium assumes that the set of projects nsi is fixed in each country and sector,
as in Chaney (2008) and Eaton et al. (2011), and thus it cannot adjust to changes in the labor

C
force. A short-run monopolistically competitive equilibrium is a set of prices wi , PiN , PiT i=1 , and
factor allocations such that (i) consumers maximize utility; (ii) firms maximize profits; and (iii) all
goods and factor markets clear, given country endowments Li and nsi .
In the long-run equilibrium, the set of projects nsi is an equilibrium outcome that responds
to changing economic conditions, in our case migration. Each country has a potentially infinite
number of entrepreneurs (projects) with zero outside option. In order to become an entrepreneur,
an agent must pay an “exploration” cost fE . Upon paying this cost, the entrepreneur k discovers
her productivity, indexed by a unit input requirement a(k), and develops an ability to produce a
unique variety of N or T valued by consumers and other firms. The equilibrium number of projects
nsi is then pinned down by the familiar free entry condition in each sector and each country, as in
Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003). A long-run monopolistically competitive equilibrium is a set


C
T C
of prices wi , PiN , PiT i=1 , equilibrium masses of projects nN
i , ni i=1 , and factor allocations such
that (i) consumers maximize utility; (ii) firms maximize profits; (iii) all goods and factor markets
clear; and (iv) the net profits in the economy equal zero, given country endowments Li ∀i.
Appendix A.1 presents the complete equations defining both types of equilibria.

3.5

Mechanisms

Immigration into country i increases Li . In addition to its impact on nominal wages, immigration
will affect the natives’ welfare by changing equilibrium product variety. The vectors of nsj ’s and the
array of cutoffs (9) together determine the set of varieties offered in each country.11 An increase
in the set of varieties available in country i implies a lower price level and, other things equal,
higher utility/real income. Consumers benefit directly from the variety-induced reduction in the
price level, as well as indirectly through cheaper intermediate inputs available to firms.
However, in the presence of firm heterogeneity not all varieties are equally valuable: an unproductive variety (higher a(k)) raises welfare by less than a more productive one. Thus, changes in
equilibrium variety due to movements in asij ’s have a smaller welfare impact than those coming
from changes in the nsj ’s. This is because movements in the asij ’s correspond to entry/exit of the
least productive firms in the economy, whereas movements in nsj ’s result in entry/exit along the
entire firm size distribution.
11
For instance, the measure of domestic varieties available in sector s in country i is equal to nsi G(asii ). Of course,
the total variety in the T sector is the sum of domestic and imported varieties.

12

In this respect, the critical difference between the long run and the short run is that in the
long run, nsj ’s will change in response to migration. In the short run, the set of projects nsj is
fixed. However, even in the short run the set of actual firms that serve the market – and thus the
equilibrium product variety in the economy – will still change due to migration. This is because
generically, not all projects are implemented in equilibrium, and migration changes the cutoffs
asii /asij for producing and exporting. Entry and exit do occur in the short run, but they are
confined to the marginal firms, which are the least productive in the economy.
By contrast, in the long run entry/exit of firms will occur along the entire productivity distribution, rather than only among the least productive firms. A well-known property of monopolistic
competition models with free entry is that nsi increases in Li : larger countries have a greater set of
projects.12 Migration thus affects welfare in the long run by changing nsi . Natives in countries that
end up with larger Li because of immigration will be better off, all else equal, because immigration
will lead to greater equilibrium variety (see the expressions for the price indices (11)).
International trade will mitigate this effect because changes in the availability of foreign varieties
also have a welfare impact. For instance, suppose that country i loses workers to country j. As a
result, product variety will fall in i and rise in j.13 From Equation (11), it is clear that an increase
in foreign nTj will also have a positive impact on welfare in country i due to an increase in the set of
varieties imported from j. However, due to trade costs increases in foreign nTj are less valuable for
country i than increases in its own nTi and nN
i . Thus, while greater imported variety will counteract
the impact of migration on domestically available variety, it will not do so fully, and the size of
this mitigation effect is ultimately a quantitative question. We answer it below by calibrating the
size of the non-traded sector and the trade costs in the traded sector, and by comparing the main
results to an alternative counterfactual exercise in which the trade channel is turned off.
By contrast, input-output linkages embodied in the cost function (7) will raise the welfare impact
of changes in domestically available varieties, and will thus amplify the welfare impact of migration.
The magnitude of this effect is a quantitative question, and thus we calibrate the parameters βs
and ηs that regulate the strength of input-output linkages based on observed Input-Output tables.
Finally, though capital is not explicitly in the model, one can follow the interpretation suggested
by Ghironi and Melitz (2005) and Bergin and Corsetti (2008) that the set of projects available
to entrepreneurs is a form of the capital endowment. Similarly, the creation of new firms is a
form of capital investment. This interpretation is natural in the sense that these projects are in
effect a factor of production without which workers cannot generate output. Thus, the short-run
12

While the full-fledged, multi-sector model with unbalanced trade in this paper cannot be used to show this
relationship analytically, di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010, 2012) show the positive relationship between Li and nsi
in somewhat simpler models with symmetric countries.
13
The exact change in variety in each country will depend on the labor productivity parameters Aii and Ajj . If
we assume that the origin country has lower labor productivity than the destination – as is typically the case – then
there may be a net increase in worldwide product variety.

13

equilibrium corresponds to a case in which the other factors of production – nsj here – have not
had a chance to adjust to the new endowment of labor, whereas the long-run equilibrium is the one
that obtains after the adjustment of other factors.

4

Quantitative Implementation and Model Fit

We numerically implement the model laid out in Section 3. We use information on country sizes,
fixed and variable trade costs, and bilateral migration flows and remittances to solve the model
in the baseline scenario, that is, under the observed levels of migration and remittances. Then
in Section 5 we simulate the effects of un-doing the migration flows observed in the data. That
is, we repatriate all immigrants in the OECD countries back to their countries of origin. Table 3
summarizes the calibrated parameter values of the model, and Appendix A.2 discusses the details
of how the parameters are chosen.

4.1

Labor Productivity Parameters

To complete the implementation of the baseline scenario requires finding the values of Lj , or
e in each
equivalently, Ajj . While we have actual data on the numbers of natives and immigrants Nji

origin and destination, Lj is not population per se, but a combination of the number of workers
and the efficiency units – or labor productivity – possessed by workers in country j (Section 3.2).
To find Lj we follow the approach of Alvarez and Lucas (2007). Starting with an initial guess
for Lj for all j = 1, . . . , C, we solve the full model in the long run equilibrium. Given the solution
for wj , we update our guess for Lj for each country in order to match the nominal US$ GDP ratio
between each country j and the U.S.. Using the resulting values of Lj , we solve the model again to
obtain the new set of wages, and iterate to convergence. Thus, our procedure generates vectors wj
and Lj in such a way as to match exactly the relative total GDPs of the countries in the sample
while imposing that the model world economy is in the long-run equilibrium.
Having obtained the total efficiency-adjusted labor endowments Lj , and using the data on
bilateral immigrant stocks by skill for each destination and origin country, we obtain countryspecific productivity Ajj for every country j from (6):
Ajj = 
P

C
`
`
i=1 φji Nji

 σ−1
σ

Lj
σ .
 P
 σ−1  σ−1
σ
C
h
+ ζj µj i=1 φhji Nji

(12)

Intuitively, this procedure infers productivity from total country GDPs and the labor force composition of each country. Section 4.2 checks that the resulting productivity estimates are plausible.
A notable consequence of this approach is that, controlling for population, countries with higher
labor productivity Ajj will tend to have a greater number of entrepreneurs nsj , all else equal, since

14

our procedure will give them a higher Lj .14
σ−1

The calculation above requires assigning values to (i) the term ζj µj σ , and (ii) φeji . We calibrate
σ−1

ζj µj σ using skill premia. Optimal factor usage implies the following relationship:
! 1
PC
h
h −σ
σ−1
wjh
i=1 φji Nji
σ
= ζj µj
,
PC
`
`
wj`
i=1 φji Nji
where wje is the wage of the worker of skill level e = `, h. Using country-specific data on the skill
P
h
premium wjh /wj` described in Section 2 as well as the population composition by skill Ci=1 φhji Nji
σ−1
P
` allows us to back out the combination ζ µ σ of the skill share parameter and
and Ci=1 φ`ji Nji
j j
the skilled worker’s productivity advantage. This procedure ensures that the baseline equilibrium
matches perfectly the observed skill premium in each country.
On φeji , we adopt three approaches. The first is to assume that φ`ji = φhji = 1, common across
all countries. In this case, the average equilibrium wages of natives and immigrants with the same
skill level will be equal within each country (although they will of course differ across countries).
This will be our baseline scenario as we find it helpful in conveying the main mechanisms driving
our results. It corresponds to the broad pattern in the data that the wages of migrants are well
approximated by the wages of the natives in the host country, and are often an order of magnitude
larger than wages of similar workers in the source country (Pritchett, 2006).
We check the robustness of the results to two alternative calibrations of {φeji }. The first captures
a plausible amount of imperfect cross-border transferability of skills. The second allows for originspecific native-immigrant productivity gaps that reflect migrant selection (positive or negative), or
differences in the quality of education across countries. The results and a more detailed discussion
are in Section 6 and Appendix B.1.

4.2

Model Fit

Before describing the counterfactual results, we assess the model fit on overall and bilateral trade,
as well as on how the total labor productivities implied by the model compare to GDP per capita
at the country level. The baseline is solved as the long-run equilibrium given the population
compositions, total GDPs, and remittances in all countries as they are in the data in 2006.
Table 4 compares the bilateral and overall trade volumes in the model and in the data. Note
that since in the data we only have bilateral trade as a share of GDP, not of total sales, we compute
the same object in the model: πij = Xij /wi Li .15 This captures both the distinction between trade,
which is recorded as total value, and GDP, which is recorded as value added; as well as the fact
that there is a large non-traded sector in both the model and in the data.
14

That is, population and efficiency enter symmetrically and multiplicatively in determining market size, which in
turn determines equilibrium variety. This approach is common in the literature. For instance, Alvarez and Lucas
(2007) and Chaney (2008) assume that the number of productivity draws is a constant multiple of Lj .
15
Since the baseline is solved as the long-run equilibrium, total profits are zero and GDP is simply labor income.

15

The top panel of the table compares the share of domestically produced goods in GDP, πii ,
which is one minus imports/GDP, and can be thought of as the opposite of trade openness. It is
clear that the overall trade volumes implied by the model match the actual data well. The means
and medians are similar, and the correlation between πii calculated from the model and those in the
data for this sample of countries is around 0.57. The bottom panel compares bilateral trade shares
πij , i 6= j. The average levels are quite similar, and the correlation between model and data bilateral
trade shares is actually higher at 0.78. Since we use estimated gravity coefficients together with
the actual data on bilateral country characteristics to compute trade costs, it is not surprising that
our model fits bilateral trade data quite well given the success of the empirical gravity relationship.
Nonetheless, since the gravity estimates we use come from outside of our calibration procedure, it
is important to check that our model delivers outcomes similar to observed trade volumes.
The model delivers a vector of implied baseline labor productivities Ajj for each country, and
we would like to compare these estimates to the data. Unfortunately, as a model object Ajj reflects
the physical productivity of a worker, which we cannot measure in the data. In addition, in the
model wages of a single efficiency unit of labor, wj , will differ across countries to ensure global
market clearing. To match the model precisely with the data, we calculate in the model the real
w L

PPP-adjusted per capita income for an individual living in j, which is given by Pj P Pj j N e , with
i
e=`,h ji
P P
e simply the total population
Pj = (PjN )α (PjT )1−α the consumption price level, and i e=`,h Nji
of country j. This object is then directly comparable to income data from the Penn World Tables.
Figure 1 presents the scatterplot of the real PPP-adjusted per capita income for 2006 from the
Penn World Tables on the x-axis against the corresponding object in the model, along with the
45-degree line. The model matches the broad variation in per capita income in our sample of
countries quite well. The countries line up along the 45-degree line, though it appears that the
model tends to underpredict the relative income levels of poorer countries, and slightly over-predict
the relative income levels of the richest countries. Overall, however, both the simple correlation
and the Spearman rank correlation between the model and the data are 0.94.16

5

Counterfactuals

Our counterfactual experiments evaluate the welfare effects of sending all foreign-born individuals
currently living in the OECD countries back to their countries of birth. In the counterfactual
16
The plots and the correlations are reported dropping the United Arab Emirates, for which the model underpredicts real per capita income by about a factor of 2. The U.A.E. is a very small, special economy for which we do
not have immigration data, and thus the poor performance of the model regarding the U.A.E. is highly unlikely to
affect any of the substantive results in the paper. Including the U.A.E., the simple correlation between the model
and the data is 0.91, and the Spearman correlation is still 0.94.

16

scenario effective labor endowments of each country j will be:

e j = Ajj 
L

C
X

σ

! σ−1
σ
Nij`

+ ζj

µj

C
X

 σ−1
! σ−1
σ
Nijh



.

(13)

i=1

i=1

That is, all the workers native to j that ever migrated to any destination country i are returned
home. Their labor productivity is assumed to be the same as for their compatriots with the same
skill, regardless of whether and where they migrated.17
Our main measure of welfare is the average utility of native stayers, taking into account the
distribution of skill levels among them.18 Individual welfare is given by (1). In the baseline
equilibrium the welfare of the native stayers (born and residing in j) is given by
Wjj =

T
(1 − ωjj )wj` + ωjj wjh + (ΠN
j + Πj )/

P

e=`,h
(PjN )α (PjT )1−α

PC

e
k=1 Njk

+ Rjin /Njj

,

h /(N ` + N h )
where, as above, wje is the wage of a native-born individual of skill level e, ωjj ≡ Njj
jj
jj
` + N h is the total population of natives,
is the share of skilled among the natives, Njj = Njj
jj
P
PC
e
in
k=1 Njk is the total population of country j, and Rj is the total gross amount of remite=`,h

tances received by country j.19
This expression for welfare thus makes an assumption on remittances and an assumption on
the distribution of firm profits. On remittances, we assume that (i) outgoing remittances are sent
by the migrants only, that is, natives living in their home country are not transferring any of their
income abroad; and that (ii) incoming remittances are received by the native stayers only, that
is, remittances from abroad coming into the country go to natives, and not to immigrants living
in that country.20 On profits, we assume that all residents of a country have an equal number
of shares in domestic profits, regardless of their skill level or country of birth.21 This is a strong
assumption, but it only matters in the short run. In the long run, profits are zero due to free entry.
17

In reality, return migrants may bring back skills learned at the destination country. However, there are very few
estimates available for the rates of return to those skills. For more details see Dustmann (2003, 2008), and Dustmann
et al. (2011). See also Rauch and Trindade (2002, 2003) for estimates of the effects of migration on enhancing trade
flows via the information conveyed through ethnic networks.
18
Appendix B.6 reports estimates of the welfare changes for the migrants themselves.
19
Recall that Rj was used to denote the total net remittances received by country j from the rest of the world,
which can take both positive and negative values.
20
For example, remittances from Mexicans working in the United States are received by native Mexicans living
in Mexico, and not by Guatemalan immigrants living in Mexico or by Mexicans living in Spain. We lack data to
evaluate the plausibility of this assumption but it appears reasonable and unlikely to bias the results.
21
We are not aware of a good empirical benchmark that directly speaks to the question of the immigrants’ share
of a country’s total profits. However, it is helpful to compare the entrepreneurship rates of natives and immigrants.
Fairlie (2012) reports a higher business ownership rate among immigrants (10.5%) than among natives (9.3%) in
the U.S.. Likewise the start-up rate is also higher for immigrants than for non-immigrants (0.62% versus 0.28%).
However, these figures are likely to overestimate the share of profits accruing to immigrants because immigrant-owned
businesses tend to be smaller than native-owned ones. According to Fairlie (2012) immigrant-owned businesses have
about 30% lower revenue. In light of these numbers it appears reasonable to allocate aggregate profits to natives and
immigrants in proportion to their population shares.

17

In the counterfactual scenario each country’s population is composed of the individuals that
were born in that country, including both those that never left and returnees. The expressions for
individual welfare in the counterfactual equilibrium are analogous to the expressions above, with
the proviso that there are no longer any remittances. Hence, the counterfactual individual welfare
of a native stayer in country j is given by
fjj =
W

eN + Π
e T )/ PC Nkj
(1 − ωjj )w
ej` + ωjj w
ejh + (Π
j
j
k=1
,
(PeN )α (PeT )1−α
j

(14)

j

where the tilde denotes the counterfactual equilibrium values.
The change in the average welfare of natives between the baseline and the no-migration scenarios
is closely related to the concept of the immigration surplus, defined as the change in the real
average income of natives caused by an inflow of immigrants (Berry and Soligo, 1969; Borjas,
1995). Virtually all studies that quantify the immigration surplus employ a one-good framework
and a standard neoclassical production function. In our framework each firm produces a different
good and product variety is endogenous. In this context income is deflated by the ideal price index,
which encapsulates the impact of changes in product variety on firms and consumers. But it is still
the case that real income per native, our main welfare criterion, coincides with the immigration
surplus also in per-native terms.

5.1

The Long Run

Table 5 reports our main results. For each country, we report the percent change in the real average
income of native stayers (across the two skill levels) in the no-migration counterfactual relative to
the benchmark scenario. Negative values thus represent welfare losses from undoing international
migration. We break up the sample into the OECD and the non-OECD countries. Roughly, we can
think of the OECD group (left panel) as the migrant-receiving countries and the non-OECD group
(right panel) as the migrant-sending countries, though keeping in mind that there is substantial
migration within the OECD as well.
The first important observation is that in the long run the large majority of OECD countries
would be worse off in the absence of migration. The average OECD country would experience a
welfare change of −2.38%, with substantial dispersion in outcomes (standard deviation of 3.07%).
In this group, the largest losses are experienced by the natives of the countries with the largest
observed shares of the foreign-born in the population: Australia (−11.63%), Canada (−7.07%),
and New Zealand (−6.89%). However, it is worth noting that a handful of OECD countries would
experience welfare gains: Greece, Korea, and Portugal would all be about 1.1−1.4% better off in
the no-migration counterfactual. As Table 1 shows, these are the OECD countries with noticeable
net out-migration. In the no-migration counterfactual these countries’ population would rise by
5.2%, 2.8%, and 11.1%, respectively.
18

Second, the majority of non-OECD countries also have lower welfare in the no-migration counterfactual, although dispersion in country outcomes is substantial. The average welfare change is
−2.00% with an associated standard deviation of 3.55%. The highest welfare losses are to native
stayers in El Salvador, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, and the Philippines, at around −7−10%.
Interestingly, a handful of non-OECD countries experience welfare gains: mainly, Trinidad and
Tobago (5.70%), Mexico (1.32%), and Turkey (1.07%). A quick glance at Table 2 shows that these
countries are characterized by substantial emigration rates but small incoming remittances relative
to their GDP and to their emigration rates. For instance, while Mexico has an emigration rate
over 10%, remittances amount to only 3.1% of its GDP. In contrast, the emigration rate of the
Philippines is around 3% but their incoming remittances are equal to 15.5% of its GDP.22
Thus, both developed and developing countries tend to gain from the observed levels of migration. In the OECD, net immigration leads to a larger market size. In the presence of positive trade
costs, this implies higher equilibrium variety and thus higher per capita welfare. For the native
stayers in the non-OECD, the losses from lower variety due to emigration are in most cases more
than offset by the fact that their emigrants experience large increases in earnings, and a fraction
of those is being shared with the native stayers through remittances.
We now isolate the roles played by changes in population size, international trade, and remittances. Figure 2 presents these results using scatterplots. On the horizontal axis is the percentage
change in the total population in the counterfactual relative to the baseline (column 3 of Table 1
and column 1 of Table 2), with positive values corresponding to increases in population. On the
vertical axis is the percentage change in welfare in the no-migration counterfactual relative to the
baseline. Solid dots depict the long-run welfare change (the first column of Table 5). As discussed above, most countries in the OECD suffer a population loss as migrants return to their
home countries, while most non-OECD countries gain population. Among the OECD countries
there is a clear positive association between the population change and the percentage change in
long-run welfare: the countries with the largest population losses suffer the largest welfare losses.
For instance, Australia would lose 22.6% of its population, leading to a −11.63% welfare change
for its native stayers. The picture is much less clear for the non-OECD countries. Most of these
countries experience net population gains. However, some suffer large welfare losses while others
even experience (small) welfare gains. It is particularly interesting to compare the predictions for
El Salvador and Trinidad and Tobago. These two countries would experience similar population
gains due to return migration, at 19% and 17.9% respectively. But while the former would suffer a
22

However, it is also important to qualify the impact of cross-country variation in incoming remittances. In our
framework remittances are exogenous and taken directly from the data. As such, our analysis is silent on why
remittances, conditional on emigrant stocks, vary across countries. It could be that in some countries entire families
emigrate, while in others families are split and only one family member goes abroad. These patterns have clear
implications for remittance flows (Merkle and Zimmermann, 1992), but will also presumably have a direct and
unmodelled impact on the disutility from emigration if people value living in the same location as their family.

19

welfare loss of −8.72%, the latter would experience a welfare gain of 5.70%. As we now show, the
diverging effects of return migration on these two countries are explained by the role of remittances.
Figure 2 plots the results from two additional counterfactual scenarios. Hollow dots report the
welfare changes that would result assuming there are no remittances. Strikingly, the relationship
between population and welfare changes becomes roughly monotonically increasing, with a concave
shape. In particular, we note that El Salvador and Trinidad and Tobago would now experience
practically the same welfare gain (about 5%). The key is that remittances are a very large share
of income in El Salvador, but not in Trinidad and Tobago. Note also that for the OECD the
welfare impact remains practically unchanged. This is because the remittances originating in these
countries are very small relative to the countries’ GDPs, and the native stayers are not the ones
sending them abroad.
Next, we examine the scenario where both remittances and international trade are assumed
away. The corresponding welfare changes are depicted by hollow triangles. The relationship between
population and welfare changes becomes practically linear (with a slope of 0.5), and steeper than
under trade. This is because when a developing country experiences net population growth it
will respond by producing a wider set of varieties. In autarky, consumers in that country clearly
benefit from the increase in variety. However, in the presence of trade the resulting welfare gain is
moderated by the reduction in the number of varieties that are available through imports, implying
a smaller marginal welfare gain.

5.2

The Short Run

The native stayers’ welfare changes in the short run are reported in the second column of Table 5.
Welfare for natives in the OECD is practically unchanged in the short run (an average change of
−0.46%, compared to −2.38% in the long run). In the non-OECD, all countries would experience
a welfare loss (with the exception of Saudi Arabia). Furthermore, the short-run loss is uniformly
larger than the long-run loss (−3.28%, compared to −2.00% in the long run). The intuition for
the difference between the short and long run effects is as follows. The typical OECD country
experiences a net reduction in its labor force. As a result, some of the firms operating in the OECD
shut down. In the short run, the set of projects available in the economy is fixed. Hence, the
reduction in the number of firms/varieties is attained by an increase in the productivity cutoff for
operating a firm. As a result, the firms that exit are those with the lowest productivity. Losing
these marginal varieties has practically no effect on the welfare of natives in the OECD. At the
other end, developing countries receive a net inflow of workers. This increase in the labor force
will induce a reduction in the productivity cutoff for operating a firm there, and new firms will be
established. However, these are firms that did not find it worthwhile to operate before the inflow
of new workers. Thus, their positive contribution to welfare-adjusted equilibrium variety is minor.

20

Quantitatively, in the short run, what matters crucially is how much less productive new entrants are relative to the firms that are already in the market. For this, the calibration to the
observed firm size distribution (Zipf’s Law) plays an important role. Essentially, the observed firm
size distribution contains information on the relative productivity of the marginal firms compared
to the inframarginal ones. The extremely skewed firm size distribution observed in the economy
implies that the inframarginal firms are vastly more productive, and thus matter much more for
welfare, than the marginal ones (for a detailed exploration of this result, see di Giovanni and
Levchenko, 2010). In comparison, the main benefit in the long run from having a larger population
lies in the additional net entry of entrepreneurs – a larger nsi . An increase in population stimulates
entry everywhere in the productivity distribution. Because the long-run entry will feature some
very productive firms, it will have a much larger impact on welfare.
Three OECD countries – Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.S. – gain in welfare from un-doing
migration in the short run. It turns out that this outcome is due to the assumption that immigrants
receive a per capita share of firm profits. If we instead assume that all the firm profits in the economy
accrue to the natives, even in these three countries the natives are worse off without immigration.
Figure 3 reports the short-run results graphically and isolates the roles of remittances and
international trade. As was the case in the long run, not taking into account remittances the
relationship between population and welfare changes becomes roughly monotonic. As illustrated
by the hollow dots, with trade but no remittances, larger population gains in the counterfactual
lead to larger welfare losses among developing countries. In the OECD the relationship appears
practically flat. In other words, in the short run the increase in domestic varieties experienced
by developing countries is not enough to compensate for the loss in imported varieties. The main
reason for this is that return migrants are leaving high-productivity OECD countries to go back
to their low-productivity countries of origin, which entails a large loss in worldwide efficiency units
of labor. Turning now to the role of international trade, in the counterfactual exercise without
either remittances or cross-border trade, the relationship between population and welfare changes
again becomes roughly linear and now features a weak positive slope. This reflects the fact that
the increased labor force in the non-OECD will deliver a net increase in varieties available for
consumption, obviously with no change in imported varieties.

5.3

Distributional Effects

Our model features imperfect substitutability between skilled and unskilled workers, and thus
the potential for migration to generate distributional effects to the extent that migrants differ in
skill composition from natives. To isolate those distributional effects, Figure 4 plots the welfare
changes of the unskilled native stayers against the welfare changes of the skilled native stayers. If
a country observation is on the 45-degree line, the skilled and the unskilled experience identical

21

welfare changes.
The top panel presents the results for the OECD. Overall, welfare changes for the skilled
and the unskilled are similar: the observations tend to be relatively close to the 45-degree line
(Figure 4a). Thus, in the long run the welfare gains from new varieties dominate the changes in
the skill premium. A notable exception is Australia: the unskilled stayers lose 13.6% in the nomigration counterfactual, compared to 7.8% for the skilled. This reflects the fact that immigrants
to Australia are more skilled on average than natives (Table 1).
However, in the short run the distributional effects come to the fore (Figure 4b). In many
OECD countries, the welfare changes for the skilled and the unskilled have opposite signs, and are
an order of magnitude larger in absolute value than aggregate welfare changes. For instance, in the
short run the U.S. is 0.14% better off without migration (Table 5). Separating by skill, it turns out
that the unskilled are 1.03% better off in the absence of migration, but the skilled are 0.45% worse
off. In Australia, the numbers are even larger, and the identity of winners and losers is reversed.
While in the aggregate, Australia would be 0.68% worse off in the absence of migration, unskilled
Australians would be 2.28% worse off, while skilled Australians 2.63% better off. The identity of
winners and losers across countries corresponds closely to the relative skill levels of natives and
immigrants. In the U.S., immigrants are comparatively unskilled (Table 1), and thus in the short
run migration benefits the skilled at the expense of the unskilled. The opposite is true for Australia.
This is a general pattern: in the short run, the correlation between welfare changes for the skilled
and the unskilled is negative at −0.22. (By contrast, in the long run the welfare changes for those
two groups are strongly positively correlated at 0.81.)
For the majority of non-OECD countries, the distributional effects are negligible both in the
short run and in the long run. This is intuitive: as discussed above, for these countries the welfare
effects are dominated by remittances, which are the same in the short and the long run. Only a
couple of countries – Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago – exhibit large distributional effects. In
these countries, reversing emigration leads to large welfare losses for the skilled among the native
stayers, with a much more subdued (or even a positive) impact on the unskilled. Table 2 reveals
that emigrants from Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago are overwhelmingly more skilled than the
native stayers. These large disparities, coupled with large observed emigration, imply that returning
emigrants home to these countries will significantly change the relative supply of skill there, leading
to large distributional effects.

6

Extensions and Sensitivity

This section briefly discusses a number of extensions and sensitivity checks on the main results.
Appendix B describes these exercises in detail.

22

6.1

Native-Immigrant Productivity Differences

Migrant productivity may differ from that of the natives of similar skill levels, for a variety of
reasons. On the one hand, it is well documented that migrants suffer a reduction in human capital
associated with imperfect transferability of skills across countries, at least temporarily. If this is
indeed the case, the findings described above may overstate the effects of migration on the effective
labor force (in efficiency units) of the host country. On the other hand, some immigrants may be
permanently more productive (i.e. earn higher wages) than natives with similar schooling levels.
This could be due to positive selection into migration: migrants may be above-average in terms
of unobservable skills (such as talent or ability) relative to individuals that are observationally
equivalent in terms of education, work experience, gender, and so on. Of course, negative selection
into emigration is also possible, and the type of selection may well vary substantially by origin
country.23 Appendix B.1 presents two approaches to calibrating native-immigrant productivity
gaps, and shows that the results are quite similar to the baseline.

6.2

Imperfect Substitution Between Natives and Immigrants

The baseline framework assumes that native and immigrant workers in the same skill category
are perfect substitutes. Recently, several studies have questioned this assumption (Manacorda et
al., 2012; Ottaviano and Peri, 2012). Appendix B.2 implements a model in which natives and
immigrants of the same skill level are imperfect substitutes. As expected, assuming imperfect
substitutability between immigrants and natives increases the gains from immigration for the typical
host country since now natives and immigrants do not compete head to head. The cross-country
pattern of welfare changes is very similar to the baseline.

6.3

Additional Sensitivity and Welfare of Migrants

We examine the sensitivity of the main results along a number of additional dimensions. First, the
key mechanism through which natives in the destination countries gain from migration is increased
product variety. Since equilibrium variety responds endogenously to market size, and larger markets
exhibit greater equilibrium variety, individuals living in larger markets enjoy greater welfare, all
else equal. This phenomenon is often referred to as the “scale effect.” Scale effects are common and
well-studied in both economic growth (e.g., Romer, 1990) and international trade (e.g., Krugman,
1980). Nonetheless, it is important to justify this type of mechanism in our quantitative exercise,
and to benchmark it to existing empirical estimates of scale effects. Appendix B.3 (i) compares the
magnitude of the scale effect implied by our model to existing empirical estimates; (ii) implements
an alternative calibration that targets a scale effect at the bottom of the range suggested in the
23

Borjas (1987) explores the conditions for one type of selection or the other to take place.

23

literature; and (iii) implements a model with explicit congestion effects to counteract the positive
effect of country size on income.
Second, it may be that the share of the skilled in the population has a direct effect on TFP. For
instance, Jones (2002) and Benhabib and Spiegel (2005) develop theoretical models that feature
a positive link between human capital and TFP growth, while Ciccone and Peri (2006), Moretti
(2004), and Iranzo and Peri (2009b), among others, provide estimates of these human capital
externalities based on sub-national evidence. This force may affect the welfare impact of migration
because the migrants are frequently less skilled on average than the natives of their destination
countries, and more skilled than the staying natives of their origin countries.
Appendix B.4 discusses the results of an extension that incorporates this effect. The results for
the OECD remain qualitatively unchanged, whereas the conclusions for the non-OECD turn out
to be sensitive to the assumption that TFP is not directly affected by the skilled share. Of course
this outcome is very much dependent on the specific parameterization we adopted. Since there
is considerable uncertainty regarding the nature of the link between the skilled share and TFP,
these results should be interpreted with caution. The exercise suggests that this is an potentially
important mechanism that should be explored further in future research.
In Appendix B.5, we use our baseline model to perform more realistic policy counterfactuals.
Specifically, we compute the welfare effects of reducing the stock of immigrants in each country
by 10 percent. We also evaluate the sensitivity of our baseline results to assuming a much lower
elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor. Finally, Appendix B.6 discusses the
welfare impact of migration on the migrants themselves.

7

Conclusion

The cross-border movements of people are large relative to the overall population of many countries.
This paper develops a global-scale quantitative assessment of the welfare impact of migration in a
large cross-section of both sending and receiving countries. Our main finding is that the long-run
impact of observed levels of migration is large and positive for the remaining natives of both the main
sending countries and the main receiving ones. Relative to the counterfactual scenario in which no
migration takes place, some countries in both groups are as much as 10% better off. Interestingly,
while the overall numbers are similar, the salient reason for the welfare changes is different. For the
countries with the highest immigration rates (Australia, New Zealand, Canada), migration raises
welfare through increased equilibrium variety. For the countries with the highest emigration rates
(El Salvador, Jamaica), the staying natives are better off because of remittances. These forces
are also at work for all other countries, but the relative strength of each varies substantially. Our
findings also suggest that failing to account for the role of remittances would produce a welfare
evaluation that would be severely biased for a number of migration-sending countries.
24

All in all our analysis provides a fairly positive view of the welfare effects of international
migration, both for origin and destination countries. We note, however, that our analysis does
not take into account the effects that immigration may have on the provision of public goods and
government-mandated redistribution. Implicitly, we are assuming that immigrants contribute to
tax revenue and use public services at the same rate as the natives, and that immigrants do not alter
the political equilibrium that determines the overall degree of within-country income redistribution.
While this may be a reasonable assumption in some countries, it may not apply universally (Dolmas
and Huffman, 2004; Ortega, 2010). Relatedly, our analysis ignores any impact of migration on social
capital such as trust or social cohesion.24 Incorporating the fiscal, political, and social channels into
the quantitative welfare assessments of immigration remains a fruitful avenue for future research.

References
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara, “Who trusts others?,” Journal of Public Economics, August
2002, 85 (2), 207–234.
Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E., Jr. Lucas, “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007, 54 (6), 1726–
1768.
Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42
(3), 691–751.
Axtell, Robert L., “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, September 2001, 293 (5536),
1818–1820.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World,
1950–2010,” April 2010. NBER Working Paper 15902.
Benhabib, Jess, “On the political economy of immigration,” European Economic Review, December
1996, 40 (9), 1737–1743.
and Boyan Jovanovic, “Optimal Migration: A World Perspective,” International Economic
Review, May 2012, 53 (2), 321–348.
and Mark M. Spiegel, “Human Capital and Technology Diffusion,” in Philippe Aghion and
Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth,
Elsevier, 2005, chapter 13, pp. 935–966.
Bergin, Paul and Giancarlo Corsetti, “The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2008, 55 (7), 1222–1237.
Berry, R. Albert and Ronald Soligo, “Some Welfare Aspects of International Migration,” Journal
of Political Economy, September-October 1969, 77 (5), 778–794.
Borjas, George J, “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants,” American Economic Review,
September 1987, 77 (4), 531–53.
24

De la Rica et al. (2013) provide a comprehensive survey of the economic effects of immigration in Europe, including
the fiscal consequences. Alesina and La Ferrara (2002) find that within the U.S., individuals living in localities with
high ethnic fractionalization and income disparities exhibit less trust. Using a large cross-section of countries, Ortega
and Peri (2013) show that immigration does increase ethnic fractionalization, but any negative economic effects of
increased fractionalization appear to be more than offset by other sources of gains.

25

Borjas, George J., “The Economic Benefits from Immigration,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Spring 1995, 9 (2), 3–22.
Chaney, Thomas, “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade,” American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1707–1721.
Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri, “Identifying Human-Capital Externalities: Theory with Applications,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (2), 381–412.
Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein, “Technological Superiority and the Losses From Migration,” June 2002. NBER Working Paper No. 8971.
De la Rica, Sara, Albrecht Glitz, and Francesc Ortega, “Immigration in Europe: Trends, Policies
and Empirical Evidence,” 2013. ISA Discussion Paper.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Firm Entry, Trade, and Welfare in Zipf’s World,”
August 2010. NBER Working Paper No. 16313.
and
, “Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular
Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, December 2012, 120 (6), 1083–1132.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,” American Economic Review, June 1977, 67 (3), 297–308.
Docquier, Frédéric, Abdeslam Marfouk, Çağlar Özden, and Christopher Parsons, “Geographic,
Gender and Skill Structure of International Migration,” November 2010. mimeo, Université
Catholique de Louvain, World Bank, and University of Nottingham.
, B. Lindsay Lowell, and Abdeslam Marfouk, “A Gendered Assessment of Highly Skilled Emigration,” Population and Development Review, 2009, 35 (2), 297–321.
, Çağlar Özden, and Giovanni Peri, “The Wage Effects of Immigration and Emigration,” December 2010. NBER Working Paper No. 16646.
, Joël Machado, and Khalid Sekkat, “Efficiency gains from liberalizing labor mobility,” 2012.
mimeo, UCLouvain and Université Libre de Bruxelles.
Dolmas, Jim and Gregory W. Huffman, “On The Political Economy Of Immigration And Income
Redistribution,” International Economic Review, November 2004, 45 (4), 1129–1168.
Dustmann, Christian, “Return migration, wage differentials, and the optimal migration duration,”
European Economic Review, April 2003, 47 (2), 353–369.
, “Return Migration, Investment in Children, and Intergenerational Mobility: Comparing Sons
of Foreign- and Native-Born Fathers,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (2), 299–324.
and Albrecht Glitz, “How Do Industries and Firms Respond to Changes in Local Labour Supply,”
September 2011. CReAM Discussion Paper No. 18/11.
, Itzhak Fadlon, and Yoram Weiss, “Return migration, human capital accumulation and the
brain drain,” Journal of Development Economics, May 2011, 95 (1), 58–67.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel S. Kortum, and Francis Kramarz, “An Anatomy of International Trade:
Evidence from French Firms,” Econometrica, September 2011, 79 (5), 1453–1498.
Facchini, Giovanni and Anna Maria Mayda, “Does the Welfare State Affect Individual Attitudes toward Immigrants? Evidence across Countries,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2009, 91 (2), 295–314.
and Max Friedrich Steinhardt, “What drives U.S. immigration policy? Evidence from congressional roll call votes,” Journal of Public Economics, August 2011, 95 (7-8), 734–743.

26

, Anna Maria Mayda, and Prachi Mishra, “Do interest groups affect US immigration policy?,”
Journal of International Economics, September 2011, 85 (1), 114–128.
Fairlie, Robert W., “Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Small Business Owners, and Their Access to
Financial Capital,” May 2012. Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy.
Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2005, 120 (3), 865–915.
Gonzalez, Libertad and Francesc Ortega, “Immigration And Housing Booms: Evidence From
Spain,” Journal of Regional Science, 02 2013, 53 (1), 37–59.
Hamilton, Bob and John Whalley, “Efficiency and Distributional Implications of Global Restrictions
on Labour Mobility: Calculations and Policy Implications,” Journal of Development Economics,
January-February 1984, 14 (1), 61–75.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2), 441–487.
Hendricks,
Lutz,
“A
Database
of
http://www.lhendricks.org/Mincer.htm.

Mincerian

Earnings

Regressions,”

2004.

International Monetary Fund, “Directions of Trade Statistics,” 2007.
Iranzo, Susana and Giovanni Peri, “Migration and Trade: Theory with an Application to the
Eastern-Western European Integration,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79 (1), 1–
19.
and , “Schooling Externalities, Technology, and Productivity: Theory and Evidence from U.S.
States,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2009, 91 (2), 420–431.
Jones, Charles I., “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,” American Economic
Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 220–239.
Kennan, John, “Open Borders,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2013, 16 (2), L1–L13.
Klein, Paul and Gustavo Ventura, “TFP Differences and the Aggregate Effects of Labor Mobility
in the Long Run,” B.E. Journals in Macroeconomics, 2007, 7 (1).
and , “Productivity Differences and the Dynamic Effects of Labor Movements,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2009, 56, 1059–1073.
Krugman, Paul, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,” American
Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.
Lewis, Ethan, “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 1029–1069.
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth, “The Impact Of Immigration On The
Structure Of Wages: Theory And Evidence From Britain,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, February 2012, 10 (1), 120–151.
Mayda, Anna Maria, “Who Is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of Individual
Attitudes toward Immigrants,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 04 2006, 88 (3), 510–530.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Merkle, Lucie and Klaus F. Zimmermann, “Savings, remittances, and return migration,” Economics
Letters, January 1992, 38 (1), 77 – 81.
Moretti, Enrico, “Workers’ Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level
Production Functions,” American Economic Review, June 2004, 94 (3), 656–690.
27

Ortega, Francesc, “Immigration quotas and skill upgrading,” Journal of Public Economics, September 2005, 89 (9-10), 1841–1863.
, “Immigration, Citizenship, and the Size of Government,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2010, 10 (1), 26.
and Giovanni Peri, “Migration, Trade, and Income,” November 2013. Forthcoming, Journal of
International Economics.
and Javier Polavieja, “Labor-market Exposure as a Determinant of Attitudes toward Immigration,” Labour Economics, 2012, 19, 298–311.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri, “Rethinking The Effect Of Immigration On Wages,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, February 2012, 10 (1), 152–197.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri, “The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence
from US cities,” Journal of Economic Geography, January 2006, 6 (1), 9–44.
Pritchett, Lant, Let their people come: breaking the gridlock on global labor mobility, Washington,
D.C.: Center for Global Development, 2006.
Ratha, Dilip and William Shaw, “South-South Migration and Remittances,” April 2007. World
Bank Working Paper No. 102.
Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (1), 116–130.
and , “Information, International Substitutability, and Globalization,” American Economic
Review, 2003, 93 (3), 775–791.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1990,
98 (5), S71–S102.
Saiz, Albert, “Room in the Kitchen for the Melting Pot: Immigration and Rental Prices,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2003, 85 (3), 502–521.
The World Bank, “Doing Business Indicators,” 2007.
Trefler, Daniel, “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!,” Journal of Political
Economy, December 1993, 101, 961–987.
, “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries,” American Economic Review, December
1995, 85, 1029–1046.
Yang, Dean, “International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence from
Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks,” Economic Journal, April 2008, 118 (528), 591–
630.
Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang, “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” April 2010. Mimeo, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and University of Michigan.

28

29

Share
Emigrants
0.015
0.046
0.030
0.032
0.026
0.038
0.053
0.017
0.033
0.066
0.030
0.156
0.042
0.005
0.038
0.047
0.128
0.030
0.046
0.134
0.041
0.016
0.022
0.035
0.060
0.003

Pop. Chg. in
Counterfactuals
-0.226
-0.062
-0.078
-0.154
0.003
-0.019
0.019
-0.060
-0.031
0.052
-0.005
0.026
0.018
-0.010
0.028
-0.055
-0.122
-0.056
0.045
0.111
0.036
-0.100
-0.083
-0.103
-0.024
-0.116

Remittances
/GDP
-0.009
0.001
0.014
-0.016
0.005
0.001
0.002
-0.001
-0.004
-0.002
-0.003
-0.007
-0.002
-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
0.003
-0.002
0.012
0.010
0.006
-0.003
-0.005
-0.007
-0.003
-0.008

Share skilled
Stayers
0.29
0.23
0.28
0.49
0.10
0.21
0.26
0.24
0.25
0.15
0.12
0.17
0.18
0.23
0.25
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.15
0.17
0.20
0.18
0.52

Share skilled
Immigrants
0.45
0.12
0.19
0.58
0.11
0.17
0.23
0.16
0.21
0.15
0.13
0.40
0.15
0.28
0.37
0.22
0.41
0.28
0.13
0.18
0.27
0.18
0.25
0.21
0.34
0.42

Share skilled
Emigrants
0.55
0.33
0.34
0.60
0.34
0.41
0.27
0.33
0.39
0.20
0.39
0.33
0.16
0.61
0.50
0.43
0.48
0.38
0.37
0.10
0.18
0.18
0.46
0.40
0.46
0.58

Notes: This table presents the developed country sample, for which inward migration data are available for 2006. The first column presents
the percentage of foreign born in total population. The second column presents the share of emigrants from each country to the receiving
countries in the sample, as a share of the remaining population. The third column presents the percentage change in the population if there
were no migration. This is the percentage change in the population evaluated in the counterfactual. The remaining columns report remittances
as a share of GDP (negative numbers signify net outflows of remittances), and the shares of skilled among the native stayers, immigrants, and
emigrants. Data sources and variable definitions are described in detail in the text.

Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Rep.
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Rep.
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Share
Immigrants
0.242
0.108
0.108
0.185
0.023
0.058
0.034
0.076
0.064
0.014
0.034
0.129
0.025
0.015
0.011
0.101
0.251
0.086
0.001
0.023
0.005
0.116
0.106
0.137
0.084
0.119

Table 1. OECD Countries: Migrant Stocks, Skill Composition, and Remittances

Table 2. Non-OECD Countries: Migrant Stocks, Skill Composition, and Remittances

Country
Algeria
Argentina
Belarus
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Dominican Rep.
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Israel
Jamaica
Malaysia
Mexico
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Romania
Russian Fed.
Saudi Arabia
Serbia and Mont.
South Africa
Thailand
Trinidad and Tob.
Turkey
Ukraine
U.A.E.
Venezuela
Rest of World

Share
Emigrants
0.025
0.012
0.005
0.005
0.037
0.016
0.003
0.023
0.103
0.097
0.068
0.004
0.190
0.003
0.002
0.011
0.021
0.317
0.010
0.107
0.003
0.005
0.030
0.070
0.008
0.004
0.106
0.011
0.006
0.179
0.038
0.019
0.003
0.011
0.011

Remittances
/GDP
0.023
-0.004
0.001
0.005
0.082
-0.002
0.012
0.034
0.020
0.143
0.050
0.042
0.178
0.030
0.007
0.006
-0.023
0.200
-0.006
0.031
0.031
0.044
0.155
0.058
0.001
-0.049
0.191
0.001
0.002
0.006
-0.001
-0.010
–
-0.004
0.021

Share skilled
stayers
0.062
0.201
0.201
0.084
0.189
0.158
0.026
0.099
0.094
0.141
0.160
0.104
0.107
0.047
0.050
0.067
0.241
0.040
0.077
0.111
0.028
0.025
0.159
0.087
0.202
0.093
0.082
0.098
0.110
0.099
0.081
0.162
0.031
0.185
0.095

Share skilled
emigrants
0.147
0.408
0.172
0.328
0.234
0.403
0.281
0.317
0.199
0.256
0.266
0.271
0.198
0.318
0.182
0.487
0.235
0.420
0.352
0.148
0.313
0.231
0.545
0.334
0.309
0.301
0.230
0.510
0.296
0.494
0.092
0.222
0.206
0.521
0.118

Notes: This table presents the developing country sample, for which only outward migration data to the
developed countries are available for 2006. Thus, the population change in the counterfactual coincides with
the share of emigrants. The second column presents the share of emigrants from each country to the receiving
countries in the sample relative the remaining population. The third column presents the percentage change
in the population if there were no migration. This is the percentage change in the population evaluated in
the counterfactual. The last column reports net remittances as a share of GDP (negative numbers signify
net outflows of remittances). Data sources and variable definitions are described in detail in the text.

30

Table 3. Calibrated Parameter Values
Parameter
σ
εs
θs
α

Baseline
3
6
5.3
0.65

{βN , βT }
{ηN , ηT }

{0.65, 0.35}
{0.77, 0.35}

Source
Ottaviano and Peri (2012)
Anderson and van Wincoop (2004)
θ
Axtell (2001): ε−1
= 1.06
Yi and Zhang (2010)
1997 U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Table

τij

2.30

Helpman et al. (2008)

fiis
fij

14.24
7.20

The World Bank (2007); normalizing fU S,U S
so that nearly all firms the U.S. produce

fE

34.0

To match 7,000,000 firms in the U.S.
(U.S. Economic Census)

The details of how these parameters are chosen are described in Appendix A.2.

Table 4. Bilateral Trade Shares: Data and Model Predictions
Model
Domestic sales as a share of domestic absorption (πii )
mean
median
corr(model,data)
Export sales as a share of domestic absorption (πij )
mean
median
corr(model,data)

Data

0.7559 0.7286
0.7468 0.7697
0.5662
0.0041 0.0042
0.0018 0.0042
0.7822

Notes: This table reports the means and medians of domestic output (top panel), and bilateral trade (bottom
panel), both as a share of domestic absorption, in the model and in the data. Source: International Monetary
Fund (2007) and model output.

31

Table 5. Percentage Change in Average Welfare in the Counterfactual Relative to Benchmark
Country

Long Run

Short Run

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

OECD Countries
-0.68
-11.63
-3.06
-0.41
-4.63
-1.36
-7.07
0.25
-1.02
-0.85
-1.29
-0.31
-0.13
-0.55
-3.12
-0.39
-1.55
-0.09
1.17
-0.59
-0.46
-0.12
-0.07
-0.54
0.43
-0.15
-0.48
-0.01
1.12
-0.01
-2.60
-0.12
-6.89
-1.21
-2.53
-0.05
0.16
-1.32
1.37
-2.04
-0.10
-1.10
-4.91
-0.42
-3.45
0.15
-4.42
0.06
-1.46
-0.23
-5.37
0.14

Mean
Std. Dev.

-2.38
3.07

-0.46
0.56

Country

Long Run

Algeria
Argentina
Belarus
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Israel
Jamaica
Malaysia
Mexico
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Romania
Russian Federation
Saudi Arabia
Serbia and Montenegro
South Africa
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
Venezuela, RB

Non-OECD Countries
-1.55
-2.14
0.07
-0.19
-1.25
-1.03
-0.27
-0.43
-5.68
-6.60
0.34
-0.11
-0.75
-0.88
-2.01
-2.75
-0.35
-3.29
-9.02
-11.55
-2.26
-4.42
-3.47
-3.40
-8.72
-14.08
-2.51
-2.53
-0.65
-0.63
-0.15
-0.53
0.12
-0.04
-5.61
-14.89
-0.39
-0.43
1.32
-2.59
-2.74
-2.59
-3.45
-3.45
-10.08
-11.27
-2.73
-4.89
-0.18
-0.38
-0.26
0.66
-11.54
-14.46
-0.05
-0.31
-0.51
-0.56
5.70
-0.77
1.07
-0.30
-0.34
-0.58
-0.06
-0.07
0.10
-0.14

Mean
Std. Dev.

-2.00
3.55

Short Run

-3.28
4.54

Notes: This table presents the percent change in welfare between baseline and counterfactual equilibria,
assuming φ`i = φhi = 1 for all countries. The measure of welfare employed here is the average real income of
native stayers. The first column reports the welfare change in the long run, the second column in the short
run.

32

0

Model: PPP−adjusted Per−Capita Income
.5
1

1.5

Figure 1. Real Incomes: Model vs. Data

NOR
CHE
DNK

USA

IRL
JPN
SWE
NLD
GBR
DEU
AUT
FRA
FINAUS
ITA BEL
CAN
NZL ESP
GRC
ISR
PRT
KOR
SAU
CZE
HUN
TTO
HRV
SVK
MEX
POLCHL
ZAF
RUS
MYS
TUR
VEN
ARG
BRA
ROM
JAM
BGR
YUG
THA
DZA
ECU
IRN
SLV
COL
BLR
DOM
CHN
UKR
IDN
PHL
EGY
IND
PAK
NGA

0

.5
1
Data: PPP−adjusted Per−Capita Income

1.5

Notes: This figure reports the scatterplot of the real PPP-adjusted per capita income from the Penn World
Tables (x-axis) against the real PPP-adjusted per capita income implied by the model. Both are expressed
relative to the U.S..

33

−10

Welfare Change
0
10

20

Figure 2. Change in Average Welfare in the Long Run: Autarky, Trade, and Remittances

−20

−10
0
10
20
Population Change in Counterfactual
Trade and Remittances
Trade and No Remittances

30

Autarky

Notes: This figure reports the percentage change in welfare in the long-run counterfactual relative to the
baseline (assuming φ`i = φhi = 1 for all countries i) in three different scenarios. Solid dots depict the welfare
change with both trade and remittances. Hollow dots, depict the welfare change with international trade but
keeping remittances constant at zero in the baseline and counterfactual equilibria. Hollow triangles depict
the welfare changes under prohibitive trade costs and no remittances. The measure of welfare is the average
real income of native stayers. On the y-axis is the percent change in the population in the counterfactual
relative to the baseline.

34

−15

−10

Welfare Change
−5
0

5

Figure 3. Change in Average Welfare in the Short Run: Autarky, Trade, and Remittances

−20

−10
0
10
20
Population Change in Counterfactual
Trade and Remittances
Trade and No Remittances

30

Autarky

Notes: This figure reports the percentage change in welfare in the short-run counterfactual relative to the
baseline (assuming φ`i = φhi = 1 for all countries i) in three different scenarios. Solid dots depict the welfare
change with both trade and remittances. Hollow dots, depict the welfare change with international trade but
keeping remittances constant at zero in the baseline and counterfactual equilibria. Hollow triangles depict
the welfare changes under prohibitive trade costs and no remittances. The measure of welfare is the average
real income of the native stayers. On the y-axis is the percent change in the population in the counterfactual
relative to the baseline.

35

5

5

Figure 4. Distributional Effects: Welfare Changes of Skilled and Unskilled Natives

PRT

Change in Welfare, Unskilled
−2.5
0
2.5

Change in Welfare, Unskilled
−10
−5
0

KOR
GRC
POL
ITA
SVK
HUN
FINIRL
JPN
CZE
DNK
DEU
GBR
AUTNLD
FRA NOR
SWE
CHE
BEL
USA
ESP
NZL
CAN

USA

POL

CHE
AUT NLD
KORSWE
DEU
HUNDNK
JPN
FRAGBR
NOR
ITA
GRCFIN
ESP CAN
CZE
IRL
SVK
BEL
NZL
AUS

PRT

−5

−15

AUS

−15

−10
−5
0
Change in Welfare, Skilled

5

−5

10

TTO

Change in Welfare, Unskilled
−20
−10
0

MEX
TUR
CHL
ISR
VEN
ZAF
ARG
IRN
ARE
RUS
HRV
SAU
MYS
UKR
BRA
THA
IDN
CHN
BLR
DZA
COL
ECU
ROM
IND
NGA
PAK
EGY

JAM

BGR
SLV
DOM
PHL

TTO

SAU
ISR
CHL
ARE
VEN
ZAF
ARG
MYS
TUR
RUS
IRN
BRA
UKR
THA
IDN
CHN
BLR
DZA
IND
NGA
MEX
COL
HRV
EGY
PAK
ECU
ROM
BGR

DOM
PHL
YUG SLV

JAM

−30

YUG

5

(b) OECD Countries, Short Run

−30

Change in Welfare, Unskilled
−20
−10
0

10

(a) OECD Countries, Long Run

−2.5
0
2.5
Change in Welfare, Skilled

−30

−20
−10
0
Change in Welfare, Skilled

10

−30

(c) Non-OECD Countries, Long Run

−20
−10
0
Change in Welfare, Skilled

10

(d) Non-OECD Countries, Short Run

Notes: Units on both axes are in percentage points. These figures present scatterplots of the percent change
in welfare of the unskilled native stayers against the change in welfare of the skilled native stayers, for the
OECD (top half) and the non-OECD (bottom half) countries respectively, in both the long run (left side)
and the short run (right side). The line through the data is the 45-degree line in each plot.

36

ONLINE APPENDIX
A Global View of Cross-Border Migration
Julian di Giovanni

Andrei A. Levchenko

March 13, 2014

37

Francesc Ortega

Appendix A
A.1

Complete Model and Calibration

Complete Model Equations

Let Yis denote the value of output by sector s firms located in country i, and let Xis denote the
expenditure on sector s in country i by consumers and firms. The country’s resource constraint
states that total spending must equal the value of domestic production plus net transfers: XiN +
XiT = YiN + YiT + Ri . Because sector N output cannot be traded, it has to be the case that
XiN = YiN , and thus the aggregate resource constraint becomes:
XiT = YiT + Ri .

(A.1)

Using the expression for he total sales of a firm with unit input requirement a(k) and summing
over the sales of all country i firms serving j, the total sales from country i to country j can be
written as:
T
Xji

XjT
=  1−εT
PjT



εT
τji cTi
εT − 1

1−εT

nTi

θT −(εT −1)
bθTT θT
aTji
.
θT − (εT − 1)

Using expressions for aTji in (9), and PjT in (11), the total exports from i to j become:

T
Xji

=

nTi
PC

−θT
τji cTi

T
l=1 nl

τjl cTl



T
cTi fji

−θT



− θT −(εT −1)
εT −1

cTl fjlT

T
− θT −(εT −1) Xj .
εT −1

Adding these up across all destinations j and using (A.1), we obtain the market clearing condition
for country i’s total T -sector output:

YiT

=

XiT

− Ri =

C
X
j=1

A.1.1

nTi τji cTi
PC

T
l=1 nl

−θT 

T
cTi fji

− θT −(εT −1)
εT −1

T

− θT −(εT −1) Xj .

εT −1
−θT
τjl cTl
cTl fjlT

(A.2)

Short-Run Equilibrium

Not imposing free entry means that entrepreneurs with access to productive projects earn net
profits in this economy. Straightforward steps (see, for instance, Proposition 1 in di Giovanni and
Levchenko, 2010) establish that total profits in each sector and country are a constant multiple
s . This implies that the total spending on
of the total sales by firms in that sector: Πsi = εεss−1
θs Yi 

s
intermediate inputs in each sector is (1 − βs ) 1 − εεss−1
θs Yi . Final spending is the sum of all net
T
income, which includes labor income, profits, and remittances: Yi = wi Li + ΠN
i + Πi + Ri . Market

clearing in each sector implies that total spending equals final consumption spending plus purchases

38

of intermediate inputs:
XiN
XiT




εs − 1
εs − 1
N
Yi + (1 − βT ) ηT 1 −
YiT
= αYi + (1 − βN ) ηN 1 −
εs θ s
εs θ s


εs − 1
= (1 − α)Yi + (1 − βN ) (1 − ηN ) 1 −
YiN +
εs θ s


εs − 1
YiT .
(1 − βT ) (1 − ηT ) 1 −
εs θ s


(A.3)

(A.4)

The short-run equilibrium is obtained as a solution to (C − 1) + 2 × C equations in wi , PiN ,
and PiT , that satisfies equations (11) for s = N, T , (A.2), (A.3), and (A.4) for each i = 1, . . . , C.
Equations (A.3) and (A.4) imply that XiT is linear in wi Li and Ri , which allows us to express (A.2)
as a system of equations in relative wages given the vector of Ri and sectoral price levels. These
equations do not admit an analytical solution for a realistic number of countries and reasonable
parameter values, but are straightforward to solve numerically.
A.1.2

Long-Run Equilibrium

Entrepreneurs in sector s will enter until the expected profit equals the cost of discovering one’s
productivity:
E

" C
X

1ij [k]



V,s
πij
(a(k))

−

csj fijs



#
= csj fE

(A.5)

i=1

for each country j and sector s, where 1ij [k] is the indicator function for whether firm k in j finds
V,s
it profitable to enter market i, πij
(a(k)) are ex post variable profits from selling there, and once

again in sector N , profits can only be positive for i = j.
With free entry, the total profits in the economy are zero. Thus the total final spending equals
labor income plus remittances, Yi = wi Li + Ri , and total spending on intermediate inputs equals a
fraction (1 − βs ) of total sales by all firms in each sector s. Market clearing in each sector implies
that total spending equals final consumption spending plus purchases of intermediate inputs:
XiN

= αYi + (1 − βN ) ηN YiN + (1 − βT ) ηT YiT

(A.6)

XiT

= (1 − α)Yi + (1 − βN ) (1 − ηN ) YiN + (1 − βT ) (1 − ηT ) YiT .

(A.7)

The long-run equilibrium is obtained as a solution to (C − 1) + 2 × C + 2 × C equations in wi , PiN ,
T
PiT , nN
i and ni that satisfies equations (11) for s = N, T , (A.2), (A.5), (A.6), and (A.7) for each

i = 1, . . . , C. As in the short-run case, (A.6) and (A.7) allow us to express XiT as a linear function
of wi Li and Ri , implying that (A.2) can be solved numerically for wages given Ri and price levels.

A.2

Parameter Values

We implement the economy under the following parameter values (see Table 3 for a summary).
The elasticity of substitution between more and less educated workers is σ = 3. This elasticity has
39

been estimated in the context of a CES aggregator in a number of studies since the initial attempts
by Katz and Murphy (1992), mostly based on U.S. data.25 The estimates provided by Ottaviano
and Peri (2012) are particularly useful for our purposes since they consider alternative definitions
of the skilled. When the skilled group consists of individuals with a completed college degree,
these authors find an elasticity of substitution around 1.5−2, confirming the results in Ciccone
and Peri (2005). In our data skilled workers are individuals with at least some college education.
For this group (vis-à-vis individuals with no college education at all) Ottaviano and Peri (2012)
report an elasticity of substitution of 3. We take this as our baseline value. An earlier version of
our paper (di Giovanni et al., 2012) conducted the analysis under the assumption that skilled and
unskilled labor are perfect substitutes (σ = ∞). The results regarding the aggregate welfare were
virtually identical. Of course, perfect substitutability of skilled and unskilled workers rules out any
distributional effects of migration.
The elasticity of substitution is εs = 6, for both s = N, T . Anderson and van Wincoop (2004)
report available estimates of this elasticity to be in the range of 3 to 10, and we pick a value close
to the middle of the range. The key parameter is θs , as it governs the firm size distribution. As
described in much greater detail elsewhere (see, e.g., di Giovanni and Levchenko, 2012, 2010; di
Giovanni et al., 2011), in this model firm sales follow a power law with the exponent equal to

θs
εs −1 .

In the data, firm sales follow a power law with the exponent close to 1. Axtell (2001) reports the
value of 1.06, which we use to find θs given our preferred value of εs : θs = 1.06 × (εs − 1) = 5.3.
We set both the elasticity of substitution and the Pareto exponent to be the same in the N and
the T sectors. di Giovanni et al. (2011) show that the reduced form exponent in the empirical
distribution of firm size, which corresponds to θs /(εs − 1) in sector s is similar between the traded
and non-traded sectors. It could still be the case that while θT /(εT − 1) ≈ θN /(εN − 1), the actual
values of θs and εs differ. Since we do not have reliable information about how these two individual
parameters differ across sectors, we adopt the most agnostic and neutral assumption that both θs
and εs are the same in the two sectors.
We set the value of α – the share of non-tradeables in consumption – to be 0.65. This is the
mean value of services value added in total value added in the database compiled by the Groningen
Growth and Development Center and extended to additional countries by Yi and Zhang (2010).
It is the value also adopted by Alvarez and Lucas (2007). The values of βN and βT – share of
labor/value added in total output – are calibrated using the 1997 U.S. Benchmark Input-Output
Table. We take the Detailed Make and Use tables, featuring more than 400 distinct sectors, and
aggregate them into a 2-sector Direct Requirements Table. This table gives the amount of N , T ,
and factor inputs required to produce a unit of final output. Thus, βs is equal to the share of total
output that is not used pay for intermediate inputs, i.e., the payments to factors of production.
25

Card (2009) offers a review that includes an insightful discussion.

40

According to the U.S. Input-Output Matrix, βN = 0.65 and βT = 0.35. Thus, the traded sector
is considerably more input-intensive than the non-traded sector. The shares of non-traded and
traded inputs in both sectors are also calibrated based on the U.S. I-O Table. According to the
data, ηN = 0.77, while ηT = 0.35. Thus, more than 75% of the inputs used in the N sector come
from the N sector itself, while 65% of T -sector inputs come from the T sector. Nonetheless, these
values still leave substantial room for cross-sectoral input-output linkages.
Next, we must calibrate the values of τij for each pair of countries. To do that, we use the
gravity estimates from the empirical model of Helpman et al. (2008). Combining geographical
characteristics such as bilateral distance, common border, common language, whether the two
countries are in a currency union and others, with the coefficient estimates reported by Helpman
et al. (2008) yields, up to a multiplicative constant, the values of τij for each country pair. We vary
the multiplicative constant so as to match the mean and median imports/GDP ratios observed in
the data in our sample of countries. The advantage of the Helpman et al. (2008) estimates is that
they are obtained in an empirical model that accounts explicitly for both fixed and variable costs
of exporting, and thus correspond most closely to the theoretical structure in our paper. Note that
in this formulation, τij = τji for all i and j.
Next, we must take a stand on the values of fiis and fijs . To do this, we follow di Giovanni
and Levchenko (2012) and use the information on entry costs from the Doing Business Indicators
database (The World Bank, 2007). This database collects information on the administrative costs
of setting up a firm – the time it takes, the number of procedures, and the monetary cost – in a
large sample of countries in the world. In this application, the particular variable we use is the
amount of time required to set up a business. We favor this indicator compared to others that
measure entry costs either in dollars or in units of per capita income, because in our model fiis is a
quantity of inputs rather than value. We must normalize the fiis for one country. Thus, we proceed
by setting fUs S,U S to a level just high enough to ensure an interior solution for production cutoffs.26
Then, for every other country fiis is set relative to the U.S.. To be precise, if according to the Doing
Business Indicators database, in country i it takes 10 times longer to register a business than in
the U.S., then fiis = 10 × fUs S,U S . Since we do not have data on fixed costs of operating a business
that vary by sector, we set fiis to be equal in the N and T sectors.
To measure the fixed costs of international trade, we use the Trading Across Borders module
of the Doing Business Indicators. This module provides the costs of exporting a 20-foot dry-cargo
container out of each country, as well as the costs of importing the same kind of container into
each country. Parallel to our approach to setting the domestic cost fiis , the indicators we choose
are the amount of time required to carry out these transactions. This ensures that fiiT and fijT
26
That is, we set fUs S,U S to a level just high enough that asji < 1/bs for all i, j = 1, ..., C in all the baseline and
counterfactual exercises, with 1/bs being the upper limit of the distribution of a.

41

are measured in the same units. We take the bilateral fixed cost fijT to be the sum of the cost of
exporting from country j and the cost of importing into country i. The foreign trade costs fijT are
on average about 40% of the domestic entry costs fiiT . This is sensible, as it presumably is more
difficult to set up production than to set up a capacity to export.27
Finally, we set the value of the “exploration cost” fE such that the long-run equilibrium number
of operating firms in the U.S. is equal to 7 million. According to the 2002 U.S. Economic Census,
there were 6,773,632 establishments with a payroll in the United States. There are an additional
17,646,062 business entities that are not employers, but they account for less than 3.5% of total
shipments. Thus, while the U.S. may have many more legal entities than what we assume here, 7
million is a sufficiently high target number. Since we do not have information on the total number
of firms in other countries, we choose to set fE to be the same in all countries. In the absence of
data, this is the most agnostic approach we could take. In addition, since fE represents the cost
of finding out one’s abilities, we do not expect it to be affected by policies and thus differ across
countries. The resulting value of fE is 15 times higher than fUs S,U S , and 2.4 times higher than the
average fiis in the rest of the sample. The finding that the ex-ante fixed cost of finding out one’s
type is much higher than the ex-post fixed cost of production is a common one in the quantitative
models of this type (see, e.g., Ghironi and Melitz, 2005).

A.3

Numerical Algorithm

The solution to the model involves a large system of equations in wi ’s, Pis ’s, and, in the long run
only, nsi ’s. This system of equations is solved by adapting the tatonnement procedure of Alvarez
and Lucas (2007). For a guess of the wage and price vectors, we use (A.2) and (11) to compute the
next guess for the wage and price vectors, and iterate to convergence.
For solving the long-run equilibrium, there is an outer loop that uses a transformed version of
the free entry condition (A.5) to find the vectors of nsi conditional on the vectors of wi ’s and Pis ’s.
Given an initial guess for the vector of nsi , we solve for the wages and prices as in the paragraph
above. Then we compute the next guess for the vector of nsi using (A.5) given the vectors of wages
and prices, and then use the next guess for nsi to find the next vectors of wages and prices. We
iterate to convergence, at which point the solution yields vectors of wi ’s, Pis ’s, and nsi satisfying all
the equilibrium conditions.
Finally, to calibrate the model we must find a vector of Li ’s such that the model matches
perfectly the relative GDPs of all the countries. We do this following the approach of Alvarez and
Lucas (2007). Given an initial guess for the vector of Li ’s, we solve for the long-run equilibrium as
27

The results are very similar if we instead set the bilateral fixed cost to be the sum of domestic costs of starting
T
T
a business in the source and destination countries: fij
= fiiT + fjj
. This approach may be preferred if fixed costs of
exporting involved more than just shipping, and required, for instance, the exporting firm to create a subsidiary for
the distribution in the destination country.

42

in the paragraph above, and use the model-implied wages wi and observed actual country GDPs to
back out the next guess for Li . Using this new value of Li , we solve for the new long-run equilibrium,
and iterate to convergence. Thus, the complete model solution features a set of parameters Li and
equilibrium outcomes wi ’s, Pis ’s, and nsi such that all the equilibrium conditions are satisfied and
the model matches relative GDPs in the data.

Appendix B
B.1

Extensions and Robustness

Imperfect Skill Transferability and Selection

We implement two alternative approaches to calibrating native-immigrant productivity differentials,
introduced in Section 4.1. The first one assumes that immigrants have a 25% productivity disadvantage relative to natives with the same skill level: in all destinations j and for all origins i 6= j,
φ`ji = φhji = 0.75. Hendricks (2002) reviews the empirical literature measuring native-immigrant
wage gaps conditional on age and years of schooling for a variety of countries, and concludes that
a reasonable upper bound on the immigrants’ productivity disadvantage relative to the natives is
25%.28 In the counterfactual scenario we assume that when these individuals return to their home
countries, they are as productive as their compatriots that never left. We refer to this approach as
imperfect skill transferability.
The second alternative approach allows for a much broader set of reasons – most notably
selection into migration – why migrants would differ systematically from natives with the same
observable skill level. We refer to this setup as origin-specific selection, and discipline the choice
of the {φeji } parameters using earnings data. Ideally, one would like to allow for productivity
differences that vary by both origin and destination. However, this would require earnings data for
migrants disaggregated by country of origin for all destination countries, which are not available.
Instead we follow Hendricks (2002) and use the U.S. Census data for the year 2000 to compute
native-immigrant hourly wage ratios, controlling for skill level, for each immigration country of
origin. The sample includes only individuals 18−65 years of age with positive salary income in year
2000. For all destination countries j we set
φeji = φei =

WUe S,i
WUe S,U S

for all origin countries i 6= j and skill level e = `, h.29 This approach assumes that, controlling for
28

This is also consistent with the recent reviews of the literature by Dustmann and Frattini (2011) and De la Rica
et al. (2013). Both of these papers provide numerous estimates from a wide range of studies of the wage gaps between
natives and immigrants of different origins, and how these gaps differ across European countries and over time as
a function of the immigrants length of residence in the host country. Another calibration study, Klein and Ventura
(2009), assumes that international migration entails a 15% permanent loss in skills. Their choice is consistent with
the estimates in Borjas (1996) and in their model delivers realistic migration rates.
29
We are slightly abusing notation by using φei now to denote the native-immigrant productivity gap that varies
only by country of origin.

43

educational attainment, the relative immigrant-native productivity of, say, Mexican immigrants in
the U.S. is the same as that of Mexican immigrants in Canada or Spain. Though restrictive, this
assumption appears reasonable and transparent. Figure A1 presents the resulting native-immigrant
productivity gaps for all origin countries as a scatterplot of φhi on the y-axis against φ`i on the x-axis,
along with the 45-degree line. The mean values for the unskilled and skilled relative productivities
are 1.14 and 1.06, respectively. For most origin countries the values are in the 0.75−1.25 range,
consistent with the findings in Hendricks (2002), suggesting that controlling for schooling removes
a great deal of heterogeneity. However, several countries exhibit large native-immigrant gaps. For
instance, Finnish migrants appear to be roughly 50% more productive (based on their hourly wages
in the U.S.) than natives with a similar education.30 In contrast, Mexican migrants appear to be
roughly 25% less productive than natives with a similar education.
In the counterfactual exercise migrants keep the same values of φ`i and φhi when returning to
their country of origin, and thus the counterfactual labor force is calculated as

Lj = Ajj 

C
X

σ

! σ−1
σ
φ`j Nij`

+ ζj

µj

C
X

 σ−1
! σ−1
σ

φhj Nijh

i=1

i=1

(compare to (13)). If a country of origin had suffered positive selection into emigration – its best
and brightest had emigrated – now these exceptionally productive individuals are returning home
and will earn higher wages than stayers with the same observable skills.
The results are reported in Table A1. Throughout, we focus on the long-run effects. The Table
reports the mean and the standard deviation of the welfare change in the no-migration counterfactual relative to the baseline with the observed migration patterns, as well as the correlation
between the welfare change in each alternative model and the welfare results in the main text. For
convenience, the top row of the table reproduces from Table 5 the summary statistics for the longrun welfare changes in the OECD and non-OECD. Under imperfect skill transferability, the welfare
changes for the receiving country natives from un-doing migration are somewhat more subdued at
−1.44% (compared to −2.38% in the baseline). This is intuitive: for these countries the loss of
immigrants now implies a 25% smaller reduction in total efficiency units of labor compared to the
benchmark. By contrast, the origin countries receive the same efficiency units of labor as they did
under the benchmark approach. The cross-country pattern of welfare changes is quite similar to
the baseline analysis, with the correlation between this scenario and the baseline results of 0.99
among the OECD countries. It is important to keep in mind that our welfare measure is based on
the average utility of native stayers. Hence, for the emigration countries the differences in welfare
changes across approaches are driven solely by the global general equilibrium effects.
30
Recall that our definition of skilled is binary. Skilled workers include individuals with some college and above.
Hence, substantial within-group heterogeneity remains.

44

The results of implementing the model under the origin-specific selection calibration are reported
in the row “Selection Migrants” of Table A1. Here, average impact of migration is even more similar
to the baseline, with a −2.18% welfare change in the OECD. Once again, the correlation between
these results and the baseline is exceedingly high at 0.985 for the OECD, and essentially 1 for the
non-OECD.
To summarize, the two approaches implemented in this section deliver very similar results to
those obtained in the main text. We conclude that our benchmark results appear to be robust to
alternative parameterizations of the productivity of migrants relative to native individuals in the
host countries.

B.2

Imperfect Substitutability between Natives and Immigrants

This section implements a version of the model in which immigrants and natives of the same skill
level are imperfect substitutes in production. Instead of (6), the labor endowment of country j is
given by:
σ

λ σ−1
λ σ−1  σ−1
 λ−1

 λ−1

 λ−1

 λ−1
σ
σ 

λ
λ


C
C


X
X
σ−1
 `  λ−1

 h  λ−1

`
h
λ
λ
+
φ`ji Nji
+
φhji Nji
.
Lj = Ajj  Njj
+ ζj µj σ  Njj






i=1,i6=j
i=1,i6=j



(B.1)

That is, total labor endowment in country j is a CES aggregate of skilled and unskilled labor (as
in the baseline), and in turn labor of skill e = `, h is a CES aggregate of the native and immigrant
workers of skill level e. Thus λ is the elasticity of substitution between the (un)skilled natives and
the (un)skilled immigrants.
Define the labor aggregates by skill:
λ


 λ−1  λ−1
λ
C

 λ−1
X
λ


`
`
L`j ≡  Njj
+
φ`i Nji


(B.2)

i=1,i6=j
λ


 λ−1  λ−1
λ
C

 λ−1
X
λ


h
h
Lhj ≡  Njj
+
φhi Nji
.


(B.3)

i=1,i6=j

Then (B.1) can be rewritten as:
Lj = Ajj



L`j

 σ−1
σ

σ−1
σ

+ ζj µ j



Lhj

σ
 σ−1  σ−1
σ

.

(B.4)

As in the main text, let wj be the price of a unit of Lj in equation (B.4). Let wje denote the price
of one unit of Lej , the CES-aggregate of skill level e, which is not observable directly in the data.31
31

When we assume that natives and immigrants are perfect substitutes then we do observe skill prices since they
coincide with the wages of workers of that skill level.

45

e denote the wage of an individual of skill level e born in i working in j. Straightforward
Let wji

manipulation of the first-order conditions yields the following relationships:
wjh
wj`

σ−1
σ

= ζj µj

Lhj

!− 1

σ

,

L`j

(B.5)

and
e
wji
e
wjj

P

 λ−1 
= φeji λ 

C
k=1,k6=j

 we 
jk
e
wji

e
Njk

− 1

λ




e
Njj

.

(B.6)

Now the supply of immigrant workers relative to natives at a given skill level is inversely related
to the native-immigrant wage gap within that skill level. The model in the main text with perfect
substitutability between immigrants and natives of the same skill level corresponds to λ → ∞. In
that case the skill-specific native-immigrant wage ratio is not a function of the relative supply of
immigrant workers.
Implementing this model requires setting a value for one new parameter, λ, and re-calibrating
the set of country-specific parameters {φeji , ζj , µj , Ajj }. The rest of the parameters of the model are
the same as in the main text. We set λ = 10, which is near the lower end of the values found in the
literature, implying maximum plausible difference (i.e., lack of substitution) between immigrants
and natives of the same skill. Manacorda et al. (2012) report estimates around 10 for the U.K.,
while Ottaviano and Peri (2012) find values of around 20 for the U.S.. By using a relatively low
substitution elasticity between natives and immigrants, this implementation will yield higher gains
from immigration in the receiving countries.
The first step computes the productivity terms {φeji } using equation (B.6). As in Appendix B.1,
due to lack of data we assume that these terms are origin-specific, and do not vary by destination:
φeji = φei . For this step we use U.S. data on the immigrant and native populations and wages.
Second, we use equations (B.2) and (B.3) to build skill aggregates {L`j , Lhj }. Third, we compute
wjh /wj` from the market clearing conditions stating that total payments to labor must equal the sum
of payments to different workers, both in aggregate and for each skill level: wj Lj = wj` L`j + wjh Lhj
PC
e Ne +
e
e
and wje Lej = wjj
jj
i=1,i6=j wji Nji . Manipulation of these market clearing conditions delivers


h
PC
wji
1
h
h
h Lh Njj +
i=1,i6=j wh Nji
wjj
wjh
j
jj

.
= `
`
`
PC
wji
wj
wjj 1
`
`
Njj + i=1,i6=j w` Nji
L`
j

jj

h /w ` described in Section 2, this
Together with estimates of the country-specific skill premium wjj
jj

condition is used to obtain the price of the skilled composite relative to the unskilled composite
σ−1

wjh /wj` in each j. Fourth, we use equation (B.5) to solve for ζj µj σ for each country.32 Finally, as
32

As in the main text, we need not take a stand on the values of ζj and µj separately.

46

in the baseline we find Ajj by solving for the equilibrium and a set of Lj ’s such that the relative
nominal GDPs of all countries match the data. We then use these Lj ’s and (B.4) to compute the
country productivity terms Ajj .
Having implemented this model, we evaluate the same counterfactual scenario as in the main
text. Table A1 reports the results, in the row labelled “Imperfect Substitution.” Note that the
most precise comparison for these welfare changes is not the baseline but the “Selection Migrants”
scenario, since it also uses origin-specific φei terms computed based on U.S. immigrant-native wage
differences. As expected, immigration confers a somewhat greater benefit if migrants and natives
are imperfect substitutes. Now the average welfare change for the OECD in the no-migration counterfactual is −4.10%, compared to −2.38% in the main text. In terms of cross-country variation,
the welfare changes predicted by this model are extremely similar to the baseline, with a 0.99
correlation between the two for both the OECD and the non-OECD.

B.3

The Long-Run Scale Effect

This appendix explores the scale effect: the positive relationship between country size and per
capita income. Jones (2002) and Jones and Romer (2010) posit the following relationship between
real per capita income and population size:
(Income/P op)j
= constant × Njγ .
Pj

(B.7)

They argue that empirically the elasticity γ of real per capita income with respect to population
size is between 0.25 and 1. That is, larger countries have greater PPP-adjusted per capita income,
all else equal. We can estimate this same relationship inside our model, and compare the γ implied
by our model to the Jones and Romer (2010) values. It is important to note that our calibration
strategy does not target any moment directly related to the scale effect. The magnitude of the
scale effect in the model is driven by parameters chosen for other reasons, most importantly εs , θs ,
βs , as well as international trade costs τij .
In order to examine the magnitude of the scale effect in our model and benchmark it to the
empirical estimates, we fit the simple bivariate log-linear relationship (B.7) across countries inside
our model. When we use the actual population in the right-hand side (number of persons Nj living
in the country), the resulting OLS estimate is γ = 0.17, which is below the range suggested by
Jones and Romer (2010). If we instead use the labor force in efficiency units Lj as the right-hand
side variable, the estimated elasticity is 0.38. Thus the magnitude of the scale effect in our model
appears plausible in the context of the existing estimates in the literature.
Our scale effect operates through greater equilibrium variety available in larger countries. Unfortunately, it is not possible to measure directly all the varieties available even in a single country,
much less in a large set of countries. However, we can use existing estimates from the international
47

trade literature to benchmark the model. Hummels and Klenow (2005) demonstrate that larger
countries export a greater number of products. Although that paper does not use firm-level data,
it employs highly disaggregated product categories. These authors estimate that the elasticity of
the extensive margin of exports to total country GDP is 0.61. Estimating this relationship inside
our model yields an elasticity of 0.8. Though slightly higher, it is comparable in magnitude. In
addition, in the model we can only compute the elasticity of the number of exporting firms with
respect to total GDP, whereas Hummels and Klenow (2005)’s relationship is with respect to the
number of product varieties. If multiple firms exported the same product variety – a reasonable
assumption – our model elasticity would be somewhat lower.33
We conclude from this benchmarking exercise and review of the literature that (i) scale effects
appear to be present in the data, and (ii) the scale effect exhibited by our model has a magnitude
that is in line with existing empirical estimates.
Nevertheless, we also assess how our results would change if we instead targeted smaller scale
effects. Jones (2002) presents a range of estimates and argues that a plausible lower bound for the
scale effect is in the range of γ = 0.05 − 0.08. We choose parameter values such that the model
reproduces a scale effect of this magnitude. In particular, we eliminate input linkages (βs ≈ 0),
and set the elasticity of substitution to ε = 15. As a result, the implied scale effect in our model is
γ = 0.04 with respect to Nj and 0.07 with respect to Lj .
Table A1 presents the results of the counterfactual analysis under this calibration. As expected,
the welfare change for OECD countries from returning all immigrants to their countries of birth is
now smaller (−0.75% compared to a change of −2.38% in the baseline analysis). The loss to nonOECD countries is now larger (−3.23% compared to −2.01%). This is intuitive: lower scale effects
reduce the welfare benefits from immigration-driven increases in market size. By the same token,
all else equal, the scale-induced welfare benefit to emigration countries from returning migrants is
more muted under a lower scale effect, leading to larger losses in the non-OECD in the no-migration
counterfactual.
It may be that the scale effects are present, but they are counteracted by the presence of fixed
factors that induce congestion costs.34 We introduce congestion into our framework following Doc33

Finally, we review some sub-national evidence on availability of varieties. Handbury and Weinstein (2011) use
grocery store scanner data to show that larger U.S. cities have greater variety, with an elasticity of variety with respect
to city size of about 0.2−0.3. Since U.S. cities are much more integrated than the countries in our sample, this elasticity
does not have a direct counterpart in our model. The Handbury and Weinstein (2011) findings nonetheless imply that
scale effects exist even across locations within the same country. To our knowledge, Mazzolari and Neumark (2012)
is the only paper to report empirical estimates of the association between product variety and levels of immigration.
Using data for California they find that immigration into a local economy leads to a wider range of varieties in the
restaurant industry.
34
Note that our analysis treats countries, rather than cities, as the unit of analysis. While congestion effects may
be more apparent in cities, they are likely to be less relevant at the country level. Note also that our counterfactual
exercise involves un-doing migration, not increasing it further. Clearly, if we were to implement a scenario that moves
most of the world’s population into a single country, congestion effects would become more important.

48

quier et al. (2012), modelling it in reduced form as a negative relationship between total population
and labor productivity:
ejj N φ ,
Ajj = A
j
ejj is a constant. Following Docquier et al. (2012), we set φ = −0.03, justified by appealing
where A
to the (low) share of land in the aggregate production function.
Table A1 presents the results. Not surprisingly, the welfare losses to the OECD countries from
losing their immigrants are slightly smaller, as lower population now implies higher productivity.
By the same token, the welfare losses to the non-OECD from un-doing migration are larger, since
in these countries higher population leads to lower productivity. All in all, the results are quite
similar to those reported in the main text, both in terms of magnitudes and the patterns of welfare
changes across countries.35

B.4

TFP a Function of the Skilled Share

It is possible that changes in the skill composition of the labor force affect total factor productivity
(Jones, 2002; Benhabib and Spiegel, 2005).36 We model a direct link between TFP and the skilled
share following the functional form suggested by Docquier et al. (2012):
bjj
Ajj = A

Njh
Njh + Nj`

!ψ
,

(B.8)

where Nje is the total number of workers of skill level e residing in j (in the baseline or counterfacbjj is a constant. We choose a value of ψ = 0.32 following the estimates in Docquier et
tual), and A
al. (2012).37
The results are presented in Table A1, in the row labelled “TFP a Function of Skilled Share.”
For the OECD, the welfare reduction from losing its immigrants is now smaller, −1.57% instead of
the baseline −2.38%. This is consistent with the fact that the immigrant population in the average
OECD country is less skilled than the natives. Now the losses when immigrants leave the country
are partially offset by a boost in TFP arising from the higher share of skilled in the remaining
(native) population. The correlation between the welfare changes in this model and the benchmark
model is 0.92 for OECD countries, so the overall cross-country pattern of welfare changes among
receiving countries is quite similar.
35
One of the types of immigration-related congestion costs invoked in the literature is through the housing market.
Saiz (2003), Ottaviano and Peri (2006) and Gonzalez and Ortega (2013) find that immigration has led to increases
in housing prices and rents in the U.S.. Naturally, the welfare of natives that do not own their dwellings is likely to
be negatively affected. However, in many countries home ownership rates are high, and higher immigration-induced
house prices will benefit owners. Thus the main effect of immigration operating through housing prices may be an
increase in inequality.
36
For evidence at the sub-national level see Ciccone and Peri (2006), Moretti (2004), and Iranzo and Peri (2009b).
37
Existing micro-estimates of the strength of this human capital externality vary, and typically cannot be easily
mapped into the elasticity ψ.

49

Interestingly, the welfare effects from undoing migration are very different for the non-OECD
countries when TFP is an increasing function of the skilled share in the population. Now the average
non-OECD country is better off in the absence of migration, with a mean welfare change of +2.59%
compared to −2% in the baseline model. This result is driven by the much higher skilled share
among emigrants compared to the source countries’ overall population. As the share of the skilled
in the population falls due to emigration, the TFP of the staying natives is reduced. This effect
appears to dominate the gains from the observed remittances. Under this parameterization one
can make sense of the concerns in some low-income countries about “brain-drain.” The reliability
of these results is limited by the lack of precise empirical estimates of the relationship between the
skilled share and TFP that could be used as calibration targets. In addition, in the data this type
of effect could be non-linear or conditional on other factors, something that we could of course not
capture here. Nonetheless, the results here suggest that this is a promising direction for future
research.

B.5

Other Robustness Checks and Policy Counterfactuals

The elasticity of substitution between the skilled and the unskilled is set to σ = 3 in the baseline
analysis. To check whether the results are sensitive to this choice, Table A1 reports the results
of re-implementing the model with σ = 1.3, which is at the bottom of the range proposed in the
literature (Ottaviano and Peri, 2012). The results are quite similar to the baseline. The welfare
changes due to migration have virtually the same magnitude, and virtually perfect correlation with
those in the main analysis.
The counterfactual evaluated throughout the paper is rather drastic if interpreted as a policy
experiment – a complete elimination of cross-border migration. Thus, we consider smaller changes
that resemble more closely what can be achieved through policy. In particular, we evaluate the
welfare impact of a 10% reduction in the stocks of all immigrants in each country. Since this
experiment does not involve the complete elimination of migration, in the counterfactual there will
still be remittances. In the absence of a good benchmark estimate of the propensity of different
migrants to remit, we adopt the most agnostic approach and assume that the individual-level
propensity to remit is the same for each skill category and origin-destination pair, and reduce
the remittances accordingly in the counterfactual.38 The results are presented in the row labelled
“10% Repatriation” of Table A1. We can see that the welfare changes are essentially – and not
38

The literature is inconclusive on the cross-country or cross-skill heterogeneity, if any, in the propensity to remit.
Niimi et al. (2010) use cross-country data to empirically examine the determinants of remittances, paying special
attention to the migrants’ education level. Their findings suggest that countries whose emigrants are more educated
tend to receive lower remittances than countries with less educated emigrants. These authors note that while skilled
migrants tend to earn higher income and could thus afford to send larger remittances, it is also the case that their
relatives in the home country tend to be better off than the relatives of less educated migrants. However, Bollard
et al. (2011) use micro-data and find results that point in the opposite direction. All in all, it is not clear how
remittances are be affected by migrants’ education levels.

50

surprisingly – one-tenth of the main counterfactual welfare change. While the size of the welfare
change is smaller, the correlation between the baseline welfare changes and this scenario for both
the OECD and the non-OECD is virtually perfect.
We also perform two alternative experiments: in one we reduce the only unskilled immigrant
population in each country by 10% and, in the other, we do the same but now applied only to
the stock of skilled immigrants. The results are in the last 2 rows of Table A1. Naturally, these
welfare changes are smaller than under a 10% reduction of all migrant stocks. Interestingly, both
OECD and non-OECD countries, on average, would suffer a greater welfare loss from the partial
repatriation of unskilled workers. This is most likely due to the fact that the unskilled migrants are
larger in absolute numbers, and thus a 10% reduction in the unskilled immigrant stocks produces
larger population changes in most countries.

B.6

The Welfare of Migrants

The main text analyzes the welfare impact of migration on the native stayers, and thus highlights
primarily the general equilibrium effects of migration through population changes and the role
of remittances. The model can also be used to evaluate the impact of migration on the welfare
of the migrants themselves. The dominant mechanism here is the labor productivity differential
between the source and destination countries, which in the case of developing-developed country
comparisons is quite large. An individual of skill level e from country i produces with Aeii in her
home country, and with φeji Ajj in foreign country j. Since the differences between Aeii and φeji Ajj
are often several-fold, the welfare impact of migration on migrants’ earnings is large, as has been
commonly observed in micro data (see Hanson, 2009; Clemens et al., 2008).
The baseline equilibrium welfare of immigrants from i living in j is
PC
out
T
(1 − ωji )φ`i wj` + ωji φhi wjh + (ΠN
j + Πj )/
k=1 Njk − Rji /Nji
Wji =
,
(PjN )α (PjT )1−α
where, as in the main text, wje is the wage of a native-born individual of skill level e, ωji ≡
h /(N ` + N h ) is the share of skilled among those born in i and residing in j, N = N ` + N h
Nji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
PC
is the total number of individuals born in i residing in j (thus k=1 Njk is the total population
out are the total
of country j, including both immigrants and natives of both skill levels), and Rji

gross remittances that individuals born in country i and working in country j send to their country
of origin. In the counterfactual scenario, the welfare of a returning migrant is given by (14), but
with ωjj replaced by ωij . That is, the skill composition of emigrants from country j can differ from
the skill composition of those who never left, and those differences will be reflected in the average
welfare of migrants returning from each country i.
An important caveat here is that the migration decision is not modelled in our framework.
Thus, to the extent that there are high costs of migration, the true welfare impact of migration on
51

the immigrant will be lower. The results in this section should be interpreted more narrowly as the
change in the real income of migrants, acknowledging fully that these do not take into account any
migration costs.
Table A2 reports, for selected country pairs, the percentage change in a migrant’s welfare in the
counterfactual (in which she is living in the home country) compared to the baseline (in which she
is living in the host country).39 A negative number means that the migrant would be worse off if
she returned to the home country. Throughout we assume that skills are perfectly transferable and
ignore migrant selection (φ`ji = φhji = 1). Columns 1 and 2 report the long-run and the short-run
changes in the migrant’s welfare associated with returning to the home country.
Clearly, the welfare losses to the migrants themselves associated with returning all migrants
to their home countries are large. In the long run, a Canadian immigrant to the U.S. would lose
34.55% of her initial real income upon returning to Canada, while a Spanish immigrant to the U.S.
would suffer a 14.37% loss. A Salvadorean (Mexican) in the United States that returned to El
Salvador (Mexico) would suffer a 92.82% (80.00%) loss in real income, and the real income of an
Indian in Australia who returned to her home country would fall by 96.40%. Likewise a Turkish
worker in Germany that returns to Turkey would see her real earnings fall by 86.97%. The average
migrant would lose 54.05% of her real earnings in the long run. The short-run effects are uniformly
more muted but still very sizeable. For the average migrant the short-run loss in real earnings is
46.84%. This is sensible: one of the benefits of migration in the long run is in stimulating net entry
and raising welfare through increased variety. That channel is largely turned off in the short run.
The large losses from return migration for the migrants themselves are very large due to the fact
that most individuals migrated from low- to high-TFP countries. It is also interesting to aggregate
native stayers and migrants and compute the change in welfare for the average individual in the
world, pooling both groups. The resulting figures for the short run and the long run are −2.16%
and −2.35%, respectively.40 These figures are very close to what we obtained earlier for native
stayers, reflecting the fact that migrants represent a small share of the world population.

Appendix References
Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E., Jr. Lucas, “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007, 54 (6), 1726–
1768.
Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42
(3), 691–751.
39
Note that these welfare changes are somewhat different from the evaluations of the similar question in the
empirical literature. Empirical studies compare the earnings of comparable individuals across locations for given
factor prices. In our experiment, we compute the earnings before and after all the migrants in the world are returned
to their home countries, allowing for general-equilibrium effects on all prices.
40
To be precise, we take the simple average of the percentage welfare change across all the individuals in the world,
migrants and the non-migrants.

52

Axtell, Robert L., “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, September 2001, 293 (5536),
1818–1820.
Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel, “Human Capital and Technology Diffusion,” in Philippe
Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic
Growth, Elsevier, 2005, chapter 13, pp. 935–966.
Bollard, Albert, David McKenzie, Melanie Morten, and Hillel Rapoport, “Remittances and the
Brain Drain Revisited: The Microdata Show That More Educated Migrants Remit More,” World
Bank Economic Review, May 2011, 25 (1), 132–156.
Borjas, George, “The economic effects of Mexican immigrants in the United States,” Journal of
Development Economics, 1996, 51 (1), 69–98.
Card, David, “Immigration and Inequality,” American Economic Review, May 2009, 99 (2), 1–21.
Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri, “Long-Run Substitutability Between More and Less Educated Workers: Evidence from U.S. States, 1950-1990,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
November 2005, 87 (4), 652–663.
and , “Identifying Human-Capital Externalities: Theory with Applications,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (2), 381–412.
Clemens, M., C. Montenegro, and L. Pritchett, “The great discrimination: borders as a labor
market barrier,” 2008. Mimeo.
De la Rica, Sara, Albrecht Glitz, and Francesc Ortega, “Immigration in Europe: Trends, Policies
and Empirical Evidence,” 2013. ISA Discussion Paper.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Firm Entry, Trade, and Welfare in Zipf’s World,”
August 2010. NBER Working Paper No. 16313.
and
, “Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular
Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, December 2012, 120 (6), 1083–1132.
, , and Francesc Ortega, “A Global View of Cross-Border Migration,” May 2012. IZA Discussion
Paper 6584.
, , and Romain Rancière, “Power Laws in Firm Size and Openness to Trade: Measurement
and Implications,” Journal of International Economics, September 2011, 85 (1), 42–52.
Docquier, Frédéric, Joël Machado, and Khalid Sekkat, “Efficiency gains from liberalizing labor
mobility,” 2012. mimeo, UCLouvain and Université Libre de Bruxelles.
Dustmann, Christian and Tommaso Frattini, “Immigration: The European Experience,” 2011.
CReAM Discussion Paper No 22/11.
Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2005, 120 (3), 865–915.
Handbury, Jessie and David E. Weinstein, “Is New Economic Geography Right? Evidence from
Price Data,” May 2011. NBER Working Paper No. 17067.
Hanson, Gordon H., “The Economic Consequences of the International Migration of Labor,” Annual
Review of Economics, 2009, 1, 179–207.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2), 441–487.
Hendricks, Lutz, “How Important is Human Capital for Development? Evidence from Immigrant
Earnings,” American Economic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 198–219.

53

Hummels, David and Peter Klenow, “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” American
Economic Review, June 2005, 95 (3), 704–723.
Iranzo, Susana and Giovanni Peri, “Schooling Externalities, Technology, and Productivity: Theory
and Evidence from U.S. States,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2009, 91 (2),
420–431.
Jones, Charles I., “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,” American Economic
Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 220–239.
and Paul M. Romer, “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human
Capital,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2010, 2 (1), 224–245.
Katz, Lawrence F and Kevin M Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 107 (1), 35–78.
Klein, Paul and Gustavo Ventura, “Productivity Differences and the Dynamic Effects of Labor
Movements,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2009, 56, 1059–1073.
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth, “The Impact Of Immigration On The
Structure Of Wages: Theory And Evidence From Britain,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, February 2012, 10 (1), 120–151.
Mazzolari, Francesca and David Neumark, “Immigration and Product Diversity,” Journal of Population Economics, July 2012, 25 (3), 1107–1137.
Moretti, Enrico, “Workers’ Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level
Production Functions,” American Economic Review, June 2004, 94 (3), 656–690.
Niimi, Yoko, Çağlar Özden, and Maurice Schiff, “Remittances and the Brain Drain: Skilled Migrants Do Remit Less,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 2010, 97-98, 123–141.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri, “Rethinking The Effect Of Immigration On Wages,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, February 2012, 10 (1), 152–197.
The World Bank, “Doing Business Indicators,” 2007.
Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang, “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” April 2010. Mimeo, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and University of Michigan.

54

Table A1. Welfare Changes: Extensions and Sensitivity

Baseline
Imperf. Transferability
Selection Migrants
Imperfect Substitution
Smaller Scale Effect
Congestion
TFP a Fcn. of Skilled Share
σ = 1.3
10% Repatriation
10% Unskilled Repatriation
10% Skilled Repatriation

Mean

OECD
St. Dev.

-2.38
-1.44
-2.18
-4.10
-0.75
-2.22
-1.43
-2.40
-0.26
-0.18
-0.11

3.07
2.48
3.19
3.81
0.57
2.77
4.43
3.11
0.29
0.16
0.16

Corr/w
baseline
..
0.991
0.985
0.990
0.578
1.000
0.918
1.000
0.998
0.901
0.927

Non-OECD
Mean St. Dev. Corr/w
baseline
-2.00
-1.86
-2.04
-2.47
-3.23
-2.15
2.51
-1.96
-0.28
-0.21
-0.11

3.55
3.54
3.67
3.77
4.36
3.61
11.05
3.57
0.42
0.29
0.16

..
1.000
0.997
0.989
0.909
0.998
0.204
1.000
0.987
0.928
0.942

Notes: This table reports the mean welfare changes in the counterfactual relative to the baseline under
alternative model specifications and counterfactual exercises. All results are for the long run. “Mean” is
the average welfare change within the country group (OECD and non-OECD), “St. Dev.” is the standard
deviation of welfare changes within the country group, and “Corr/w baseline” is the correlation between
welfare changes in a particular scenario and the welfare change implied by the baseline model implemented
and calibrated in the main text. The row labelled “Baseline” reports the welfare changes in the main analysis,
reproduced from the bottom two rows of Table 5. “Imperf. Transferability” refers to the scenario where
workers are penalized and can only use 75% of their efficiency units of labor when working in a country
different from their country of origin (Section B.1). “Selection Migrants” is the scenario where we allow
for origin-specific selection and the native-immigrant productivity gaps are measured on the basis of the
wage gaps in the US between natives and each group of immigrants (Section B.1).“Imperfect Substitution”
assumes that the elasticity of substitution between immigrants and natives of the same skill level is 10 and
native-immigrant wage gaps are also calibrated on the basis of US data (Section B.2). “Smaller Scale Effect”
refers to the scenario in which the scale effects implied by the model are at the bottom of the range found
in Jones (2002) (Section B.3). “Congestion” refers to a scenario in which total population has a direct
negative effect on TFP (Section B.3). “TFP a Fcn. of Skilled Share” refers to the scenario in which the
level of TFP is assumed to be a function of the skilled share (Section B.4). “σ = 1.3” implements a model
with that elasticity of substitution between skilled and the unskilled. “10% Repatriation” evaluates the
welfare impact of reducing immigrant stocks by 10% worldwide. “10% (Un)skilled Repatriation” evaluates
the welfare impact of reducing (un)skilled immigrant stocks by 10% worldwide.

55

Table A2. Percentage Change in Migrants’ Welfare
Long Run

Short Run

Canada → United States
Spain → United States
Mexico → United States
El Salvador → United States

-34.55
-14.37
-80.00
-92.82

-23.48
-8.73
-56.39
-69.50

Poland → United Kingdom

-82.89

-65.24

Turkey → Germany

-86.97

-63.68

New Zealand → Australia
India → Australia

-25.40
-96.40

-16.78
-71.65

Migrant Mean

-54.05

-46.84

Change in Global Welfare

-2.35

-2.16

Notes: This table presents the percent welfare (real income) change for the migrants themselves between
baseline and counterfactual equilibria. Notation X → Y denotes an individual born in country X that
migrated to country Y.

56

Non−college graduates: Hourly Wages Immigrant/Native
.5
1
1.5
2

Figure A1. Migrant-native relative productivity by origin country

DZA
FIN
SWE NOR
CZE HRV

IRN

FRA
IRL
MYS
CAN
AUT
JPN
TTO
AUS
NGA
ITA
GBR
ZAF
DNK
CHL
EGY
KOR
JAM
POL
ARG
IND
ESP
GRC
HUN
PRTROU USA
DEU
SRB
UKR
PHL
TUR
VEN
RUS
BGR
BRA
DOM IDN
PAK
ECU
SVK
CHN
COL
SLV
BLRTHA
MEX
SAU

CHE
ISR
NLD
BEL
NZL

.5
1
1.5
2
College graduates: Hourly Wages Immigrant/Native

Notes: Each point in the scatterplot reports the ratio of the hourly wage of an individual born in a particular
origin country relative to a U.S.-born individual with the same skill level. The calculations are based on the
2000 U.S. Census. The line through the data is the 45 degree line.

57

