                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



      COMMODITY-PRICE COMOVEMENT AND GLOBAL ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

                                         Ron Alquist
                                        Saroj Bhattarai
                                        Olivier Coibion

                                      Working Paper 20003
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20003


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2014, Revised October 2018


For helpful comments, the authors are grateful to Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Lance Bachmeier, John
Baffes, Olivier Blanchard, John Bluedorn, Zeno Enders, Julian di Giovanni, Lutz Kilian, Peter
Nagle, Serena Ng, Hashem Pesaran, Benjamin Wong and Choongryul Yang; seminar participants
at the Bank of France; the Bundesbank; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System;
the Centre for Applied Macro and Petroleum Economics conference “Oil and Macroeconomics”;
the European Central Bank; the Norges Bank; the Toulouse School of Economics; UC Irvine; the
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis and San Francisco; the Reserve Bank of Australia;
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand; the FEEM conference “Oil and Commodity Price Dynamics”;
and the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum. Data for the project were kindly provided by Andrea
Bastianin, Christiane Baumeister, Lutz Kilian and the trade associations of the aluminum (EEA),
copper (ICSG), tin (ITRI) and nickel (INSG) industries. The paper was previously distributed
under the title “Commodity Price Comovement: Sources and Implications” while Alquist was at
the Bank of Canada and Coibion was a visiting scholar at the International Monetary Fund. The
support of both organizations is greatly appreciated. AQR Capital Management is a global
investment management firm that may or may not apply similar investment techniques or
methods of analysis described in this paper. The views expressed in the paper are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of AQR Capital Management, the
Bank of Canada, its Governing Council, the International Monetary Fund, the National Bureau of
Economic Research, or any other institution with which the authors are or have been affiliated.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Ron Alquist, Saroj Bhattarai, and Olivier Coibion. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Commodity-Price Comovement and Global Economic Activity
Ron Alquist, Saroj Bhattarai, and Olivier Coibion
NBER Working Paper No. 20003
March 2014, Revised October 2018
JEL No. E3,F4

                                         ABSTRACT

Guided by a macroeconomic model in which commodity prices are endogenously determined, we
apply a new factor-based identification strategy to decompose the historical sources of changes in
commodity prices and global economic activity. The model yields a factor structure for
commodity prices and identification conditions that provide the factors with an economic
interpretation: one factor captures the combined contribution of shocks that affect commodity
markets only through general-equilibrium forces. Applied to a cross-section of commodity prices
since 1968, the theoretical restrictions are consistent with the data and yield structural
interpretations of the common factors in commodity prices. Commodity-related shocks have
contributed modestly to global economic fluctuations.

Ron Alquist                                     Olivier Coibion
AQR Capital Management                          Department of Economics
Two Greenwich Plaza                             University of Texas at Austin
Greenwich, CT 06830                             2225 Speedway
ronalquist@gmail.com                            Austin, TX 78712
                                                and NBER
Saroj Bhattarai                                 ocoibion@gmail.com
University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
2225 Speedway, Stop C3100
Austin, TX 78712-1690
saroj.bhattarai@austin.utexas.edu
1       Introduction
Between January 2003 and July 2008, the prices of most major commodities grew rapidly: wheat by 120%, copper
by 363%, aluminum by 100% and nickel by 138%. Many observers concluded that the simultaneous rise in prices
across such a broad cross-section of commodities reflected a common cause—an increase in the global demand for
commodities due to growth in emerging Asia and especially China. Other episodes of widespread comovement in
commodity prices have similarly suggested that global demand is a common source of movements in commodity
prices, such in the early 1970s or in the late 1990s. But this explanation is not necessarily the only one: exogenous
changes in the prices of oil and other energy products could simultaneously drive the prices of many non-energy
commodities because of the important role played by transportation costs in their distribution. In addition, changing
preferences on the part of consumers could shift the demand for commodity-intensive products, as could
technological changes that affect the relative importance of raw materials in the production of consumption goods.
Decomposing the sources of commodity price comovement is therefore inextricably linked to identifying the sources
of global business cycle fluctuations.
        In this paper, we develop and implement a new methodology for decomposing the sources of commodity
price comovement and global business cycle fluctuations. Underlying this methodology is a general-equilibrium
model of global business cycles with commodities that predicts a factor structure for real commodity prices. The
predicted factor structure decomposes the sources of global business cycle fluctuations and commodity price
movements, and the theory suggests several ways to recover a structural interpretation to the common factors
extracted from commodity prices. In other words, this methodology provides a way to use the comovement in
commodity prices to disentangle the simultaneous determination of commodity prices and business cycles.
        The factor structure in commodity prices predicted by the model separates exogenous forces (or “shocks”)
into two types. The first set of shocks includes those that directly shift the supply and demand curves for commodities
and thus would affect commodity prices, even in the absence of general-equilibrium changes in aggregate income,
though such forces may also have general-equilibrium effects on aggregate income and therefore additional indirect
effects on commodity prices. We refer to these factors as direct factors. They potentially reflect a variety of common
shocks to the prices of inputs used to produce commodities, such as labor or energy, common productivity shocks,
or demand factors such as changes in the relative need for commodities to produce final consumption goods. The
second set of shocks includes those that affect commodity prices only indirectly through their effects on aggregate
output. We refer to these as indirect factors. The indirect effects can come through two channels. One is the standard
demand channel. When aggregate economic activity is high, the demand for commodities used to produce the final
good is also high, thereby raising the prices of all commodities. The second is a supply-side channel. When aggregate
income is high, agents may be less willing to supply the inputs used to produce commodities because of income
effects, thereby pushing up the prices of commodities. Both channels induce positive comovement in the prices of
commodities.



                                                          2
         The theory predicts a new result about indirect shocks. Because their effects on commodity prices are
summarized entirely by their effects on aggregate output, each of the indirect shocks induces the same comovement
among commodity prices. As a result, their combined effect on commodity prices can be aggregated into a single
factor. Furthermore, this factor has a precise structural interpretation in the model. It corresponds to the
counterfactual level of global economic activity that would have been obtained without direct commodity shocks.
Identifying this factor therefore provides a new way to recover historical changes in global economic activity and
commodity prices that reflect endogenous responses to non-commodity-related shocks.
         However, because standard empirical factor decompositions identify factors only up to a rotation, one cannot
immediately recover the indirect common factor from a simple factor decomposition of commodity prices. The
second element of our approach is to impose identification conditions, again grounded in the predictions of the
theoretical model, to recover the direct and indirect factors underlying commodity price movements. The theoretical
model provides two ways to do this: sign restrictions on factor loadings of the indirect common factor and
orthogonality conditions with respect to a set of instruments for either the direct or indirect factors. Using a cross-
section of 40 non-energy commodity prices available since 1968, we apply both identification strategies to identify
the indirect factor and find similar results across specifications, indicating that the results are robust to the choice of
identification strategy and instruments.
          Our main empirical finding is that the vast majority of historical commodity price movements are associated
with the indirect factor, i.e., broad-based changes in commodity prices can largely be attributed to a general-
equilibrium response to aggregate non-commodity shocks rather than direct shocks to commodity markets. While
there are a number of historical episodes during which direct shocks to commodity markets played some role in
accounting for commodity price movements and changes in global production (e.g., 1979–80, the run-up in
commodity prices in the 2000s and the decline in prices in 2008–09), the primary source of commodity price
movements is their endogenous response to non-commodity-related shocks.
         Our approach is related to the literature on the macroeconomic effects of shocks to oil and commodity prices
(Bosworth and Lawrence 1982; Hamilton 1983; Barsky and Kilian 2002; Hamilton 2009; Blinder and Rudd 2012;
Stuermer 2017) as well as a growing body of recent research on identifying the sources of oil price movements
following Kilian (2009). We differ from this line of research in that we focus on a broad range of non-energy
commodities (rather than just oil), which are essential to implement our identification strategy. Second, our
identification strategy is new: we apply factor methods that decompose the comovement across different commodity
prices then exploit the predictions about this decomposition from a microfounded model to identify the structural
sources of fluctuations in commodity prices and aggregate output.1 Third, while identification in VARs of


1
  We are not the first to apply factor methods to commodity prices. Some papers have examined whether there is excess
comovement among unrelated commodities—that is, price comovement in excess of what one would expect, conditional on
macroeconomic fundamentals (e.g. Pindyck and Rotemberg 1990). Other papers have investigated the forecasting performance
of the common factor in metals prices for individual metals prices (West and Wong 2014) and commodity convenience yields
for inflation (Gospodinov and Ng 2013). But there has been little attempt at interpreting the resulting factors in a structural sense.
                                                                  3
commodity markets decomposes shocks into supply and demand shocks, our general-equilibrium model allows for
the fact that exogenous forces should tend to have both supply and demand effects.
        Our model provides a structural interpretation of a factor representation for commodity prices along with the
requisite identification conditions, so that we are able to disentangle the different economic channels underlying
commodity price movements. In this respect, our approach is related to work that uses economic theory to assign
factors an economic interpretation (e.g. Forni and Reichlin 1998). Other work identifies the factors driving
macroeconomic aggregates common to all countries and specific subsets of countries (Stock and Watson 2005; and
Kose et al. 2012). Factor methods have also been used to identify relative price changes for specific goods and the
absolute price changes common to all goods (Reis and Watson 2010) and the relative importance of aggregate and
sector-specific shocks for U.S. industrial production (Foerster et al. 2011). Our paper differs from this line of research
in that we use commodity price dynamics to identify the sources of global business cycle fluctuations and in our
identification strategy, which relies on the use of sign restrictions and orthogonality conditions rather than zero
restrictions on the factor loadings.
        Finally, we also show that our factor-based method can help with forecasting commodity prices. Using
recursive out-of-sample forecasts, we find that a bivariate factor-augmented VAR with each commodity’s price and
the first common factor extracted from the cross-section of commodities generates improvements in forecast
accuracy relative to the no-change forecast, particularly at short horizons. This result extends to broader commodity
price indices as well as real oil prices. An additional advantage of our approach is that it relies only on commodity
prices that can be readily updated at monthly or quarterly frequencies and does not require information about
production and inventory data that are often unavailable at these frequencies. Our approach thus provides a unified
framework to forecast commodity prices in real-time as well as a structural interpretation of these forecasts.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a general-equilibrium business cycle
model with commodities and shows how the model can be used to assign a structural interpretation to the common
factors in commodity prices. The section also shows how to recover the economic factors from typical factor
decompositions through identification restrictions. Section 3 applies these results to a historical cross-section of
commodity prices. Section 4 uses the indirect common factor in a recursive out-of-sample forecasting exercise.
Section 5 concludes.

2       The Sources of Commodity Price Comovement: Theory
In this section, we present a model that characterizes the sources of commodity price comovement. In particular, we
show that the model yields a tractable factor structure for a cross-section of commodity prices, which permits an
economic interpretation of the factors.

2.1     Model of commodity prices




                                                            4
The baseline model consists of households, an energy-producing sector, a continuum of heterogeneous primary
commodities, a sector that aggregates these commodities into a single intermediate commodity input, and a final
goods sector that combines commodities, labor and technology into a final good.

The Household
A representative consumer maximizes expected discounted utility over consumption ( ), labor supplied to the final
good sector (         ) and labor supplied to the energy sector (             ):


                                     max                          −                          −
                                                           1−                            1            1
                                                                                   1+            1+

where           is the discount factor. We refer to the two types of labor as final-goods labor and energy-specific-labor.
With        > 0 and        > 0, welfare is decreasing in hours worked in either sector. The                    term is an exogenous shock
to the disutility of hours worked in the final goods sector.2
            The household pays a price             for the consumption good, receives wage                for each unit of labor supplied
to the final goods sector and and wage                     for labor in the energy sector. The household also can purchase risk-free
bonds           that pay a gross nominal interest rate of              . The budget constraint is          +         =            +           +

            +         () ()      +     where          represents payments from the ownership of firms.
The Energy Production Sector

A representative energy firm produces a total supply of the energy good (Σ ) subject to an exogenous energy-specific
                                                                                                                                      ,
productivity shock (Ξ ) and a decreasing returns production function that uses energy-specific labor (                                    ): Σ =
        ,
Ξ                  . This representative firm takes the price of the energy good ( ) as given and therefore chooses how
                                                                                             ,                 ,
much labor to hire to maximize its profits which are given by                        Ξ            −                . Equilibrium in the labor
                                           ,
market for energy requires that                =       .

The Primary Commodity-Production Sector
There is a continuum of primary commodities of mass 1. Each primary commodity j is produced by a representative
price-taking firm which uses energy Σ ( ) to produce an amount of the commodity                           ( ) using a decreasing returns
in energy production function                  ( )=         ( )Σ ( )         where       ( ) is the exogenously determined level of
productivity for commodity j. The value 1 −                           (0 <     < 1) determines the commodity-specific degree of
diminishing returns to energy and is in equilibrium equal to the ratio of firm j’s expenditures on energy to its total



2
 One could alternatively model the household as providing a single type of labor which can be used in both the final goods
and energy sector. This would not change the qualitative results. One could also introduce a preference shock to the
household’s willingness to supply labor the energy sector but this would have the same qualitative effects as the productivity
shock in the energy sector.
                                                                         5
revenues. Given the price of commodity j         ( ) and the price of energy     , the firm chooses the amount of energy
input to maximize profits.
We assume the steady-state level of productivity ( ) is such that the steady-state level of production in each sector

is equal. Equilibrium in the supply and demand for energy requires that Σ =            Σ() .

The Intermediate Commodity
A perfectly competitive sector purchases        ( ) of each primary commodity j and aggregates it into an intermediate
commodity        using the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator


                                                    =

where      is the elasticity of substitution across commodities and the price of the intermediate commodity aggregate

is given by      =        ()                . Market clearing for each commodity sector j requires        ( )=     ( ). This

setup implicitly assumes that no storage of commodities takes place, since all commodities produced must be used
in the same period. We discuss the rationale for this assumption and its implications in more detail in Appendix I.

The Final Goods Sector
A perfectly competitive sector combines purchases of the intermediate commodity good               and labor       (at prices

     and      respectively) according to the Cobb-Douglas production function             =                    to maximize
profits, taking all prices as given and      is an exogenously determined aggregate productivity process.3 Since all of
the final good is purchased by the household, equilibrium in the final goods market requires            =    . The fact that
     may be time-varying allows for exogenous variation in the relative demand for commodities and labor in the
production of the final good.

The Linearized Model
A detailed solution of the model is provided in Appendix A. We assume that exogenous processes are stationary
around their steady-state levels, so that all real variables are constant in the steady state. Lower-case letters denote
log deviations from steady state (e.g.,       ≡ log     − log ̅ ), and we normalize the nominal variables by the price
level of final goods (e.g.,     ( ) ≡ log    ( )/     − log( ( )/ ). We normalize commodity-specific productivity as

    ( )≡    ( ) 1+                  1+              to simplify the aggregation across commodities, where                  ≡

    1−     / . 4 We assume that the productivity process for each commodity sector has an idiosyncratic component


3
  One could allow the final goods sector to also use energy in its production process without changing any of the qualitative
results in the factor structure of commodity prices.
4
  The rescaling of the commodity-specific productivity process ensures that a 1% increase in productivity in each commodity
sector raises the equilibrium level of production of that commodity by equal amounts for each commodity. This would not be
the case without the rescaling because each primary commodity sector’s supply curve has a different slope.
                                                              6
and a common component such that         ( )=       +    , which implies that the sum of productivity across commodities

is    ≡        ()     =     . The idiosyncratic components are orthogonal across commodity sectors, such that

           =0∀ ≠          and [ ] = 0. The log deviation of             from its steady-state value of     is denoted by      and

similarly for Ξ. Each of the exogenous processes ( ,              ,     ,Ξ ,   ) is stochastic, persistent, and assumed to be
stationary, but we do not need to otherwise specify the specific process followed by each. 5
          As shown in Appendix 1, the aggregate level of production of final goods can be expressed in terms of
exogenous forces:
                                          =         +        +         Ξ +        +                       (1)
where       > 0 as long as      > 1,     > 0,     > 0, and            > 0: output rises with aggregate productivity, positive
variation in the household’s willingness to supply land, as well as energy-specific and commodity-specific
productivity shocks. Whether output rises when the relative demand for commodities increases (                     ) depends on
specific parameter values.

2.2       Comovement and the Factor Structure of Commodity Prices
As shown in Appendix 1, the supply of commodity j can be written in reduced form as:
                              ( )=       ( )+        +         +         Ξ ++         +                   (2)
Because different commodities have different returns to energy in the production process, the slope of their supply
curves (given by ) will generally differ. The supply curve of each commodity shifts up with increases in aggregate
income      regardless of its source: greater aggregate production raises the price of energy and therefore the price of
commodity j (       >0). The price of energy is higher when aggregate income rises because that higher income induces
the household to reduce its supply of labor to the energy sector (which raises                 and therefore the price of energy)
and because higher aggregate income implies a greater aggregate demand for energy which also causes the price of
energy to rise. Hence, any shock that affects aggregate income in this model is a supply shock from the point of view
of a given commodity. In addition, productivity shocks in the commodity sector or productivity shocks to the energy
sector will induce an additional shift of the supply curve, holding constant their effect on aggregate production, as
will shocks to the relative demand for commodities (which affect energy prices and therefore change cost of
producing commodities). Hence, these shocks have a direct effect on the supply of commodities, above and beyond
the general equilibrium effects that all shocks have on supply via their effects on aggregate income.
          The demand for commodity j can similarly be written in reduced form as:
                                  ( )=−          ( )+        +             +    Ξ +        .                            (3)




5
  Because we do not need to specify the specific time series process followed by each exogenous variable, we will frequently
refer to these exogenous variables as “shocks” with obvious abuse of terminology, instead of referring explicitly to the
innovations that generate variation in each exogenous variable.
                                                              7
Given the setup of the model, all commodities have the same elasticity of demand. In addition, all commodities
experience in rise in demand from any increase in aggregate production, regardless of its source (                 > 0) which
simply reflects the role of commodities as an input into the production of final goods. This term therefore captures
general-equilibrium demand effects, and all macroeconomic shocks that affect aggregate production in the model
result in an equal upward or downward shift in the demand for each commodity. Thus, all shocks in the model other
than idiosyncratic shocks are both demand and supply shocks. However, in addition to these general-equilibrium
shifts in commodity demand, the demand for commodity j rises with changes in the relative demand for commodities
( ), holding aggregate output constant. It also shifts, holding aggregate output constant, with exogenous common
commodity productivity shocks (which increase the demand for all commodities on the part of the final goods sector)
and exogenous shocks to energy (which affect the relative demand for all commodities).
          As can be seen from the supply and demand curves above, there are two aggregate shocks that affect
aggregate output but do not directly impact commodity prices other than through general equilibrium effects on
output:     and    . We will refer to these variables as “indirect” shocks that affect commodity prices only through
their general equilibrium effects on output. It’s helpful to decompose movements in output coming from these
variables vs other exogenous forces:
                                             =     ( ,     )+           Ξ +     +
where        =     [   +        ] is the level of aggregate output coming exclusively from changes in aggregate
productivity and changes in the willingness of households’ to supply labor to the final goods sector.
          As shown in Appendix A, we can then rewrite the equilibrium price of commodity j as
                   ( )=           ( ,        )+    Ξ +          +        −       ()                    (4)
                            indirect (   )                  (   )


                       =        +

where      > 0 and           > 0 when            > 1 and   (1 − ) − 1 > 0.

          Equation (4) provides a factor structure for real commodity prices with three distinct and orthogonal
components.6 The last term on the right-hand side reflects idiosyncratic shocks to commodity j that have no aggregate
real effects. The second set of terms on the right-hand side consist of a factor for each exogenous force that has both
direct and indirect effects on the commodity market (i.e., that shifts the supply or demand for commodities, holding
aggregate output constant, but also ultimately leads to changes in aggregate output). For this reason, we refer to these


6
  The differences in factor loadings across commodities in equation (4) stem only from differences in slopes of commodity
supply curves, which are themselves a reflection of the different energy intensities of production across commodities.
Appendix 2 considers a version of the model where industrial and agricultural commodities are aggregated into two different
intermediate commodity bundles, both of which are used in final production, but in which the aggregation occurs with
different elasticities of substitution. The factor structure is preserved, even though commodities now differ in both the slopes
of their supply curves as well as their demand curves. This alternative representation of the model also illustrates that the
aggregation of shocks underlying the factor structure of commodity prices does not hinge on the use of CES aggregation of all
commodities into a single commodity intermediate input.
                                                                    8
factors as “direct common” (DC) factors. In this setup, there are three such factors: exogenous shocks to energy
sector, a common productivity shock to commodities, and a shock to the relative demand for commodities in the
production of final goods. Because these forces have both direct and indirect effects on the market for commodity j,
there is, in general, no guarantee that their respective loadings have the same signs across commodities. However, it
should be the case that commodities which are more intensive in energy (larger       ) should have prices which respond
more strongly to exogenous energy price shocks.
        The most interesting component of the factor structure is the first term on the right-hand side of (4), which
reflects the combined contribution on the price of commodity j from all shocks whose effects on commodity prices
operate only indirectly through aggregate output (i.e., only through general-equilibrium effects). We refer to this
common factor as the “indirect common” (IC) factor. It captures the fact that, because some shocks affect commodity
markets only through changes in aggregate output, they all have identical implications for the price of a given
commodity, conditional on the size of their effect on aggregate output, and induce the same comovement across
different commodity prices. As a result, they can be represented as a single factor. Furthermore, this factor has a
well-defined interpretation: it is the counterfactual level of global output that would have occurred in the absence of
any direct commodity shocks. Thus, this common factor represents a way to reconstruct the counterfactual history of
aggregate output without direct commodity shocks, as well as to decompose historical commodity price changes into
those components reflecting direct commodity shocks versus all other aggregate economic forces captured by the IC
factor. Unlike the DC factors, another key characteristic of the IC factor is that all the loadings on this factor must
be positive (   > 0 ∀ ). This prediction reflects the fact that the shocks incorporated in the IC factor raise commodity
demand when the shock is expansionary and simultaneously restrict the commodity supply through income effects,
which unambiguously increases commodity prices.7 In short, this factor decomposition provides a new way to
separate causality in the presence of simultaneously determined prices and production levels.

2.3     Recovering a Structural Interpretation of the Factors
A key limitation of factor structures is that, empirically, factors are identified only up to a rotation. For example, if
one estimated a factor structure on commodity prices, one could not directly associate the extracted factors with the
structural interpretation suggested by (4). However, the theory developed in this section has implications that can be
used to identify the unique rotation consistent with those predictions and permits us to assign an economic
interpretation to the factors driving commodity prices.
        To see this, suppose that, as in the theory above, the N variables in vector        (N by 1) of real commodity
prices have a factor structure    =      +    where      is a K by 1 vector of unobserved variables, and     is an N by K


7
 The prediction that all commodities have the same sign loading on the common factor is sensitive to the assumption of
diminishing returns to scale in production of commodities, which generates upward-sloping supply curves. Downward sloping
supply curves (coming from increasing returns) would imply that when global production is high, the increased demand would
now reduce commodity prices (since supply slopes down), while the income effect would raise it (as before). Whether
commodity prices went up would therefore depend on the relative strengths and slopes of each effect.
                                                            9
matrix of factor loadings. Let the variance of               be given by               and the covariance matrix of               be      ( )=
      ( )=       such that the     s are uncorrelated with one another. We make the typical assumptions underlying
factor analysis: (a) ( ) = 0, (b) ( ) = 0, (c) (                  ) = 0 and (d)                ( ) = , so that the factors are orthogonal
to one another and have variance normalized to one. Then, letting                          ≡       ( ) be the covariance matrix of X, it
follows that    =       +    . The identification problem is that for any K by K orthogonal matrix                           such that    ′= ,
we can define       =       and   =           such that       =          +       . As a result, an empirical estimate of the factors
underlying      do not, in general, permit the economic identification of the factors                         but rather some rotation      .
          However, the model provides additional restrictions on the factor structure that can be used to assign an
economic interpretation to the factors and identify the “structural” factors                              from the estimated factors       . For
example, consider the factor structure of equation (4) in section 2.3 in which real commodity prices reflect two
underlying factors, an exogenous energy shock (Ξ ) and the level of aggregate production that would have occurred
in the absence of this shock (      ), thus     =[           ]′ =            Ξ ′. As we discuss below, this two-factor structure is
the most empirically relevant case. A factor decomposition of commodity prices would yield a rotation of these
factors     such that

                                                                    ] =       cos          sin        [        ]
                              = ′     =                 ′[
                                                                             − sin         cos
where the last equality reflects the properties of rotation matrices. Recovering the “structural” factors                          corresponds
to identifying the parameter θ and the rotation matrix T such that                     = ′ .
          The theory imposes three types of conditions that can be used to identify θ. The first is that                                 (the IC
factor) is orthogonal to commodity-related shocks (DC factors). Therefore, if one had a S by 1 vector of instruments
     that is correlated with the energy shocks Ξ , the orthogonality of                               would deliver S moment conditions
 [        ] = 0. The conditions can be rewritten as
                                      [        ]=            cos +               sin           = 0.                    (5)
If S = 1, then θ would be uniquely identified. If S > 1, then θ is overidentified, and one could estimate it using
standard generalized method of moments GMM methods by writing the moment conditions as
                                                ( )= [               ]       [         ]                                         (6)
where      is a weighting matrix, such that         =                ( ). Letting              be the inverse of the variance-covariance
matrix associated with the moment conditions, standard GMM asymptotic results apply, including standard errors
for θ and tests of the over-identifying conditions for N and T large enough for the factors to be considered as observed
variables rather than generated (e.g., Stock and Watson 2002; and Bai and Ng 2002).
          A second approach would be to make use of the theoretical prediction that                                is a linear combination of
exogenous variables that have only indirect effects on the commodity sector such as the productivity shocks or labor
supply shocks considered in the model. If one had a S by 1 vector of instruments                              for each period correlated with
one or more of these exogenous drivers, then another set of orthogonality conditions imposed by the theory would


                                                                    10
be [         ] = 0. As in the previous case, one could estimate θ using GMM, given these orthogonality conditions,
and test over-identifying restrictions if S > 1.
          In both of these cases, the econometrician must take a stand on whether the chosen instruments should be
correlated with commodity-related shocks or with           . While economic theory may provide clear guidance in some
cases, this choice may be problematic when one is interested in whether an exogenous variable affects commodities
only through general-equilibrium effects or more directly. Within our framework, this question amounts to whether
the exogenous variable should be considered part of            or one of the commodity-related shocks. For example, in
the case of commodity prices, monetary policy shocks could potentially have direct effects on commodity markets
in the presence of storage motives but would otherwise not be expected to have direct effects on commodity markets
if the speculative channel is absent or sufficiently small, as discussed in Appendix I.
          A third approach is to make use of sign restrictions on the loadings. The theory predicts that the loadings on
      must all be positive (since    > 0 ∀ in equation (4)). Letting be the N by 2 matrix of unrotated factor loadings,

the rotated or “structural” loadings are    =      =[        ] . The loadings on the first rotated factor (corresponding to
      ) are then   =    cos +       sin . Imposing that all of the elements of      be positive would therefore correspond
to identifying the range of values of θ such that min        cos +       sin     > 0. In general, this leads only to a set of
admissible values of θ and associated rotation matrices without uniquely identifying the rotation matrix. This
approach is conceptually similar to the set identification of VARs by sign restrictions (Uhlig 2002).
          In short, the theoretical model of commodity prices yields not only a factor structure for commodity prices
but also a set of conditions that can be used to identify (or, in the case of sign restrictions, limit the set of) the rotation
matrix necessary to recover the underlying factors. Furthermore, the factors have economic interpretations. The IC
factor corresponds to the level of production and income net of commodity-related shocks, while other factors
correspond to one or more of these commodity-related shocks. The identification of the rotation matrix, and thus the
underlying economic factors, follows from orthogonality conditions implied by the model, as well as sign restrictions
on the loadings predicted by the theory. The implied factor structure of the model combined with the ability to
recover an economic interpretation of the factors thus provides a new method for separating fluctuations in aggregate
output into those driven by commodity-related shocks and those driven by non-commodity-related shocks.

3         The Sources of Commodity Price Comovement: Empirical Evidence
In this section, we implement the factor decomposition of real commodity prices suggested by the theory. We first
construct a historical cross-section of real commodity prices for the commodities that conform to the theoretical
structure of the model along several dimensions. We then implement a factor decomposition and identify the factors
suggested by the theory. After considering a wide range of robustness checks, we argue that commodity-related
shocks have contributed only modestly to fluctuations in global economic activity.

3.1       Data


                                                              11
Guided by the theoretical model, we use four criteria to decide which commodities to include in the data set and
which to exclude. First, commodities must not be vertically integrated.8 Second, the main use of commodities must
be directly related to the aggregate consumption bundle, and they should not be primarily used for the purposes of
financial speculation.9 Third, commodities must not be jointly produced.10 Finally, the pricing of commodities must
be determined freely in spot markets and must not display the price stickiness associated with the existence of long-
term contractual agreements.11
         Applying these criteria leaves us with 40 commodities in the sample. It includes 22 commodities that we
refer to as agricultural or food commodities, five food oils, and 13 industrial commodities (see Appendix C for a
detailed list). We compiled monthly data from January 1957 to January 2013 (as available) from a number of sources,
including the CRB Commodity Yearbooks, the CRB InfoTech CD, the World Bank GEM Commodity Price Data,
the IMF’s Commodity Price Indices and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. While most of the data are consistently
available from January 1968 until January 2013, in some cases, there are a number of missing observations in the
underlying data, as well as periods when we treat the available data as missing because spot trading was limited.
Appendix C provides details on the construction of each series, their availability and any periods over which we treat
the data as missing because of infrequent price changes. Furthermore, while we can construct price data going back
to at least 1957 for many commodities, we restrict the empirical analysis to the period since 1968, in light of the
numerous price regulations and government price support mechanisms in place during the earlier period. 12

3.2      Common Factors in Commodity Prices
Before conducting the factor analysis, we normalize each price series by the U.S. CPI, take logs of all series and
normalize each series by its standard deviation. Because there are missing observations in the data, we use the
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm of Stock and Watson (2002).13 We follow Kilian (2009) in focusing on


8
  Vertically integrated commodities would introduce the possibility of price comovement resulting from idiosyncratic shocks
to one commodity affecting prices in other commodities through the supply chain. For example, an exogenous shock to the
production of sorghum would affect the price of non-grass-fed beef because sorghum is primarily used as feed. Thus, this
shock could ultimately affect the price of milk and hides as well.
9
  Some commodities, such as precious metals, have long been recognized as behaving more like financial assets than normal
commodities (Chinn and Coibion 2014). Thus, we exclude gold, silver, platinum and palladium from the cross-section of
commodities.
10
   Some commodities are derivative products of the production of other commodities. This is particularly the case for minerals,
which are commonly recovered during the mining for metal commodities, making the assumption of orthogonal productivity
shocks clearly inapplicable. We drop any such commodities.
11
   While many commodities have long been traded on liquid international spot markets, this is not always the case. For example,
the price measure of tung oil tracked by the Commodity Research Bureau (CRB) Commodity Yearbooks varies little over time
and is often fixed for periods lasting as long as one year. Because we want to focus on commodities whose prices reflect
contemporaneous economic conditions, we exclude commodities such as tung oil that systematically display long periods of
price invariance. For some commodities in the sample, prices were not determined in flexible markets until much later than
others; for these commodities, we treat early price data as missing values. For mercury, the reverse is true, since its use has
declined over time and its price began to display long periods with no price changes starting in 1995. We treat its prices after
March 1995 as missing. Appendix B provides more details on these adjustments.
12
   Appendix D provides detail on the geographic variation in where commodities are produced and how they are used.
13
   Specifically, we first demean each series and replace missing values with zeroes before recovering the first K factors. We use
these K factors to impute the value of missing observations, and then do the factor analysis again, iterating on this procedure
                                                               12
the (log) level of real commodity prices but document in our robustness checks that our results are qualitatively
unchanged if we take the first difference of real commodity prices or use linearly detrended series.
         We consider several metrics to characterize the contribution of the first five factors in accounting for
commodity price movements, summarized in Table 1.14 The first row presents the sum of eigenvalues associated
with each number of factors normalized by the sum across all eigenvalues, a simple measure of variance explained
by common factors. In addition, we present additional metrics based on R2s that explicitly take into account missing
values associated with some commodities: the average across the individual R2s computed for each commodity, the
median across these same commodity-specific R2s, the R2 constructed across all commodities. The key result from
this table is that the first common factor explains a large share of the price variation across commodities, ranging
from 60% to 70% depending on the specific measure used. In contrast, all of the additional factors explain smaller
percentages of the variance in commodity prices. The second factor, for example, accounts for between 6% and 10%,
while the third factor contributes another 5% of the variance. Thus, the first two factors jointly account for
approximately 70–75% of the variance in commodity prices.15
        The ability of the first two factors, and the first common factor in particular, to account for so much of the
variance holds across commodity groups. Table 1 includes the contribution of different factors to explaining the
variance across the three subsets of commodities in the sample—agricultural/food, oils and industrials. Differences
across subsets of commodities are quite small: the contribution of the first factor ranges from 55% (pooled R2 across
all commodities in this subset) for industrial commodities to 64% for agricultural/food commodities and 72% for
oils (see Appendix E for commodity-specific results). The decomposition does not suggest that one needs different
factors for different types of commodities. This point is worth stressing because a common concern with factor
analysis is that different factors are needed to explain different subsets of the data. As illustrated in Table 1, this is
not the case for our data.

3.3     Identification of the Rotation Matrix and the Underlying Economic Factors
To implement a structural interpretation of the factors as suggested by the model, we interpret the results of Table 1
as indicating that a two-factor representation adequately characterizes the data. First, additional factors beyond the
first two add relatively little in explanatory power and can be omitted. Second, under the null of the model, it is a
priori unlikely for there to be fewer than two factors. Indeed, such a finding would imply that there are no shocks
that directly affect commodity prices and that all movements in commodity prices reflect either the level of aggregate
economic activity or idiosyncratic commodity factors. We can rule this argument out immediately because there



until convergence. We use K = 5 factors for the imputation; however, the results are not sensitive to the specific number of
factors used.
14
   Following Connor and Korajczyk (1993) and Bai and Ng (2002), we use principal components on the variance-covariance
matrix of commodity prices to estimate the approximate factors.
15
   Statistical tests of the number of factors point toward parsimonious factor specifications. For example, the PC2 and IC2
criteria of Bai and Ng (2002) each select one factor. The same result is obtained using the test suggested by Onatski (2010) or
the two criteria proposed in Ahn and Horenstein (2013).
                                                              13
exists at least one common shock to the supply of commodities: exogenous energy price movements. Because
commodities require energy in production and distribution, exogenous shocks to energy prices necessarily induce
some comovement in commodity prices, as commodities are produced in different parts of the world but consumption
occurs disproportionately in advanced economies, thereby generating significant shipping and distribution costs.
         To estimate the rotation matrix, our baseline is to impose orthogonality conditions on the indirect common
factor   . Specifically, we take       , the measure of OPEC production shocks from Bastianin and Manera’s (2014)
updated version of the Kilian (2008) series and define the orthogonality conditions as             [       ], where    ≡
1        …            is the vector of instruments that consists of a constant, the contemporaneous value of the
production shock series as well as L lags of the shock. The IC factor      (     in the model) is a rotation over the two
estimated factors      and   , i.e.,   =        +        where the orthogonal rotation parameters          and    can be
expressed as a function of a single underlying rotation parameter θ such that      = cos and           = sin . Given that
there are more moment conditions (L + 2) than parameters (θ), we can estimate the rotation parameter θ using GMM
by minimizing ( ):

                                       ( )=    ∑(     ( ) )         ∑(     ( ) )                  (7)

         We set L = 36 months for the baseline estimation to capture the fact that the OPEC production shocks have
long-lived effects on commodity prices, although the results are robust to both shorter and longer lag specifications
as well, as we document below. W is the Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation HAC robust
estimate of the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of moment conditions. We iterate over minimizing ( )
and then computing the implied weighting matrix until the estimate of θ has converged (W = I in the first step). Table
2 presents the resulting estimate of θ and its associated standard error. With   = −0.10 and a standard error of 0.31,
we cannot reject the null hypothesis that θ = 0. From this estimate of θ, we construct estimates of the rotation
parameters      and      :    is close to 1, and we cannot reject the null hypothesis that        = 0, so the estimated
rotation matrix is not statistically different from the identity matrix. Furthermore, the over-identification conditions
cannot be rejected.
         The reason why the estimated rotation matrix is close to the identity matrix is that, while the first unrotated
factor is largely uncorrelated with OPEC production shocks, this condition is not satisfied for the second unrotated
factor, which responds strongly to OPEC production shocks. Because the unrotated factors are already largely
consistent with the theoretically predicted orthogonality conditions (namely, that the first factor is orthogonal to
commodity shocks, but the second is not), the estimation procedure yields only a slight rotation of the original factors.
         While the fact that we cannot reject the over-identifying conditions is consistent with the theory, we can
further assess the extent to which the estimated rotation satisfies the theoretical predictions of the model. For
example, an additional theoretical prediction is that the loadings on the indirect factor will all be the same sign. To
assess this prediction, we present in Table 3 the estimated factor loadings for each rotated factor. The loadings on
the IC factor are positive for all commodities, as predicted by the theory. In contrast, the loadings on the commodity-

                                                           14
related factor are of mixed signs. There are no systematic patterns across commodity groups, again confirming that
the factors explaining commodity prices are common across commodity subsets. Without imposing any restrictions
on the loadings as part of the identification strategy for the rotation matrix, we find that the estimated rotation satisfies
theoretical predictions on the factor loadings and those implied by the over-identifying restrictions.16
         Given the estimate of θ and the rotation matrix, we construct the rotated factor              that, according to the
model, corresponds to the level of aggregate output and income that would have occurred in the absence of
commodity-related shocks. This factor is presented in Figure 2, after being detrended with a Hodrick-Prescott (HP)
filter with λ = 129,600, the typical value for monthly data, to highlight variation at business cycle frequencies. In
addition, we draw from the estimated distribution of θ, construct           for each new draw and use this distribution to
characterize the 99% confidence interval of the HP-filtered factor.
         This factor displays a sharp rise in 1973–74 before falling sharply during the 1974–75 recession in the United
States. This drop is followed by a progressive increase over the course of the mid- to late 1970s, with the factor
peaking in 1979 before falling sharply during each of the “twin” recessions of 1980–82, and then rebounding sharply
after the end of the Volcker disinflation. Thus, over the course of the 1970s, this structural factor displays a clear
cyclical pattern. During the mid-1980s, the factor drops sharply before rebounding in the late 1980s, and then falls
gradually through the 1990–91 U.S. recession before rebounding through the mid-1990s. It experiences a large
decline in the late 1990s, before the 2000–01 U.S. recession and then rebounds shortly thereafter. After a brief decline
in the mid-2000s, the factor displays a sharp increase from 2005 to 2008, the period when many commodity prices
boomed, and then falls sharply in late 2008 and 2009 before rebounding strongly in 2010. In short, there is a clear
procylical pattern to the IC factor relative to U.S. economic conditions.

3.4      Robustness of the Estimation
To assess the sensitivity of our results, we vary some of the specific choices made for the estimation of θ. For
example, we report in Table 2 results from using fewer moment conditions (L = 12 and 24 months) as well as more
moment conditions (L = 48 months). Neither changes the estimates significantly. Similarly, we repeat the GMM
estimates using a two-step procedure, in which θ is first estimated using a weighting matrix equal to the identity
matrix with no subsequent iterations after updating the weighting matrix, and second using a continuously updated
GMM in which we minimize over θ and W jointly until convergence. In both cases, the results are qualitatively




16
   The model developed in section 2 also predicts that commodities that are more energy intensive in production have larger
(in absolute value) loadings on the DC factor. Using the 2007 benchmark input-output tables to characterize energy intensity
of production for 13 commodity groupings (which jointly include 34 of the commodities in our cross-section), we find a
positive relationship between the loadings and the energy intensity of production. These results are reported in Appendix K.
This suggestive evidence is consistent with the model’s predictions and lends credibility to the framework we use to
characterize the common variation in commodity prices. Unfortunately, the input tables are not sufficiently detailed to allow
us to test this prediction for a more differentiated set of commodities.
                                                              15
similar. Finally, because non-linear GMM can be sensitive to normalizations, we replicate the baseline estimation

after rewriting moment conditions as         (    +           )        = 0, and the results are again unchanged.17

          A more interesting robustness check is to consider the alternative identification strategy suggested in section
2.4, namely to exploit the theoretical predictions for signs of factor loadings: loadings on the IC factor should all be
positive. Thus, one can characterize the set of admissible rotation matrices by restricting them to be consistent with
the sign restrictions implied by the theory, in the spirit of Uhlig (2002). In our case, this procedure consists of
identifying the set of θ such that min           cos +       sin        > 0, where     for i = {1, 2} are the loading vectors
associated with the unrotated factors and min is with respect to the elements of           . We consider values of     ∈ [− , ]
(at increments of 0.001) and, for each θ, determine whether the restriction is satisfied. This yields a set of admissible
rotation matrices and therefore a set of possible IC factors. We apply the HP filter to each of these and plot the
resulting minimum and maximum values for each month in Panel B of Figure 2, along with the 99% confidence
interval for the rotated IC factor from the baseline GMM estimation. There is significant overlap between the two
approaches, with the minimum and maximum values from the sign restriction typically being within the 99%
confidence interval of the GMM-estimated IC factor. Thus, despite the fact that the two identification strategies are
quite different, they point toward a remarkably consistent characterization of the non-commodity-related structural
factor.
          In Appendix F, we provide a number of additional robustness checks on these results. For example, we
replicate our results dropping either all commodities whose primary use is as food or as feed, or those commodities
disproportionately produced in the U.S.S.R., China or India through much of the sample. We verify that our results
are robust to alternative assumptions about stationarity and find similar results using first differences or linearly
detrended real commodity prices (Appendix G). We also find little sensitivity to dropping commodities for which
imputation was needed or to decomposing the correlation matrix rather than the covariance matrix for the factor
analysis.

3.4       Factor Contributions to Commodity Prices, Comovement and Global Real Activity
We now turn to using the factor structure to better understand the historical sources of commodity price movements
and global real activity. For prices, we decompose the average annual percentage change in commodity prices into
the components driven by indirect and direct common factors. The decomposition follows directly from the rotated
factor structure, yielding
                             −         =           −          +                −        +(    −        )
where the bar denotes averages across all commodities in the cross-section. The first term on the right-hand side of
the equation represents the contribution of the IC factor to average commodity price changes, the second represents


17
  While we rely on standard asymptotics which apply for large N and T, adjusting standard errors to account for smaller N
would only strengthen the main result that one cannot reject the null that the estimated rotation matrix is not different from the
identity matrix.
                                                                  16
the contribution of the DC factor, and the third reflects average idiosyncratic effects. The results of this
decomposition are presented in the top panel of Figure 3, in which we plot the contributions from the IC and DC
factors each month as well as the actual annual average price change across commodities. The IC factor, which
captures the endogenous response of prices to non-commodity shocks, explains the vast majority of historical
commodity price changes. To the extent that income effects on inputs into the production of commodities are likely
weak, the IC factor can be interpreted as primarily reflecting changing demand for commodities due to changes in
global economic activity. During the commodity boom of 1973–74, for example, indirect shocks to commodity
markets accounted for almost all of the rise in commodity prices, with the remainder reflecting direct commodity-
related shocks. Every other historical episode of large changes in average commodity prices is also accounted for by
the indirect factor, i.e., as an endogenous response of commodity prices to global business cycle conditions not driven
by commodity-related shocks.
          We can also quantify how changes in each factor have contributed to the time variation in comovement
among commodity prices. Specifically, we can decompose, each month, annual changes in real commodity prices as
follows:
                        ( )−        ( )=            −           +          −         +    −
From this, we can construct each month the cross-sectional R2 coming from both factors (i.e., the ability of changes
in both factors to explain commodity price movements through common forces) as well as the partial R2 coming
from the IC factor. These series are plotted in Panel B of Figure 3. There is significant variation over time in the
overall comovement of commodity prices, as captured by both factors, with the highest degrees of comovement in
commodity prices occurring between 1973 and 1975, in the early to mid-1980s, in the late 1990s, and in the mid- to
late 2000s continuing to 2013. The time variation in comovement is again primarily explained by changes in the
indirect factor. Periods in which commodity prices co-move most strongly have also been periods in which
commodity price changes have been driven by the endogenous response of commodity prices to non-commodity
shocks.
          We now assess the contribution of each factor to global economic activity, using the global industrial
production (IP) constructed by Baumeister and Peersman (2011) from 1947Q1 until 2010Q4.
Unlike with commodity prices, the factor structure does not immediately lend itself to a decomposition of historical
changes in global industrial production. To do so, we first rely on the theory presented in section 2 in which the IC
factor corresponds to the level of global activity that would have occurred in the absence of direct commodity shocks
(   ). Because the scale of the IC factor is not identified, we normalize it such that the standard deviation of quarterly
changes in the IC is equal to the standard deviation of quarterly percent changes in global IP and treat the resulting
historical changes in the IC as the contribution of indirect shocks to global IP. The difference between the demeaned
quarterly growth rate of global IP and the demeaned change in the IC (defined as          ≡      −       ) should reflect
the contribution of direct commodity shocks, potentially omitted factors, and mismeasurement in global production
levels. To evaluate the contribution of direct commodity shocks to global IP, we regress        on 4 lags of itself and 8
                                                           17
lags of the direct commodity factor (          ) at a quarterly frequency and construct the contribution of the DC factor to
global IP net of the contribution of the IC factor. This approach leaves a component of global activity unaccounted
for, potentially reflecting measurement error, omitted variables or model misspecification.
         We plot the resulting contributions of the IC and DC factors to global IP growth in Panel C of Figure 3,
again showing only the annual changes to filter out the high-frequency variation in the measurement of global IP.
The correlation between the IC factor and global IP is high (0.59) so that historical changes in global IP are primarily
attributed to indirect non-commodity shocks. This is particularly true from the early 1970s through the mid-1980s,
although commodity-related shocks deepened the decline in global IP during late 1974 and early 1975. As was the
case with the decomposition of commodity prices, the decline in economic activity during the Volcker disinflation
is accounted for by the IC factor. The dynamics of global activity from the late 1980s to mid-1990s are also largely
attributed to the IC factor, although actual changes in global IP exceeded those predicted by the two factors. Growth
in the IC factor during the 2000s also coincides with the growth in global IP during this time period, while
commodity-related shocks in the DC contributed modest downward pressure on economic activity in 2002 and 2003,
then again in 2007–10. To the extent that the DC factor reflects exogenous energy price fluctuations, the negative
contribution of the DC factor from late 2007 through 2010 (subtracting 1–2% from the annual growth rate of global
IP) is broadly consistent with Hamilton (2009), who argues that oil price shocks contributed to the severity of the
Great Recession of 2007–09. Nonetheless, most of the decline in the growth rate of global IP from late 2007 to the
depth of the recession can be attributed to declines in the IC factor.

4        Forecasting Applications
We examine whether the IC factor contains real-time information relevant for predicting commodity prices, broad
commodity price indices and the price of oil in a recursive out-of-sample forecasting exercise. The forecasting model
is a monthly linear bivariate FAVAR(p) model for the real price of commodity j and the IC factor.18 The lag length
p is chosen recursively using the BIC. We assess the ability of the IC factor to forecast the 40 individual real
commodity prices used to compute the IC factor, three widely used real commodity price indices—the CRB spot
index, the World Bank non-energy index and the IMF non-fuel index – and the real price of oil.19 The forecast
performance of the FAVAR is evaluated over two periods. One is commodity-specific and begins either in January
1968 or at the earliest possible date subject to the condition that the initial estimation window contains at least 48
observations. The second one begins in January 1984 and ends in December 2012, with the initial estimation window
ending in December 1983. We evaluate the recursive mean-squared prediction error (MSPE) of the FAVAR-based




18
   Because we are unable to reject the null that the rotation matrix equals the identity matrix in section 3, we use the unrotated
first factor in the forecasting exercises.
19
   The IMF non-fuel commodity price index begins in February 1980. The price index was backcast to January 1957 using the
IMF agricultural raw material, beverage, food and metals sub-indices with weights obtained from regressing the non-fuel index
on the individual sub-indices. The real price of oil is the U.S. refiner’s acquisition cost of imported oil. All variables are deflated
by U.S. CPI. We apply the EM algorithm recursively to fill in the missing observations.
                                                                  18
forecast at the 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-month horizons. All forecast accuracy comparisons are conducted relative to the no-
change benchmark. Multiple step-ahead forecasts are computed iteratively using the FAVAR.
         Table 4 summarizes the results obtained from the forecasting exercise for the commodity-specific and
common sample periods. A summary measure across all commodities is given by the                                                ≡
∑
    ∑
                  where                   is the mean-squared prediction error of the FAVAR-based forecast for

commodity ;                is the mean-squared prediction error of the random walk forecast for commodity .
         For both the commodity-specific and the common forecast evaluation periods, forecasts based on a common
factor generate improvements in forecast accuracy between 2% and 8% relative to the no-change forecast up to the
6-month horizon. The FAVAR-based forecasts improve on the no-change forecast for most commodities at short-
horizons but performance deteriorates over longer horizons.20 The FAVAR does best at predicting the World Bank
non-energy index and the IMF non-fuel index, with improvements in forecast accuracy up to 17% over short
horizons. It also delivers significant improvements relative to the random walk at predicting real oil prices at short
horizons.21
         These findings show that the prices of internationally traded commodities are forecastable in a way suggested
by the model presented in section 2. Improvements in forecast accuracy can be economically important at short
horizons, and agricultural commodities and oils tend to be more predictable than industrial commodities. Thus, the
factor structure in commodity prices serves a dual purpose for policy-makers and practitioners: it both provides a
structural decomposition of the forces driving commodity prices and helps forecast commodity price fluctuations.

5        Conclusion
We propose a new empirical strategy, grounded in a microfounded business cycle model with commodities, to
identify the driving forces of global economic activity and commodity prices. The model provides a set of
orthogonality conditions and sign restrictions that can be used to identify the parameters of the rotation matrix that
yield a structural interpretation of the common factors behind commodity prices, with the “indirect” factor
representing the counterfactual level of global economic activity that would have occurred without direct shocks to
commodity markets. The IC factor we identify accounts for about 60–70% of the variance in commodity prices, and
we cannot reject the theoretical restrictions implied by the model. Its behavior during the 1970s and 1980s suggests
that the macroeconomic fluctuations observed during that era were not driven primarily by commodity-related

20
   Appendix J provides commodity-specific results. FAVAR-based forecasts generate improvements in forecast accuracy for
some agricultural commodities and oils up to 12 months ahead. For the common sample period, 10 (out of 15) of the agricultural
commodities and 2 (out of 3) oils achieve improvements in forecast accuracy at the 12-month horizon. The improvements in
forecast accuracy in the industrial commodities are concentrated at shorter horizons (i.e., 1- and 3-months).
21
   Additional results on the ability of the commodity price factor to forecast the real price of oil are in Appendix Table J.3. It
compares the bivariate FAVAR with a VAR model of the global oil market that performs well at forecasting the real price of oil
out of sample (Baumeister and Kilian 2012; Alquist et al. 2013). The FAVAR model based on the IC factor does well relative
to the oil market VAR model at the 1- and 3-month horizons when the BIC is used but it is dominated by the VAR model when
a fixed lag length of 12 is used, although the IC factor model still delivers improvements in forecast accuracy up to about 14%
relative to the no-change forecast.
                                                               19
shocks. Nevertheless, there are episodes during which the direct commodity shocks contributed negatively to global
economic activity, particularly in the early 1990s and during the Great Recession.
        The IC factor can also be used to forecast real commodity prices, some commonly used commodity price
indices and the real price of crude oil with a bivariate FAVAR in real-time. Because our identification strategy relies
only on commodity prices themselves, it can be implemented for commodities for which market fundamentals are
unavailable in real time. In sum, we provide a new conceptual framework for identifying the sources and implications
of commodity price comovement and its relationship to global macroeconomic conditions.


References
Ahn, Seung C. and Alex R. Horenstein, 2013. “Eigenvalue Ratio Test for the Number of Factors,” Econometrica
        81(3), 1203-1227.
Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert Vigfusson, 2013. “Forecasting the Price of Oil,” in: G. Elliott and A.
        Timmermann (eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng, 2002. “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor Models,”
        Econometrica, 70, 191-221.
Barsky, Robert B. and Lutz Kilian, 2002. “Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great Stagflation? A Monetary
        Alternative,” in B. Bernanke and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, May 2002, 137-
        183.
Bastianin, Andrea and Manera, Matteo. 2014. “How does stock market volatility react to oil shocks?” FEEM
        Working Paper No. 70.2014
Baumeister, Christiane and Lutz Kilian, 2012. “Real-Time Forecasts of the Real Price of Oil,” Journal of Business
        and Economic Statistics, 30(2), 326-336.
Baumeister, Christiane and Geert Peersman, 2011. “The Role of Time-Varying Price Elasticities in Accounting for
        Volatility Changes in the Crude Oil Market,” Bank of Canada WP 11-28.
Blinder, Alan S. and Jeremy B. Rudd, 2012. “The Supply Shock Explanation of the Great Stagflation Revisited,”
        in: The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking. NBER.
Bosworth, Barry P. and Robert Z. Lawrence, 1982. Commodity Prices and the New Inflation, The Brookings
        Institution, Washington D.C.
Chinn, Menzie and Olivier Coibion, 2014. “The Predictive Content of Commodity Futures,” Journal of Futures
        Markets 34(7), 607-636.
Connor, Gregory, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1993. “A Test for the Number of Factors in an Approximate Factor
        Model,” Journal of Finance 48(4), 1263-1291.
Foerster, Andrew, Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark Watson, 2011. “Sectoral versus Aggregate Shocks: A
        Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production,” Journal of Political Economy 119(1), 1-38.



                                                          20
Forni, Mario and Lucrezia Reichlin, 1998. “Let’s Get Real: A Factor Analytical Approach to Disaggregated
        Business Cycle Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies 65(3), 453-473.
Gospodinov, Nikolay and Serena Ng, 2013. “Commodity Prices, Convenience Yields, and Inflation,” The Review
        of Economics and Statistics 95(1), 206-219.
Hamilton, James D., 1983. “Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II,” Journal of Political Economy 91(2),
        228-248.
Hamilton, James D. 2009. “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-2008,” Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity 2009(2): 215-259.
Kilian, Lutz. 2008. “Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks: How Big Are They and How Much Do They Matter for the
        U.S. Economy?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 216-240.
Kilian, Lutz. 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the Crude
        Oil Market,” American Economic Review, 99(3), June 2009, 1053-1069.
Kose, M. Ayan, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar Prasad, 2012. “Global Business Cycles: Convergence or
        Decoupling?” International Economic Review 53(2), 511-538.
Newey, Whitney K; West, Kenneth D (1987). "A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
        Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix". Econometrica 55 (3): 703–708.
Onatski. Alexei. 2010. “Determining the Number of Factors From Empirical Distribution of Eigenvalues,” Review
        of Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 1004-1016.
Pindyck, Robert S., Julio J. Rotemberg (1990). “The Excess Comovement of Commodity Prices,” The Economic
        Journal, 100(403), 1173-1189.
Reis, Ricardo and Mark W. Watson, 2010. “Relative Goods’ Prices, Pure Inflation, and the Phililips Correlation,”
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (July), 128-157.
Stock, James and Mark W. Watson. 2002. “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes,” Journal of
        Business and Economic Statistics, 20, 147-162.
Stock, James and Mark W. Watson. 2005. “Understanding Changes in International Business Cycle Dynamics,”
        Journal of the European Economic Association 3(5), 968-1006.
Stuermer, Martin. 2017. “Industrialization and the Demand for Mineral Commodities,” Journal of International
        Money and Finance 46, 16-27.
Uhlig, Harald, 2002. “What are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an Agnostic Identification
        Procedure,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(2), 381-419.
West, Kenneth D. and Ka-Fu Wong. 2014. “A Factor Model for Comovements of Commodity Prices,” Journal of
        International Money and Finance, 42, 289-309.




                                                         21
                  TABLE 1: CONTRIBUTION OF COMMON FACTORS TO COMMODITY PRICES

                                                         Cumulative Variance Explained by Common Factors
 Number of Common Factors:                                 1          2          3          4       5
 Complete Sample:
   Cumulative eigenvalue shares                            0.59         0.69         0.75         0.79        0.82
   Mean across commodity-specific R2s                      0.60         0.69         0.74         0.78        0.81
   Median across commodity-specific R2s                    0.70         0.76         0.78         0.84        0.85
   R2 across all commodities                               0.62         0.71         0.75         0.79        0.82

 Subset of Commodities:
   R2 across agricultural/food commodities                 0.64         0.72         0.75         0.77        0.80
   R2 across oils                                          0.72         0.74         0.76         0.82        0.85
   R2 across industrial commodities                        0.55         0.68         0.75         0.80        0.83

Notes: The table provides metrics of the cumulative variance associated with using additional factors, as indicated by
each column. The first row provides the cumulative sum of eigenvalues associated with each factor normalized by the
sum of all eigenvalues. The second row provides the mean across the R2 of each commodity for each given factor,
using the specific sample associated with each commodity. The third row provides the median R2 across all
commodity-specific R2s. The fourth row provides the joint R2 constructed using all commodities. In addition, the top
panel presents joint R2s for subsets of commodities (as defined in Table 1). Each R2 omits imputed values. See section
3.2 for details.




                                                         22
                                  TABLE 2: GMM ESTIMATES OF THE ROTATION MATRIX
                                    GMM Estimates of Rotation Parameter                         Implied Rotation Coefficients
                                      θ     se(θ)    p(over-id)    N                     t11     95% CI(t11)    t21     95% CI(t21)

Baseline GMM Estimates:              -0.10      (0.31)        1.00         505          1.00     [0.75 1.00]     -0.10     [-0.65 0.49]
   (Iterative GMM, L=36)

Robustness of GMM Estimates:
   More moments: (L=48)              -0.15      (0.27)        1.00         493          0.99     [0.77 1.00]     -0.15     [-0.63 0.39]
   Fewer moments: (L=24)             -0.13      (0.35)        1.00         517          0.99     [0.67 1.00]     -0.13     [-0.73 0.54]
   Fewer moments: (L=12)             -0.23      (0.50)        1.00         529          0.97     [0.32 1.00]     -0.23     [-0.94 0.69]
   Two-step GMM                      -0.10      (0.31)        1.00         505          1.00     [0.75 1.00]     -0.10     [-0.65 0.47]
   Continuous GMM                    -0.07      (0.31)        1.00         505          1.00     [0.76 1.00]     -0.07     [-0.62 0.52]
   Alternative normalization         -0.08      (0.31)        1.00         505          1.00     [0.75 1.00]     -0.08     [-0.64 0.50]


      Notes: The table presents nonlinear GMM estimates of parameter θ from equation (7) in the text, along with Newey-
      West (1987) standard errors (se(θ)), the p-value for over-identifying restrictions (p(over-id)), and the number of
      observations used in the estimation (N). The panel on the right presents the implied parameters of the first row of the
      rotation matrix, along with the 95% confidence interval implied from the estimated distribution of θ. The baseline
      estimates are based on iterative GMM until convergence, using a constant as well as the contemporaneous value and
      36 lags of OPEC production shocks for moment conditions. Subsequent rows present robustness to using more or
      fewer lags of OPEC production shocks as moment conditions, a two-step GMM procedure, a continuously updated
      GMM procedure and an alternative normalization of moment conditions. See section 3.3 for details.




                                                                23
                    TABLE 3: ROTATED COMMODITY-SPECIFIC FACTOR LOADINGS
                                Factor Loadings                                            Factor Loadings
      Commodity                 IC         DC                      Commodity                IC        DC

Agr./Food Commodities                                        Oils
    Apples                      0.46          0.13               Coconut oil                0.82           0.02
    Bananas                     0.57          0.22               Groundnut oil              0.86           0.13
    Barley                      0.75          0.41               Palm oil                   0.89           0.13
    Beef                        0.87         -0.09               Rapeseed oil               0.53           0.39
    Cocoa                       0.89         -0.12               Sun/Safflower oil          0.83           0.22
    Coffee                      0.85         -0.17
    Corn                        0.95          0.09           Industrial Commodities
    Fishmeal                    0.91          0.15               Aluminum                   0.80        0.05
    Hay                         0.86         -0.04               Burlap                     0.85       -0.00
    Oats                        0.88          0.11               Cement                     0.21        0.06
    Orange juice                0.74         -0.22               Copper                     0.60        0.69
    Onions                      0.53         -0.39               Cotton                     0.92       -0.20
    Pepper                      0.56         -0.62               Lead                       0.73        0.58
    Potatoes                    0.73         -0.05               Lumber                     0.53       -0.23
    Rice                        0.93          0.09               Mercury                    0.46        0.75
    Shrimp                      0.44         -0.75               Nickel                     0.20        0.74
    Sorghums                    0.95          0.08               Rubber                     0.79        0.45
    Soybeans                    0.95          0.02               Tin                        0.90        0.18
    Sugar                       0.78          0.11               Wool                       0.87        0.16
    Tea                         0.87         -0.22               Zinc                       0.60        0.36
    Tobacco                     0.84         -0.33
    Wheat                       0.92          0.13


      Notes: The table presents the rotated loadings from factor analysis using the GMM estimates of the
      rotation matrix. See section 3.3 for details.




                                                     24
                     TABLE 4: SUMMARY OF RECURSIVE FORECAST ACCURACY DIAGNOSTICS FOR REAL COMMODITY PRICES


                                                                  Forecast Evaluation Period: Commodity-Specific

                          Aggregate MSPE Ratio                    Distribution of MSPE Ratios
                                                          [0,0.9) [0.9,0.95) [0.95,1) [0,1) [1,∞)                     CRB         WB       IMF       Crude Oil
 1 month                            0.921                   10         11         11     32   8                       0.974      0.834     0.874       0.805

 3 months                           0.922                    4           5           11        20       20            1.057      1.023     0.990        0.977

 6 months                           0.938                    5           4            4        13       27            1.127      1.125     1.072        1.143

 12 months                          1.096                    5           6            5        16       24            1.187      1.214     1.155        1.324

 No. of commodities                   40                                                                             24 (15) 39 (17) 45(17)

                                                            Forecast Evaluation Period: January 1984—December 2012

                          Aggregate MSPE Ratio                    Distribution of MSPE Ratios
                                                          [0,0.9) [0.9,0.95) [0.95,1) [0,1) [1,∞)                     CRB         WB       IMF       Crude Oil
 1 month                            0.931                    8          7          8     23   5                       0.964      0.863     0.888       0.790

 3 months                           0.944                    7           5            6        18       10            0.991      0.982     0.928        0.951

 6 months                           0.985                    8           3            3        14       14            1.068      1.106     1.008        1.114

 12 months                          1.106                    9           2            5        16       12            1.128      1.256     1.112        1.314

 No. of commodities                   28                                                                             24 (15) 39 (17) 45 (17)
Notes: For the commodity-specific forecast evaluation period, the initial estimation window depends on the commodity. It begins either in January 1968 or
at the earliest date that allows the initial estimation window to contain at least 48 observations. The maximum length of the recursive sample is restricted by
the end of the data sample for each commodity and the forecast horizon. The “Aggregate MSPE Ratio” is the ratio of the sum of the MSPEs for the
bivariate FAVAR forecasts of the real commodity prices relative to the sum of the MSPEs for the no-change forecast. The MSPE ratios of the individual
forecasts of real commodity prices are also computed relative to the benchmark no-change forecast. For the FAVAR-based forecasts, the lag length is
chosen recursively using the BIC. The number of commodities included in the commodity price indices but not in the cross-section of 40 commodities used
to extract the factor is in parentheses.

                                                                               25
                                                FIGURE 1: INDIRECT COMMON FACTOR IN COMMODITY PRICES

                                                     Panel A: Indirect Common Factor (GMM Approach)
                        5



                        4



                        3



                        2



                        1



                        0



                    -1



                    -2



                    -3



                    -4



                    -5
                                1970     1975               1980                  1985                       1990     1995                      2000                       2005                2010

                                        Panel B: Indirect Common Factor (Factor Loading Sign Restrictions)
                            5



                            4



                            3



                            2



                            1
  Std. Dev. from Mean




                            0



                        -1



                        -2



                        -3



                        -4



                        -5
                                 1970     1975               1980                   1985                       1990      1995                       2000                        2005              2010

                                            US Recessions           99% CI for Rotated Common Factor (GMM)            Min and Max Values for Rotated Common Factor (Factor Sign Restrictions



Notes: The figure in Panel A presents the IC factor from the factor analysis in section 3.3. The IC factor is HP-filtered
(λ = 129,600) in the figure. The light grey shaded areas are recessions dated by the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The dark grey shaded areas are 99% confidence intervals of HP-filtered rotated factors constructed from
the estimated distribution of rotation parameters. The figure in Panel B plots the 99% confidence interval of the IC
factor as estimated by GMM (shaded areas), and the minimum and maximum range for admissible values of the IC
factor using sign restrictions on factor loadings (solid blue lines). See section 3.3 for details.



                                                                                                             26
FIGURE 2: THE CONTRIBUTION OF INDIRECT AND DIRECT FACTORS TO CHANGES IN COMMODITY PRICES
               Panel A: Contributions to Average Annual Commodity Price Changes

                                                                                           1

                                                                                       0.8

                                                                                       0.6

                                                                                       0.4
                                       Annual Growth Rate
                                                                                       0.2

                                                                                           0

                                                                                       -0.2

                                                                                       -0.4

                                                                                       -0.6

                                                                                       -0.8

                                                                                           -1
                                                                                             1969        1973       1977       1981     1985       1989       1993       1997      2001     2005       2009              2013
                                                                                                           Contribution of DC Factor     Contribution of IC Factor       Average Annual Commodity Price Change

                                                    Panel B: Contributions to Comovement in Commodity Price Changes
                                                                                                                                                                                             Total contribution of factors
                                                                                                                                                                                             Contribution of indirect factor
                                                                                        0.9


                                                                                        0.8


                                                                                        0.7
                                                 Rolling R2s of 1-year price changes




                                                                                        0.6


                                                                                        0.5


                                                                                        0.4


                                                                                        0.3


                                                                                        0.2


                                                                                        0.1


                                                                                            0


                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                  1970          1975         1980           1985         1990        1995        2000         2005              2010

                  Panel C: Contributions to Annual Changes in Global Industrial Production
                                               0.15



                                                                 0.1



                                               0.05
                  Annual Growth Rate




                                                                                       0



                                         -0.05



                                                   -0.1



                                         -0.15
                                                                                           1971          1975        1979        1983          1987       1991         1995      1999       2003         2007
                                                                                                                Contribution of DC Factor        Contribution of IC Factor     Annual Growth in World IP

Notes: Panel A plots the contributions of the direct and indirect factors (DC and IC, respectively) to the average annual
price changes across all commodities. Panel B plots the contribution of the two factors to cross-sectional variation in
1-year commodity price changes (black line) and that coming solely from IC factor (blue shaded area). See section
3.4 for details. Panel C plots the equivalent contributions to the annual growth rate of global industrial production.

                                                                                                                                                      27
                 APPENDIX A.1: BASELINE MODEL

1     Model
We present the model in detail below.

1.1    Household
Household maximizes
                                                                     1+ 1   1+ 1
                                                                                  
                           ∞                                                   η
                                    C 1−σ                      N s,e
                                                                        η
                           X                  n     Ns
                        Et     β i  t+i − e−εt+i ϕn t+i 1 − ϕe t+i          1
                                                                                   
                           i=0
                                    1−σ             1+ η        1+           η


where Ct is consumption and the household supplies labor to the final good (Nts ) and the energy
sectors (Nts,e ). The nominal flow budget constraint faced by the household is

                         Pt Ct + Bt = Bt−1 Rt−1 + Wt Nts + Wte Nts,e + Tt

where Pt is aggregate price, Bt is nominal bond holdings with Rt−1 the interest rate, Wt the wage
in the final good sector, Wte the wage in the energy sector and Tt lump-sum profits from firms.
    The first order conditions are standard and given by
                                                  s η1           n   Wt
                                        ϕn Ctσ Nt         = e εt        ,
                                                                     Pt
                                                    s,e η1       Wte
                                        ϕe Ctσ Nt            =       ,
                                                                 Pt
                                                              
                                                           Pt
                                     Ct−σ          −σ
                                            = βEt Ct+1 Rt        .
                                                          Pt+1

1.2    Energy Sector
The energy sector’s total supply of the energy good (Σt ) is endogenous, with exogenous productivity
shock Ξt and the firm faces a decreasing returns to scale (determined by γ) production function
that uses labor                                       1−γ
                                         Σt = Ξt Ntd,e        .

The energy sector firm maximizes
                                                1−γ
                                     St Ξt Ntd,e      − Wte Ntd,e

while taking productivity and wages as given, where St is the price of the energy good. The
first-order condition can we written in real terms as
                                                St           We
                                      (1 − γ)      Σt = Ntd,e t .
                                                Pt           Pt


                                                      1
The market clearing condition for labor is

                                           Nts,e = Ntd,e = Nte

while the market clearing condition for the energy good is
                                              Z 1
                                         Σt =     Σt (j)dj
                                                            0

where as we explain below, a continuum of primary-commodity producing firms use the energy
good in production.

1.3    Primary Commodity-Production Sector
There are a continuum of primary commodity producing firms. The energy good is used in the
production of the primary commodity (Qt (j)), with a decreasing returns to scale (determined by
αj ) production function
                                  Qt (j) = At (j)Σt (j)1−αj
where At (j) is the productivity shock. Let Pt (j) be the price of the commodity j. Then the firm’s
problem is to maximize profits

                                   Pt (j)At (j)Σt (j)1−αj − St Σt (j)

while taking productivity and prices as given. The first-order condition can be written in real terms
as
                                                 
                                           Pt (j)                  St
                               (1 − αj )            Qt (j) = Σt (j) .
                                            Pt                     Pt

1.4    The Intermediate Commodity
The production function for the intermediate commodity (QC  t ), which is simply a CES aggregator
with elasticity of substitution θc across the primary commodities, is given by
                                              Z       1                          θcθ−1
                                                                                      c
                                                                    θc −1
                                    QC
                                     t    =                Yt (j)    θc     dj
                                                   0

which gives the standard price index
                                                                                     1
                                              Z       1                          1−θ c
                                    PtC   =                Pt (j)   1−θc
                                                                            dj
                                                0

and the standard demand curve                                           −θc
                                          Yt (j)                Pt (j)
                                                 =                                 .
                                           QC t                  PtC
Market clearing is then given by
                                              Yt (j) = Qt (j).


                                                               2
1.5     The Final Goods Sector
The production function for the final good (Yt ) sector is given by
                                                          αt     1−αt
                                       Yt = At YtC Ntd                    .

where At is the productivity shock and the share parameter αt is exogenous. Let Pt be the price
of the final good. The firm’s problem is to maximize profits
                                        αt     1−αt
                                Pt At YtC Ntd          − Wt Ntd − PtC YtC

while taking productivity and prices as given.
   The first order conditions are given by
                                             C  C 
                                               Pt     Yt
                                       αt =                 ,
                                               Pt     Yt
                                                     d
                                                  Wt    Nt
                                     1 − αt =                 .
                                                  Pt     Yt
Market clearing for good is
                                                Yt = Ct
while for labor is
                                             Ntd = Nts = Nt
and for the commodity input is
                                               QC     C
                                                t = Yt .


1.6     Equilibrium
We now present the equilibrium conditions of the model.

1.6.1   Non-linear equilibrium conditions
The following non-linear optimality and market clearing conditions determine the equilibrium
                                                  1              n   Wt
                                        ϕn Ytσ Ntη = eεt
                                                                     Pt
                                                           
                                                        Pt
                                    Yt−σ = βEt Yt+1
                                                 −σ
                                                    Rt
                                                       Pt+1
                                                   Wtee η1
                                         ϕe Ytσ Nt           =
                                                    Pt
                                             St        We
                                      (1 − γ) Σt = Nte t
                                             Pt        Pt
                                                                 1−γ
                                         Σt = Ξt (Nte )
                                              Z 1
                                         Σt =     Σt (j)dj
                                                  0


                                                      3
                                       Yt (j) = At (j)Σt (j)1−αj
                                                    
                                              Pt (j)                   St
                                  (1 − αj )            Yt (j) = Σt (j)
                                               Pt                      Pt
                                                Z    1                          θcθ−1
                                                                                     c
                                                                   θc −1
                                      YtC   =             Yt (j)    θc     dj
                                                  0
                                                              −θc
                                            Yt (j)      Pt (j)
                                                   =
                                             YtC         PtC
                                               Z 1                    1
                                                                    1−θ c
                                      PtC   =       Pt (j) 1−θc
                                                                dj
                                                  0
                                                                αt
                                          Yt = At YtC Nt1−αt
                                                C  C 
                                                 Pt     Yt
                                          αt =
                                                 Pt     Yt
                                                       
                                                    Wt     Nt
                                        1 − αt =
                                                    Pt     Yt
where the following are exogenous processes {At , αt , At (j), εnt , Ξt }.

1.6.2   Log-linear approximation
We now consider a first-order approximation around a non-stochastic steady-state. We use the
notation with lower case variables denoting log deviations of real variables (except forΣt (j) and
Σt , which are deviations from steady-state) and variables without a t subscript to denote steady-
state values of respective variables. We normalize, without loss of generality, equal production in
steady-state across commodity producers. The log-linear equilibrium is determined by
                                                  1
                                            σyt + nt = wt + εnt
                                                  η
                                                             
                                                          1
                                            yt = Et yt+1 − rt
                                                          σ
                                                     1
                                                σyt + net = wte
                                                     η
                                                     Σt
                                             st +       = net + wte
                                                     Σ
                                            Σt
                                               = Ξt + (1 − γ) net
                                            Σ
                                                  Z 1
                                             Σt =     Σt (j)dj
                                                           0

                                                                (1 − αj )
                                     yt (j) = at (j) +                    Σt (j)
                                                                   Σj


                                                            4
                                                          1
                                       pt (j) = st +         Σt (j) − yt (j)
                                                         Σj
                                                         Z 1
                                                yc,t   =     yt (j)dj
                                                           0
                                                           1
                                      pt (j) = pc,t −         (yt (j) − yc,t )
                                                           θc
                                  yt = at + αyc,t + (1 − α)nt + ϕα α̃t
                                         pc,t = yt − yc,t + α̃t
                                                           α
                                       wt = yt − nt −          α̃t
                                                        1−α
                                                                  
where note that α̃t is log-deviation of αt and ϕα ≡ α ln Y C − ln N .

1.6.3   Solution
We now present the solution of the model.

Primary commodity sector We start with the primary commodity sector. We have, from the
production function and substitution of the energy good input, the following

                                                    (1 − αj )
                              yt (j) = at (j) +               Σt (j)
                                                       Σj
                                     = at (j) + (1 − αj ) [pt (j) − st + yt (j)]

which gives, after defining                           
                                                αj
                                                         ≡ εj ,
                                              1 − αj
                              yt (j) = 1 + ε−1    at (j) + ε−1
                                                
                                            j               j (pt (j) − st ) .                  (1)
(1) above gives the supply curve of commodity j. Next, plug in the relative demand expression
                                                           1
                                      pt (j) = pc,t −         (yt (j) − yc,t )
                                                           θc
to (1) in order to eliminate the commodity price pt (j), which gives, after defining a re-scaled
productivity shock for commodity j as
                                               −1
                                         1
                                                        1 + ε−1
                                                                
                                    1+                       j    at (j) ≡ υt (j)
                                       εj θ c

the solution as                                −1                        
                                            1          −1         1
                    yt (j) = υt (j) + 1 +             εj    pc,t + yc,t − st    .               (2)
                                          εj θc                   θc




                                                           5
   To determine the aggregate supply of commodities, integrate (2) over all j, which gives
                        Z 1                  Z 1            −1
                                                        1
                yc,t =       υt (j)dj + pc,t      1+             ε−1
                                                                  j dj+
                          0                   0       εj θ c
                             Z 1            −1              Z 1          −1
                     1                    1       −1                     1
                        yc,t       1+            εj dj − st        1+           ε−1
                                                                                 j dj.
                     θc       0        ε   θ
                                         j c                   0      ε   θ
                                                                        j c

Define                                             Z     1
                                                             υt (j)dj ≡ υt
                                                     0
                                                     Z       1
                                                                            −1
                                            ϕ≡                   (1 + εj θc )    dj
                                                         0
and rewrite as                                           
                                            1        1                  1
                                   pc,t   =            − 1 yc,t + st −     υt .                    (3)
                                            θc       ϕ                 ϕθc
   Next, we have the aggregate demand for commodity given by

                                                 pc,t = yt − yc,t + α̃t

which we use with (3) to derive the production of the intermediate commodity bundle, which is
                         θc ϕ                1                 θc ϕ               θc ϕ
          yc,t =                  yt +               υt −               st +               α̃t .   (4)
                    1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
For future reference, we also derive the solution for pc,t . We can use the aggregate demand for the
commodity sector to derive, after plugging in for (4)
                        1−ϕ                  1                 θc ϕ              1−ϕ
           pc,t =                 yt −               υt +               st +               α̃t     (5)
                    1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ

with (5) above giving the solution for pc,t .

Energy sector price We now move to the energy sector. We can use market clearing condition
to pin down the (aggregate) price of the energy sector st . Using the production function and (2)
we get
                                                          −1                      
                    (1 − αj )                         1          −1        1
           at (j) +           Σt (j) = υt (j) + 1 +             εj   pc,t + yc,t − st
                       Σj                           εj θ c                 θc
which can be written as
                                       −1                   −1
                                 1 − αj                 1 − αj
                     Σt (j) =               υt (j) −                at (j)+
                                   Σj                     Σj
                                    −1             −1                            
                              1 − αj              1                       1
                                           1+               ε−1
                                                             j    pc,t +     yc,t − st    .
                                Σj              εj θc                     θc
Define
                                                         1 − αj
                                                                ≡ ςj
                                                           Σj

                                                                    6
and get
                                                                 −1                           
                                                              1                      1
              Σt (j) = ςj−1 υt (j) − ςj−1 at (j) + ςj−1 1 +            ε−1
                                                                        j    p c,t +    yc,t − st    .                          (6)
                                                            εj θc                    θc

Then we use (6) in the market clearing condition to get a solution for st
              Z    1                       Z    1                                            Z 1                −1
                                                                                   1                          1
       Σt =            ςj−1 υt (j)dj   −            ςj−1 at (j)dj          + pc,t + yc,t − st       −1
                                                                                                   ςj    1+            ε−1
                                                                                                                        j dj.
               0                            0                                      θc           0           εj θ c

Lets define,                                                       Z       1
                                                                               ςj−1 υt (j)dj ≡ υ̃t
                                                                    0
                                                                   Z       1
                                                                               ςj−1 at (j)dj ≡ ãt
                                                                       0
                                                     Z      1                  −1
                                                                           1
                                                                ςj−1 1 +            ε−1
                                                                                     j dj ≡ ϕ̃.
                                                        0                εj θ c
                                                        1−αj
For future reference, note that if    ≡ ςj = 1, then υ̃t = υt and ϕ̃ = θc ϕ.
                                                         Σj
   Then we can write the solution for st as
                                                                                                           1
                                           st = ϕ̃−1 υ̃t − ϕ̃−1 ãt − ϕ̃−1 Σt + pc,t +                        yc,t              (7)
                                                                                                           θc
where (7) gives the solution for st as a function of the total supply in the energy sector, the two
averages over commodity specific productivity shocks, and pc,t and yc,t . We have expressions for
pc,t and yc,t in (5) and (4), which we can later combine for solutions of all aggregate variables as a
function of various aggregate shocks and total supply in the energy sector.
    Moreover, given the equilibrium conditions from the supply side of the firms, we can derive
                                                                        −1
                                                                       1
                  Σt              1                      (1 − γ)   1 + η
                  Σ
                     =                  −1  Ξt +                      −1  [st − σyt ] ,                                 (8)
                                        1                                 1
                        1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η              1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η

                                                                                                     Σt
which we will use later for equating demand and supply of                                            Σ .


Final good sector We now use the equilibrium conditions of the final good sector to determine
labor supply and output, which are given by
                                                                                      α
                                            (1 − σ)                        1
                                       nt =        yt −  1−α  α̃t +        εnt ,
                                                 1             1             1
                                              1+ η         1+ η           1+ η
                                                                                       
                                                             α
        1     (1 − σ)                       ϕα           11−α           1            α
            −       yt = −        −         α̃t +        εnt +         at +         yc,t .
     (1 − α)       1
                1+ η                 1
                                  1+ η    (1 − α)            1
                                                          1+ η         (1 − α)      (1 − α)


                                                                                     7
First, we can plug in the solution for yc,t from (4) to eliminate it. Moreover, we can later in turn
write all aggregate variables as a function of aggregate shocks and averages of commodity specific
productivity shocks. Lets define
                                                          
                                          1       (1 − σ)
                                              −         ≡ χ.
                                       (1 − α)     1+ 1    η

Then, we have
                                      
                            α                     −1         −1
                           1−α    ϕα    α̃t +  χ  εnt + χ                  α
         yt = −χ−1        −                                    at + χ−1         yc,t .              (9)
                          1
                       1+ η    (1 − α)          1+ η1     (1 − α)          (1 − α)

which gives the expression for final output.

Aggregate equilibrium The aggregate equilibrium is now given by the following four conditions
(4), (5), (7), and (9) that give the solution for {yt , yc,t , st , pc,t },
                         θc ϕ                1                 θc ϕ               θc ϕ
          yc,t =                  yt +               υt −               st +               α̃t .
                    1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                    1−ϕ                    1                      θc ϕ                1−ϕ
           pc,t =             yt −                   υt +                   st +                α̃t
                1 + (θc − 1)ϕ       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ          1 + (θc − 1)ϕ          1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                                                                          1
                           st = ϕ̃−1 υ̃t − ϕ̃−1 ãt − ϕ̃−1 Σt + pc,t + yc,t
                                                                         θc
                                          
                         α
                                     ϕα               χ−1              χ−1                α
         yt = −χ−1   1−α  −               α̃t +           εnt +           at + χ−1         yc,t
                       1+  1      (1 −  α)            1+   1          (1 − α)           (1 − α)
                                 η                         η

and we can write them eventually as a function of shocks. Note that {at , εnt } only show up in the
expression for yt , as given in (9), while {Σt } only shows up in the expression for st as given in (7).
   At this point, lets express the aggregate energy price st as a function of shocks and yt . So lets
replace for pc,t + θ1c yc,t to get
                                                                                 
                                                                           θc − 1
               st = (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ) ϕ̃−1 υ̃t − ϕ̃−1 ãt − ϕ̃−1 Σt + yt −
                                                                
                                                                                    υt + α̃t       (10)
                                                                             θc
This solution for st in (10) will be used below in discussing the direct and indirect determinants of
commodity supply and demand.
   Finally, we can also write down the solution for yt by plugging in for yc,t and st . That is, after
manipulations and plugging in, get
                                    
                    α                             −1          −1
                   1−α         ϕ α    α̃t +  χ  εnt + χ
  yt = −χ−1            −                                        at                                  (11)
                  1 + η1     (1 − α)          1 + η1       (1 − α)
                                                    
               α                   α         θc ϕ
     + χ−1          υt − χ−1                            (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ) ϕ̃−1 υ̃t − ϕ̃−1 ãt − ϕ̃−1 Σt
                                                                                                     
            (1 − α)            (1 − α) 1 + (θc − 1)ϕ


                                                     8
with (11) above giving a solution for yt as a function of all aggregate shocks and the supply of
energy good.
   Next, lets impose, without loss of generality, the normalization on steady-state that
                                                         1 − αj
                                                                ≡ ςj = 1
                                                           Σj

Then we have
                                                  υ̃t = υt and ϕ̃ = θc ϕ
                                Z      1                              Z 1
                                           ςj−1 υt (j)dj ≡ υ̃t = υt ≡     υt (j)dj
                                   0                                                       0
                                       Z       1                          Z    1
                                                   ςj−1 at (j)dj =                 at (j)dj ≡ ãt
                                           0                               0
                               Z     1                               −1
                                                            1
                                         ςj−1          1+                     ε−1
                                                                               j dj ≡ ϕ̃ = θc ϕ
                                 0                        εj θc
So we can further simplify (11) as

                              yt = ϕy [at + κn εnt + κã ãt + κΣ Σt − κα α̃t ]                      (12)

where
                                                                                      
                                                                                   1
                                                                          1+       η
                                         ϕy ≡                    
                                                              1
                                                        1+    η    − (1 − σ) (1 − α)
                                                                  !
                                                         1−α
                                         κn ≡
                                                         1 + η1
                                         κã ≡ α
                                         κΣ ≡ α
                                                                               !
                                                          α
                                         κα =                 1   − ϕα                 .
                                                         1+   η


Comovement in Commodity Prices First, lets write out the supply curve for commodity j,
which can be derived from (1) and reproduced here

                            yt (j) = 1 + ε−1   at (j) + ε−1
                                             
                                          j              j (pt (j) − st )

and where we will use the definition
                                          −1
                                      1
                                               1 + ε−1
                                                       
                                1+                  j    at (j) ≡ υt (j).
                                    εj θ c

That is, write (1) as
                                                                               (1 + εj θc )
                                pt (j) = εj yt (j) + st −                                   υt (j)   (13)
                                                                                   θc

                                                                      9
where st appears.
   Next, we can write out the demand curve for commodity j from the relative demand equation
and final good input share equation, as well as the solution for yc,t as given in (4). That is, we get
                                                                               
                         1                 1                θc − 1           1
             pt (j) = − yt (j) +                     yt −                              υt         (14)
                        θc           1 + (θc − 1)ϕ            θc      1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                                                          
                          (θc − 1) ϕ                 1
                    +                   st +                   α̃t
                        1 + (θc − 1)ϕ          1 + (θc − 1)ϕ

where there is a dependence not just on st , but now also on yt directly.
    Lets simplify the above further by replacing for the solution for st from (10). Start with (13),
to get

                              (1 + εj θc )
       pt (j) = εj yt (j) −                υt (j)                                                                                      (15)
                                  θc
                      −1                                        −1                                             −1
             + (θc ϕ)      υt − (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ) (θc ϕ)               ãt − (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ) (θc ϕ)                    Σt + α̃t + yt .

Next, do the same manipulation for (14), to get
                                                                                                       
                                     1                                  θc − 1                   θc − 1
                        pt (j) = −      yt (j) + yt + α̃t −                          ãt −                    Σt .                     (16)
                                     θc                                   θc                       θc

These intermediate derivations for the commodity demand and supply are useful for intuition. We
will later derive the final formulations after we determine the solution for Σt , the level of energy
good produced in this economy.

Commodity Prices Next, we can solve for commodity prices, by combining (15) and (16) above
                                                                                                 
                                                                     θc − 1      (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
   pt (j)(1 + εj θc ) = (1 + εj θc ) yt + (1 + εj θc ) α̃t − εj θc            +                       ãt (17)
                                                                       θc                 θc ϕ
                                                             
                                θc − 1        (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)           (1 + εj θc )                −1
                      − εj θc              +                      Σt −               υt (j) + (θc ϕ) υt
                                   θc                θc ϕ                   θc

where we have two averages of commodity producer productivity that appear in (17). We have
defined them as                        −1
                                   1
                                             1 + ε−1
                                                      
                              1+                  j     at (j) ≡ υt (j)
                                 εj θ c
                                             Z 1
                                        υt ≡     υt (j)dj
                                                                0
                                                            Z   1
                                                    ãt ≡           at (j)dj.
                                                            0
Lets assume then that there is a common and idiosyncratic component to the commodity producer
productivity at (j) (with the idiosyncratic components orthogonal across commodity producers)

                                                    at (j) = aat + ajt


                                                                10
                                                          −1
                                                    1
                                                                    1 + ε−1
                                                                            
which also means, multiplying by 1 +              εj θ c                 j    on both sides

                                                       υt (j) = vta + υtj

where we define
                                                                   −1
                                                       1
                                    υtj
                                                                                   j
                                          ≡       1+                      1 + ε−1
                                                                               j   at
                                                     εj θ c
                                                                   −1
                                                             1
                                    vta ≡                                 1 + ε−1
                                                                                   a
                                                  1+                           j   at .
                                                           εj θ c

Then, this implies that
                                              Z    1
                                    ãt ≡              at (j)dj = aat
                                              0
                                              Z    1
                                    υt ≡               υt (j)dj = vta
                                              0
                                                                   −1
                                                       1
                                    vta                                   1 + ε−1
                                                                                   a
                                          ≡       1+                           j   at
                                                     εj θ c
                                                                   −1
                                                             1
                                    υtj ≡
                                                                                   j
                                                  1+                      1 + ε−1
                                                                               j   at .
                                                           εj θ c

Now lets substitute these in (17) above to get
                                                                            
                                                 θc − 1       (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
      pt (j) = yt + α̃t − (1 + εj θc )−1 εj θc             +                     Σt                     (18)
                                                   θc               θc ϕ
                                                                                    
                                   θc − 1                         1                            1
             − ((1 + εj )θc )−1               (1 + εj θc ) −                  + (1 + εj ) vta − υtj .
                                      θc                     ϕ (1 + εj θc )                    θc

    Given the endogenous determination of Σt however, we need to do further manipulations to
write this solution in terms of yt and aggregate shocks. Moreover, we need to further manipulate
to find a solution for the energy price st . For this purpose, lets first simplify the current solution
for st given in (10) to
                                                                            
                             1       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ             1              −1 a
                     st =        −                     1+             1 + ε−1
                                                                           j       vt
                            θc ϕ          θc ϕ               εj θ c
                                         
                            1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                        −                    Σt + yt + α̃t .
                                 θc ϕ

Next, we have from the firm/supply side of the energy sector given in (8)
                                                                   −1
                                                                  1
             Σt              1                      (1 − γ)   1 + η
             Σ
                =                  −1  Ξt +                      −1  [st − σyt ] .
                                   1                                 1
                   1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η              1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η


                                                                    11
Lets use the two expressions above to solve for Σt as a function of yt and aggregate shocks. We
substitute for st and get
                      1
  Σ−1 Σt =                  −1  Ξt
                            1
            1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η
                            −1
              (1 − γ) 1 + η1          
                                          1
                                                
                                                  1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                                                                
                                                                       1
                                                                                         
                                                                                   −1 −1
                                                                                          vta
                                                                                     
          +                    −1          −                   1+          1 + εj
                       
                              1          θc ϕ          θc ϕ          εj θ c
            1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η
                             −1
               (1 − γ) 1 + η1          
                                          1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                                                                       
          +                    −1   −                  Σt + yt + α̃t
                                              θc ϕ
             1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η1
                            −1
              (1 − γ) 1 + η1
          +                   −1  (−σyt ) .
                              1
            1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η

For ease of notation, we define
                                                        −1
                                                       1
                                      γη ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +
                                                       η
where note that γη = 0 when γ = 1, the case where energy good supply is exogenous. Then,
                                
           γη       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ             1              γη
  Σ−1 +                              Σt =           Ξt +            ((1 − σ) yt + α̃t )            (19)
        (1 − γη )        θc ϕ             (1 − γη )       (1 − γη )
                                                                                                      
                                             γη         1       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ             1             −1 a
                                        +                   −                        1+         1 + ε−1
                                                                                                     j      vt .
                                          (1 − γη )    θc ϕ            θc ϕ             εj θc

Here, (19) is important so that we can plug this back into the earlier solution for commodity prices.
In particular, for ease of notation lets define
                                                                
                                        θc − 1     (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
                               εj θ c            +                   ≡ Σj,c
                                          θc             θc ϕ

and lets define the following for use in (19)
                                                                     
                                       −1       γη       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                             Ση ≡ Σ +
                                             (1 − γη )        θc ϕ




                                                  12
where note that Ση = Σ−1 when γ = 1 as then γη = 0. Then, plugging in (19) gives
                                                            
                             −1       −1    γη
 pt (j) = 1 − (1 + εj θc ) Σj,c Ση                  (1 − σ) yt                                                (20)
                                         (1 − γη )
                                                  
                                            γη
        + 1 − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1                 α̃t
                                     η
                                         (1 − γη )
                                      1
        − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1           Ξt
                               η
                                  (1 − γη )
                                                                                                     
                                        γη           1        1 + (θc − 1)ϕ              1            −1 −1
        − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1                                                                             vta
                                                                                                        
                                                          −                      1 +           1  + ε j
                               η
                                    (1 − γη )      θc ϕ            θc ϕ                εj θc
                                                                                  
                               θc − 1                            1                             1
        − ((1 + εj )θc )−1                (1 + εj θc ) −                    + (1 + εj ) vta − υtj
                                 θc                        ϕ (1 + εj θc )                      θc

where (20) now gives a version of the solution for commodity prices.

Aggregate output solution in terms of shocks We can also now give the final solution for
aggregate output. Currently, we have (12), where we now substitute in for the solution to Σt , to
get
                                                        
                                                  1
     yt = Ω−1 ϕy at + κn εnt + Σ−1    κ  Σ             Ξt                                             (21)
                                   η
                                             (1 − γη )
                                           
                                     γη
        − Ω−1 ϕy κα − Σ−1   κ  Σ               α̃t
                          η
                                 (1 − γη )
                                                                                           
                      1 + εj θ c                   γη       1     1 + (θc − 1)ϕ    1 + εj θc
        + Ω−1 ϕy κã              + Σ−1    κ Σ                −                                   vta
                     θc (1 + εj )       η
                                               (1 − γη ) θc ϕ          θc ϕ       θc (1 + εj )
where
                                                               γη
                                     Ω = 1 − Σ−1 ϕy κΣ                (1 − σ)
                                              η
                                                            (1 − γη )
which means that the coefficients just for at , εnt are

                                                   Ω−1 ϕy
                                                   Ω−1 ϕy κn

respectively.
   This solution given in (21) above for aggregate output is the version that appears in the text in
Equation (1), where we use reduced form coefficients in the text to represent the solution in (21).
Then as in the text, we can define,
                                                                
                                                        1
      yt = ytnc (at , εnt ) + Ω−1 ϕy Σ−1      κ Σ             Ξ t                                            (22)
                                           η
                                                    (1 − γη )
                                                 
                                           γη
         − Ω−1 ϕy κα − Σ−1         κ  Σ             α̃t
                                 η
                                        (1 − γη )
                                                                                                  
                             1 + εj θ c                 γη         1     1 + (θc − 1)ϕ    1 + εj θc
         + Ω−1 ϕy κã                    + Σ−1   κΣ                  −                                   vta
                            θc (1 + εj )      η
                                                     (1 − γη ) θc ϕ           θc ϕ       θc (1 + εj )


                                                       13
where we have defined
                                 ytnc (at , εnt ) = Ω−1 ϕy (at + κn εnt ) .                      (23)
This expression given in (22) above for aggregate output and             ytnc   (at , εnt )
                                                                           is the version that appears
in the text of the paper, where we use reduced form coefficients in the text to represent the solution
in (22) .

Solution for commodity prices Consider the solution for commodity prices above in (20),
where below we sign the coefficient only on aggregate output
                                                                          
                                                             γη
                     pt (j) = 1 − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1           (1 − σ)  yt
                                                       η
                                                          (1 − γη )

where we have
                                                                     
                                            θc − 1      (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
                             Σj,c ≡ εj θc             +
                                              θc              θc ϕ
                                            
                                        αj
                              εj ≡
                                     1 − αj
                                   Z 1
                                                   −1
                               ϕ≡      (1 + εj θc ) dj
                                      0
                                                                                 
                                                  γη              1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                             Ση ≡ Σ−1 +
                                               (1 − γη )               θc ϕ

                                               Z   1
                                          Σ=           (1 − αj ) dj
                                               0
                                                                     −1
                                                       1
                                      γη ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +
                                                       η

and 0 ≤ γ < 1; 0 ≤ αj < 1; η > 0; θc > 1. Given this, we have
                                         
                                     αj
                           εj ≡              >0
                                   1 − αj
                                Z 1
                                                 −1
                            ϕ≡       (1 + εj θc ) dj > 0
                                  0
                                                                   
                                         θc − 1       (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
                         Σj,c ≡ εj θc               +                   >0
                                           θc               θc ϕ
                                Z 1
                            Σ=       (1 − αj ) dj > 0
                                  0
                                             −1
                                            1
                           γη ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +         > 0 and γη < 1
                                            η
                                                                
                                           γη       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                           Ση ≡ Σ−1 +                                >0
                                        (1 − γη )        θc ϕ


                                                         14
which means that a sufficient condition for
                                                                            
                                                            γη
                          1 − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1              (1 − σ)       >0
                                                   η
                                                         (1 − γη )

is that
                                                  σ > 1.
Moreover, note that the two shocks that only affect aggregate yt have the following coefficients in
the final solution for yt
                          "                               −1 #
                                  −1         γη
                             1 − Ση ϕy κΣ           (1 − σ)    ϕy at
                                          (1 − γη )
                          "                               −1      #
                                  −1         γη
                             1 − Ση ϕy κΣ           (1 − σ)    ϕy κn εnt
                                          (1 − γη )

respectively. That is, here, we are trying to sign the coefficients on ytnc (at , εnt ) that we have defined
in (23). Then, when σ > 1, we have
                                                         
                                                   1 + η1
                                 ϕy ≡                             >0
                                         1 + η1 − (1 − σ) (1 − α)
                                                !
                                         1−α
                                 κn ≡             >0
                                         1 + η1
                                  κΣ ≡ α > 0

which implies that

                                              Ω−1 ϕy > 0
                                              Ω−1 ϕy κn > 0

where
                                                         γη
                                  Ω = 1 − Σ−1 ϕy κΣ             (1 − σ) .
                                           η
                                                      (1 − γη )
Next, consider the solution for commodity prices again, where we now look at the coefficient on the
energy shock
                                                                    1
                              pt (j) = −(1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1           Ξt
                                                             η
                                                                (1 − γη )




                                                    15
and where we now want to check how the coefficient depends on 1 − αj . From before, note the
various definitions of the parameters above
                                                                       
                                             θc − 1       (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
                             Σj,c ≡ εj θc               +
                                               θc               θc ϕ
                                             
                                         αj
                               εj ≡
                                       1 − αj
                                    Z 1
                                                     −1
                                ϕ≡       (1 + εj θc ) dj
                                      0
                                                                       
                                        −1        γη       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ
                              Ση ≡ Σ +
                                              (1 − γη )         θc ϕ
                                    Z 1
                               Σ=        (1 − αj ) dj
                                       0
                                                 −1
                                                1
                               γη ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +       .
                                                η

Thus, first, we can manipulate the component that depends on 1 − αj
                                                                                     
                                                             θc − 1     (1 + (θc − 1)ϕ)
                (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c = (1 + εj θc )−1 εj θc            +                   .
                                                               θc             θc ϕ

We have εj is increasing αj . Then, it is the case that (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c is decreasing in αj . Then it
is also the case that
                                                               1
                                   (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1
                                                        η
                                                           (1 − γη )
is decreasing in αj . In other words, when the share of energy in the commodity production, which
is given by (1 − αj ) increases, then the coefficient in the solution of commodity prices on the energy
shock also increases:
                             ∂ (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c
                                                  
                                                          1           −2
                                                     = − (1 + εj θc ) < 0.
                                      ∂εj                ϕ

Factor structure of commodity prices Finally, note that we use the definition of ytnc (at , εnt )
given in (23) in (20) to derive the factor structure of prices in the form presented in the text. That




                                                    16
is
                                                                   
                                                   γη
     pt (j) = 1 − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1                  (1  −  σ)  ytnc (at , εnt )                                    (24)
                                           η
                                               (1 − γη )
                                                                                                        
                                                         γη                                        1
          + Ω−1 1 − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1                      (1 − σ)    ϕ y    Σ  −1
                                                                                         κ Σ             Ξt
                                                 η
                                                     (1 − γη )                        η
                                                                                               (1 − γη )
                                                   
                                            γη
          − Ω−1 ϕy κα − Σ−1       κΣ                  α̃t
                               η
                                        (1 − γη )
                                                                                                             
                            1 + εj θ c                    γη         1         1 + (θc − 1)ϕ          1 + εj θ c
          + Ω−1 ϕy κã                   + Σ−1     κΣ                    −                                          vta
                          θc (1 + εj )         η
                                                      (1 − γη ) θc ϕ                   θc ϕ         θc (1 + εj )
                                                         
                                                   γη
          + 1 − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1                      α̃t
                                          η
                                              (1 − γη )
                                           1
          − (1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c Σ−1                Ξt
                                 η
                                       (1 − γη )
                                                                                                                 
                        −1       −1          γη             1        1 + (θc − 1)ϕ                  1            −1 −1
                                                                                                                          vta
                                                                                                                   
          − (1 + εj θc ) Σj,c Ση                                 −                           1+            1 + εj
                                         (1 − γη )        θc ϕ             θc ϕ                   εj θc
                                                                                             
                                 θc − 1                                 1                                  1
          − ((1 + εj )θc ) −1
                                                 (1 + εj θc ) −                      + (1 + εj ) vta − υtj
                                    θc                            ϕ (1 + εj θc )                          θc

This (24) above is the expression that appears in Equation (4) in the text of the paper, where we
use reduced form coefficients in the text to represent the solution in (24).
     Now consider the coefficient on Ξt
                       −1                                                                        
           (1 + εj θc )                                                     γη
pt (j) = −                   Σj,c Σ−1  − Ω−1
                                                (1 + ε θ
                                                      j c ) −  Σ   Σ
                                                                j,c η
                                                                      −1
                                                                                   (1 − σ)  ϕ Σ−1
                                                                                             y η  κΣ Ξt
             (1 − γη )              η
                                                                         (1 − γη )
                                                                                                           
                                              (θc (1 − α) − 1) 1 + η1 − (θc − 1) (1 − σ) (1 − α) (1 + ε θ )−1
                                  −1
                  (1 − γη ) Ση θ                                                                        j c
       =−                     γη
                                                                                                    +         Ξt
           1 − Σ−1
                                                                    
                 η
                    ϕ  y κΣ (1−γη ) (1 − σ)                        1
                                                              1 + η − (1 − σ) (1 − α)                   ϕ

where                                                 Z    1
                                                                          −1
                                                ϕ≡             (1 + εj θc )    dj.
                                                       0
      Thus, if

                                                   θc (1 − α) − 1 > 0,
                                                                σ>1

then the coefficient on Ξt is negative. Also, the coefficient is always decreasing (in absolute term)
in εj . Moreover, as shown above, the coefficient on ytnc (at , εnt ) in (24) above is positive when σ > 1.

Commodity demand and supply final solutions Now we re-write after relevant substitutions
the commodity demand and supply curves. For this, first combine (15) and (19) to get




                                                                 17
                       (1 + εj θc ) j 1 + (θc − 1)ϕ −1            1
pt (j)   = εj yt (j) −             υt −                  Ση             Ξt                                         (25)
                           θc                 θc ϕ            (1 − γη )
                                                           
                     1 + (θc − 1)ϕ −1 γη
           + 1−                      Ση            (1 − σ) yt
                          θc ϕ           (1 − γη )
                                                  
                     1 + (θc − 1)ϕ −1 γη
           + 1−                      Ση              α̃t
                          θc ϕ           (1 − γη )
                                                                                                           
                       1 + (θc − 1)ϕ −1 γη                1         1 + (θc − 1)ϕ    1 + εj θc       (1 + εj θc )
           +       1−                 Ση                       −                                   −                vta ,
                            θc ϕ           (1 − γη )     θc ϕ            θc ϕ       θc (1 + εj )         θc

and (25) above is the expression that appears in Equation (2) in the text of the paper, where we
use reduced form coefficients in the text to represent the solution in (25).
   Second, combine (16) and (19) to get,
                                   
               1             θc − 1              1
  pt (j) = − yt (j) −                 Σ−1               Ξt                                             (26)
               θc              θc        η
                                            (1 − γη )
                                                        
                        θc − 1             γη
             + 1−                Σ−1              (1 −  σ)   yt
                          θc       η
                                      (1 − γη )
                                              
                        θc − 1             γη
             + 1−                Σ−1                α̃t
                          θc       η
                                      (1 − γη )
                                                                                             
                  θc − 1      1 + εj θc                γη       1     1 + (θc − 1)ϕ    1 + εj θ c
             −                             + Σ−1                  −                                   vta
                    θc       θc (1 + εj )      η
                                                   (1 − γη ) θc ϕ          θc ϕ       θc (1 + εj )

and (26) above is the expression that appears in Equation (3) in the text of the paper, where we
use reduced form coefficients in the text to represent the solution in (26).




                                                        18
              APPENDIX A.2: TWO-SECTOR MODEL

1     Model
We now present the two-commodity-sectors extension of our baseline model.

1.1    Household
Household maximizes
                                                                     1+ 1   1+ 1
                                                                                  
                           ∞                                                   η
                                    C 1−σ                      N s,e
                                                                        η
                           X                  n     Ns
                        Et     β i  t+i − e−εt+i ϕn t+i 1 − ϕe t+i          1
                                                                                   
                           i=0
                                    1−σ             1+ η        1+           η


where Ct is consumption and the household supplies labor to the final good (Nts ) and the energy
sectors (Nts,e ). The nominal flow budget constraint faced by the household is

                         Pt Ct + Bt = Bt−1 Rt−1 + Wt Nts + Wte Nts,e + Tt

where Pt is aggregate price, Bt is nominal bond holdings with Rt−1 the interest rate, Wt the wage
in the final good sector, Wte the wage in the energy sector and Tt lump-sum profits from firms.
    The first order conditions are standard and given by
                                                  s η1           n   Wt
                                        ϕn Ctσ Nt         = e εt        ,
                                                                     Pt
                                                    s,e η1       Wte
                                        ϕe Ctσ Nt            =       ,
                                                                 Pt
                                                              
                                                           Pt
                                     Ct−σ          −σ
                                            = βEt Ct+1 Rt        .
                                                          Pt+1

1.2    Energy Sector
The energy sector’s total supply of the energy good (Σt ) is endogenous, with exogenous productivity
shock Ξt and the firm faces a decreasing returns to scale (determined by γ) production function
that uses labor                                       1−γ
                                         Σt = Ξt Ntd,e        .

    The energy sector firm maximizes
                                                1−γ
                                     St Ξt Ntd,e      − Wte Ntd,e

while taking productivity and wages as given, where St is the price of the energy good. The
first-order condition can we written in real terms as
                                                St           We
                                      (1 − γ)      Σt = Ntd,e t .
                                                Pt           Pt


                                                      1
The market clearing condition for labor is
                                             Nts,e = Ntd,e = Nte.
   The market clearing condition for the energy good remains the same as before, but as we discuss
below, there will be two sectors using it, ag and ind, and so we have
                                       Z 1             Z 1
                                 Σt =      Σag
                                             t (j)dj +     Σind
                                                            t (j)dj
                                            0                             0

where we use the notation for total supply.

1.3    Primary Commodity-Production Sector
There are two types of “commodity sectors/goods”, say agriculture and industrial, denoted by k.
Here, k = ag, ind. There are a continuum of primary commodity producing firms in each sector.
The energy good is used in the production of the primary commodity (Qkt (j)), with a decreasing
returns to scale (determined by αk,j ) production function
                                      Qkt (j) = Akt (j)Σkt (j)1−αk,j
where Akt (j) is the productivity shock. Let Ptk (j) be the price of the commodity j in sector k. Then
the firm’s problem is to maximize profits
                                 Ptk (j)Akt (j)Σkt (j)1−αk,j − St Σkt (j)
while taking productivity and prices as given. The first-order condition can be written in real terms
as
                                           k 
                                           Pt (j)                   St
                              (1 − αk,j )          Qkt (j) = Σkt (j) .
                                             Pt                     Pt

1.4    The Intermediate Commodity
This production function remains the same as before, as a CES aggregator, but now we have the two
sectors for commodity producers given above, where we allow different elasticity of substitutions
across varieties in a given sector θk,c
                                                Z       1             θk,c −1
                                                                                       θ θk,c−1
                                                                                         k,c
                                   Qk,C
                                    t      =                 Ytk (j)    θk,c
                                                                                 dj
                                                  0

which gives the standard price index
                                                Z       1                             1−θ1
                                                                                             k,c
                                   Ptk,C   =                 Ptk (j)1−θk,c dj
                                                     0

and the standard demand curve                                             !−θk,c
                                       Ytk (j)                  Ptk (j)
                                                     =                                   .
                                           Qk,C
                                            t                   Ptk,C
Market clearing is then given by
                                                Ytk (j) = Qkt (j).

                                                                2
1.5     The Final Goods Sector
The production function for the final good (Yt ) sector is similar to the baseline model , but now
with these two different aggregate of commodity goods serving as inputs
                                                              ag                              ag
                                                             αt                  αind      1−αt −αind
                                     Yt = At Ytag,C                Ytind,C
                                                                                  t
                                                                                        Ntd
                                                                                                  t




where At is the productivity shock and the share parameters αtk are exogenous. Let Pt be the price
of the final good. Then the firm’s problem is to maximize profits
                           ag                          ag
                          αt              αind      1−αt −αind
           Pt At Ytag,C         Ytind,C                               − Wt Ntd − Ptag,C Ytag,C − Ptind,C Ytind,C
                                           t
                                                 Ntd
                                                           t




while taking productivity and prices as given.
   The first order conditions are given by
                                                                             !                !
                                                               Ptk,C               Ytk,C
                                                   αtk   =
                                                                Pt                  Yt

                                                                                              Ntd
                                                                                                 
                                                                                 Wt
                                           1 − αtag − αtind =                                           .
                                                                                 Pt           Yt
Market clearing for good is
                                                                Yt = Ct
while for labor is
                                                           Ntd = Nts = Nt
and for the commodity input is
                                                             Qk,C
                                                              t   = Ytk,C .

1.6     Equilibrium
We now present the equilibrium conditions of the model.

1.6.1   Non-linear equilibrium conditions
The following non-linear optimality and market clearing conditions determine the equilibrium
                                                                     1            n   Wt
                                                         ϕn Ytσ Ntη = eεt
                                                                                      Pt
                                                                        
                                                                     Pt
                                                 Yt−σ = βEt Yt+1
                                                              −σ
                                                                 Rt
                                                                    Pt+1
                                                                     e η1         Wte
                                                          ϕe Ytσ Nt          =
                                                                                  Pt
                                                                   St         We
                                                   (1 − γ)            Σt = Nte t
                                                                   Pt         Pt
                                                                                  1−γ
                                                          Σt = Ξt (Nte )

                                                                         3
                                            Z     1                        Z    1
                                   Σt =               Σag
                                                       t (j)dj +                    Σind
                                                                                     t (j)dj
                                              0                             0

                                       Ytk (j) = Akt (j)Σkt (j)1−αk,j
                                              k 
                                               Pt (j)                     St
                                 (1 − αk,j )            Ytk (j) = Σkt (j)
                                                Pt                        Pt
                                                  Z       1             θk,c −1
                                                                                          θ θk,c−1
                                                                                            k,c
                                   Ytk,C    =                  Ytk (j)    θk,c
                                                                                    dj
                                                       0
                                                                               !−θk,c
                                            Ytk (j)               Ptk (j)
                                                           =
                                            Ytk,C                  Ptk,C
                                                  Z       1                              1−θ1
                                                                                               k,c
                                    Ptk,C   =                  Ptk (j)1−θk,c dj
                                                       0
                                                        ag                              ag
                                                       αt                 αind       1−αt −αind
                                Yt = At Ytag,C                  Ytind,C
                                                                           t                t
                                                                                    Nt
                                                                      !      !
                                                           Ptk,C       Ytk,C
                                        αtk       =
                                                            Pt           Yt
                                                                         
                                                                      Wt     Nt
                                    1 − αtag − αtind              =
                                                                      Pt      Yt
where the following are exogenous processes {At , αtk , Akt (j), εnt , Ξt }.

1.6.2   Log-linear approximation
We now consider a first-order approximation around a non-stochastic steady-state. We use the
notation with lower case variables denoting log deviations of real variables (except forΣkt (j) and
Σt , which are deviations from steady-state) and variables without a t subscript to denote steady-
state values of respective variables. We normalize, without loss of generality, equal production in
steady-state across commodity producers. The log-linear equilibrium is determined by
                                                   1
                                             σyt + nt = wt + εnt
                                                   η
                                                              
                                                           1
                                             yt = Et yt+1 − rt
                                                           σ
                                                  1
                                             σyt + net = wte + εet
                                                  η
                                                           Σt
                                                st +          = net + wte
                                                           Σ
                                             Σt
                                                = Ξt + (1 − γ) net
                                             Σ


                                                                  4
                                            Z    1                 Z    1
                                     Σt =            Σag
                                                      t (j)dj +             Σind
                                                                             t (j)dj
                                             0                      0

                                                                (1 − αk,j ) k
                                      ytk (j) = akt (j) +                  Σt (j)
                                                                    Σkj
                                                            1 k
                                       pkt (j) = st +          Σ (j) − ytk (j)
                                                           Σkj t
                                                           Z 1
                                                 ytk,c   =     ytk (j)dj
                                                            0
                                                            1                       
                                     pkt (j) = pk,c
                                                t −                ytk (j) − ytk,c
                                                           θk,c

                      yt    = at + αag ytag,c + αind ytind,c + (1 − αag − αind )nt
                                     ag
                              +ϕag           ind ind
                                 α α̃t + ϕα α̃t

                                             pk,c
                                              t   = yt − ytk,c + α̃tk
                                                αag      ag     αind
                               wt = yt − nt −         α̃t   −         α̃ind
                                              1 − αag         1 − αind t
                                                                         
where note that α̃tk is log-deviation of αtk and ϕkα ≡ α ln Y k,C − ln N .

1.6.3   Solution
We now present the solution of the model.

Primary commodity sector We start with the (two) primary commodity sectors. We have,
from the production function and substitution of the energy good input, the following

                                                 (1 − αk,j ) k
                           ytk (j)   = akt (j) +            Σt (j)
                                                     Σkj
                                     = akt (j) + (1 − αk,j ) pkt (j) − st + ytk (j)
                                                                                   


which gives, after defining                           
                                                αk,j
                                                         ≡ εk,j
                                              1 − αk,j
                                                
                               ytk (j) = 1 + ε−1     k      −1   k
                                                                            
                                              k,j at (j) + εk,j pt (j) − st                     (1)

(1) above gives the supply curve of commodity j. Next, plug in the relative demand expression
                                                            1                       
                                     pkt (j) = pk,c
                                                t −                ytk (j) − ytk,c
                                                           θk,c




                                                             5
to (1) in order to eliminate the commodity price pkt (j), which gives, after defining a re-scaled
productivity shock for commodity j as
                                                                       −1 
                                                          1                          
                                              1+                             1 + ε−1   k        k
                                                                                  k,j at (j) ≡ υt (j)
                                                      εk,j θk,c

the solution as
                                                                                  −1                                                     
                                                                    1                                                     1
                    ytk (j)   =    υtk (j)    + 1+                                          ε−1
                                                                                             k,j       pk,c
                                                                                                        t     +               ytk,c   − st        .              (2)
                                                                εk,j θk,c                                             θk,c

   To pin down the aggregate supply of commodities for each sector, lets integrate (2) over all j,
which gives
                        Z     1                             Z       1                          −1
                                                                                        1
            ytk,c   =             υtk (j)dj + pk,c
                                               t                         1+                             ε−1
                                                                                                         k,j dj +
                          0                                     0                   εk,j θk,c
                                          Z   1                                 −1                      Z       1                         −1
                            1                                1                                                                   1
                                  ytk,c               1+                                 ε−1
                                                                                          k,j dj   − st                   1+                          ε−1
                                                                                                                                                       k,j dj.
                        θk,c              0              εk,j θk,c                                            0              εk,j θk,c

Define                                                              Z       1
                                                                                 υtk (j)dj ≡ υtk
                                                                        0
                                                                        Z    1
                                                            k                                       −1
                                                        ϕ ≡                      (1 + εk,j θk,c )         dj
                                                                         0
and rewrite as                                                           
                                                        1           1                      1
                                      pk,c
                                       t   =                           − 1  ytk,c + st − k    υk .                                                               (3)
                                                      θk,c          ϕk                  ϕ θk,c t
   Next, we have the aggregate demand for commodity of a sector given by

                                                                pk,c
                                                                 t   = yt − ytk,c + α̃tk

which we use with (3) to derive the production of the intermediate commodity bundle, which is


                 θk,c ϕk                   1                   θk,c ϕk               θk,c ϕk
  ytk,c =                    y t +                  υt
                                                      k
                                                        −                  st +                 α̃k .                                                            (4)
            1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk t

For future reference, lets also derive the solution for pk,c
                                                         t . We can use the aggregate demand for the
commodity sector to write, after plugging in for (4)


                 1 − ϕk                   1                   θk,c ϕk               1 − ϕk
   pk,c
    t   =                    yt −                  υt
                                                     k
                                                       +                  st +                 α̃k                                                               (5)
            1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk t

with (5) above giving the solution for pk,c
                                        t .




                                                                                     6
Energy sector price Now lets move to the energy sector. We can use market clearing condition
to pin down the (aggregate) price of the energy sector st . Using the production function and (2)
we get
                                                           −1                     
         k       (1 − αk,j ) k        k               1           −1   k,c  1 k,c
        at (j) +            Σt (j) = υt (j) + 1 +                εk,j pt +     y − st
                     Σkj                          εk,j θk,c                θk,c t

which can be written as
                                                      !−1             !−1
                                      1 − αk,j               1 − αk,j
               Σkt (j)      =                          −     υtk (j)       akt (j) +
                                         Σkj                    Σkj
                                               !−1              −1                          
                                      1 − αk,j             1            −1      k,c   1 k,c
                                                    1+                 εk,j pt +         y − st
                                         Σkj           εk,j θk,c                     θk,c t

Define
                                                                     1 − αk,j
                                                                              ≡ ςk,j
                                                                        Σkj
and get
                                                                                           −1                     
                        −1 k              −1 k                −1                    1             −1   k,c  1 k,c
         Σkt (j)   =   ςk,j υt (j)   −   ςk,j at (j)    +    ςk,j         1+                     εk,j pt +     y − st    .                   (6)
                                                                                εk,j θk,c                  θk,c t
Then we use (6) in the market clearing condition to get a solution for st
                "Z                                                                                     −1        #
                     1                 Z 1                                    Z 1      
         X                                                       1                               1
Σt =                    −1 k
                       ςk,j υt (j)dj −      −1 k
                                           ςk,j at (j)dj + pk,c
                                                            t +     y k,c − st       −1
                                                                                    ςk,j  1+               ε−1
                                                                                                            k,j dj .
                   0                    0                       θk,c t           0           εk,j θk,c
           k=ag,ind

Lets define,                                                 Z     1
                                                                          −1 k
                                                                         ςk,j υt (j)dj ≡ υ̃tk
                                                               0
                                                             Z       1
                                                                          −1 k
                                                                         ςk,j at (j)dj ≡ ãkt
                                                                 0
                                            Z     1                                  −1
                                                       −1                     1
                                                      ςk,j    1+                            ε−1         k
                                                                                             k,j dj ≡ ϕ̃ .
                                              0                           εk,j θk,c
                                                  1−α
For future reference, note that if Σk,jk,j ≡ ςk,j = 1, then υ̃tk = υtk and ϕ̃k = θk,c ϕk .
   Then we can write the solution st as
                     −1 X                           −1 X
st = ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind                υ̃tk − ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind              ãkt                                                                       (7)
                                 k=ag,ind                                              k=ag,ind
                                −1                                      −1     X                                 −1     X               1 k,c
          − ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind              Σt + ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind                                   ϕ̃k pk,c
                                                                                               t + ϕ̃
                                                                                                      ag
                                                                                                         + ϕ̃ind                    ϕ̃k       y
                                                                                                                                          θk,c t
                                                                               k=ag,ind                                  k=ag,ind

where (7) gives the solution for st as a function of the total supply in the energy sector, the
two averages over commodity specific productivity shocks over sectors, and pk,c
                                                                            t   and ytk,c . We have

                                                                                7
expressions for pk,c
                 t   and ytk,c in (5) and (4), which we can later combine for solutions of all aggregate
variables as a function of various aggregate shocks and total supply in the energy sector.
   For future, note the following in terms of the firm/supply side FOC, we can derive
                                                                           −1
              Σt                     1                       (1 − γ) 1 + η1
              Σ
                 =                          −1  Ξt +                    −1  [st − σyt ]                                        (8)
                           1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η1              1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η1

                                                                                     Σt
which we will use later for equating demand and supply of                            Σ .


Final good sector We now use the equilibrium conditions of the final good sector to determine
labor supply and output, which are given by
                                                    αag                       αind
                             (1 − σ)           ag             ind            1
                        nt =        yt − 1−α  α̃tag − 1−α  α̃tind +        εnt
                                  1             1              1               1
                               1+ η         1+ η           1+ η             1+ η

                               
          1          (1  − σ)                             1                            1                         αag
                   −          yt          =                      εnt +                         at +                    y ag,c
                                                                                                           (1 − αag − αind ) t
                                                    
  (1 − αag − αind )    1 + η1                           1+      1             (1 − αag − αind )
                                                                η
                                                                                                                         ag
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                α
                                                      αind         ind,c             ϕag             ag
                                              +       ag     ind
                                                                 yt      + 
                                                                                     ag
                                                                                        α
                                                                                           ind
                                                                                               − 1−α   α̃tag
                                                (1 − α − α )                  (1 − α − α )        1 + η1
                                                                                 
                                                         ind              αind
                                                        ϕα               1−α ind
                                              +                     −           α̃tind
                                                  (1 − αag − αind )      1+   1
                                                                                                η


First, we can plug in the solution for yc,t from (4) to eliminate it. Moreover, we can later in turn
write all aggregate variables as a function of aggregate shocks and averages of commodity specific
productivity shocks. Lets define
                                                              
                                          1            (1 − σ) 
                                                   −        ≡ χ.
                                  (1 − αag − αind )     1+ 1                     η

Then, we have
                                                                                                                         
                        αag                                                           αind
                       1−αag                 ϕag             α̃tag − χ−1          1−αind                 ϕind
yt   = −χ−1                   −           ag
                                               α
                                                                                               −            α               α̃tind     (9)
                       1+   1        (1 −   α −    αind )                            1+    1        (1 −   αag −   αind )
                            η                                                              η

              χ−1                      χ−1                    αag                        αind
        +              εnt +                 at + χ−1               ytag,c + χ−1                  y ind,c .
              1+   1                   ag  ind
                                 (1 − α − α )                 ag  ind
                                                        (1 − α − α )               (1 − αag − αind ) t
                   η

which gives the expression for final output.


                                                                     8
Aggregate equilibrium We then have the aggregate equilibrium given by the following four
conditions (4), (5), (7), and (9) that give the solution for {yt , ytk,c , st , pk,c
                                                                                 t }, which are reproduced
here

                      θk,c ϕk                  1                   θk,c ϕk               θk,c ϕk
      ytk,c =                     yt +                  υt
                                                          k
                                                            −                  st +                 α̃k
                 1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk t


                     1 − ϕk                    1                  θk,c ϕk               1 − ϕk
      pk,c
       t   =                     y t −                 υ k
                                                           +                  st +                 α̃k
                1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk t    1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk t

                                 −1      X                                −1     X
 st    =        ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind                      υ̃tk − ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind                       ãkt
                                       k=ag,ind                                  k=ag,ind
                             −1                   −1                 X                                           −1     X               1
       −        ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind     Σt + ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind                               ϕ̃k pk,c
                                                                                      t + ϕ̃
                                                                                            ag
                                                                                               + ϕ̃ind                              ϕ̃k          ytk,c
                                                                                                                                          θk,c
                                                                     k=ag,ind                                            k=ag,ind


                                                                                                                                 
                             αag                                                         αind
                            1−αag                 ϕag             α̃tag − χ−1        1−αind                      ϕind
yt    = −χ−1                       −           ag
                                                    α
                                                                                                       −            α               α̃tind
                            1+   1        (1 −   α −    αind )                          1+         1        (1 −   αag −   αind )
                                 η                                                                 η

                  χ−1                       χ−1                    αag                        αind
           +                εnt +                 at + χ−1               ytag,c + χ−1                  y ind,c
                 1+     1                   ag  ind
                                      (1 − α − α )                 ag  ind
                                                             (1 − α − α )               (1 − αag − αind ) t
                        η

and we can write them as a function of shocks. Note that {at , εnt } only show up in the expression
for yt , as given in (9), while {Σt } only shows up in the expression for st as given in (7). Also from
here on, lets define a parameter that is the sum across sectors as follows
                                                             −1
                                         ϕ̃−1 ≡ ϕ̃ag + ϕ̃ind     .

   At this point, lets express the aggregate energy price st as a function of shocks and yt . So lets
replace for pk,c    1  k,c
             t + θk,c yt   to get
                                                                                                           
                                                    X                        X
                            st   =     Λ ϕ̃−1               υ̃tk − ϕ̃−1               ãkt − ϕ̃−1 Σt  + yt                                      (10)
                                                  k=ag,ind                 k=ag,ind
                                                                                        
                                                    X        θk,c − 1             1
                                       −Λϕ̃−1            ϕ̃k                                υtk
                                                               θk,c       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                                               k=ag,ind
                                                 X                 1
                                                                               
                                            −1             k
                                       +Λϕ̃              ϕ̃                     α̃tk
                                                             1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                                                  k=ag,ind

where we define
                                                                            ϕ̃
                                                 Λ ≡                                              
                                                          P                       ϕ̃k
                                                               k=ag,ind      1+(θk,c −1)ϕk


                                                                       9
This solution for st in (10) can be used below in discussing the direct and indirect determinants of
commodity supply and demand.
   Finally, we can also write down the solution for yt by plugging in for ytk,c and st . That is, after
manipulations and plugging in, get
                                                                                             
                                  αk                                 k       k        −1 k
                                                                                            
                    X           1−α  k           1                  α   θk,c ϕ  − ΦΛ ϕ̃  ϕ̃
  yt = −χ−1                         −                     ϕkα −                            α̃tk (11)
                                1 +  1    (1 − αag − αind )             1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                  k=ag,ind           η

                    χ−1                     χ−1
              +             εnt +                     at
                   1+   1             (1 − αag − αind )
                        η
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                 θk,c −1
                                                                                                                 
                        χ   −1                  X                αk + ΦΛϕ̃−1 ϕ̃k                  θk,c
              +                                                                                               υtk 
                  (1 − αag − αind )                                       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                                              k=ag,ind
                                                                                                    
                   χ−1 ΦΛϕ̃−1  X                                             X
              −                                              υ̃tk −                      ãkt − Σt 
                (1 − αag − αind )
                                               k=ag,ind                    k=ag,ind

where we define
                                                                                         θk,c ϕk
                                                             X                                                  
                                          Φ ≡                              αk                                        .
                                                                                    1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                                                       k=ag,ind

Here, (11) above gives a solution for yt as a function of all aggregate shocks and the supply of
energy good.
   Next, lets impose, without loss of generality, the normalization on steady-state that
                                                                 1 − αk,j
                                                                          ≡ ςk,j = 1
                                                                    Σkj

Then we have
       Z 1                              Z                    1                       Z   1                       −1 
            −1 k                                                                                        1                         
           ςk,j υt (j)dj ≡ υ̃tk = υtk =                          υtk (j)dj =                  1+                          1 + ε−1   k
                                                                                                                               k,j at (j)dj
          0                                              0                           0              εk,j θk,c
                                                             Z       1
                                                                          −1 k
                                                                         ςk,j at (j)dj ≡ ãkt
                                                                 0

                                  Z       1                                  −1
                                               −1                1
                                              ςk,j  1+                               ε−1         k
                                                                                      k,j dj ≡ ϕ̃ = θk,c ϕ
                                                                                                          k
                                      0                      εk,j θk,c

                                                             X                           X
                                                ϕ̃ =                        ϕ̃k =                  θk,c ϕk
                                                       k=ag,ind                      k=ag,ind


                                                     ϕ̃                                                         ϕ̃
                      Λ      ≡                                                  =P                                            .
                                  P                           ϕ̃k                                                   θk,c ϕk
                                       k=ag,ind          1+(θk,c −1)ϕk                           k=ag,ind        1+(θk,c −1)ϕk


                                                                                10
So we can further simplify (11) as
                                                                                                                              
                     −1                           k              ag         ind                               k      −1
                                                                                                                           
                 χ                 X
                                      α            (1 − α − α )                                           α − ΦΛϕ̃
yt   = −                                                           − ϕkα − θk,c ϕk                                            α̃tk 
           (1 − αag − αind )              1 − αk            1+ η1                                         1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                            k=ag,ind
                                                             
                χ−1           (1 −  α ag
                                         −  α ind
                                                  )
        +                                         εnt + at 
          (1 − αag − αind )          1 + η1
                χ−1           X  αk − ΦΛϕ̃−1  
        +                                                        υtk
          (1 − αag − αind )              1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                            k=ag,ind
                                                           
                 −1
                χ                        X
        +                   ΦΛϕ̃−1              ãkt + Σt 
          (1 − αag − αind )
                                         k=ag,ind


where
                                                                           θk,c ϕk
                                                                                       
                                                               αk
                                              P
                                               k=ag,ind                 1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
                                   ΦΛϕ̃−1 =                                         .
                                              P                        θk,c ϕk
                                                      k=ag,ind      1+(θk,c −1)ϕk

We have
                                                                                 −1
                          −1
                   χ                      1              (1 − σ) 
                               =                   −            (1 − αag − αind )−1
             (1 − αag − αind )    (1 − αag − αind )       1+ η1

                                                      
                                                1 + η1
                               =                                   .
                                  1 + η1 − (1 − σ) (1 − αag − αind )

Then we can write

                                                                                                         
                                                                 X
                      = ϕy at + κn εnt + κΣ Σt +                           κkv υtk + κã ãkt − κkα α̃t 
                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                      
                yt                                                                                                     (12)
                                                            k=ag,ind




                                                          11
where.
                                               
                                            1
                                       1+   η
   ϕy    ≡               
                      1
                 1+   η       − (1 − σ) (1 − αag − αind )
             (1 − αag − αind )
   κn    ≡               
                   1 + η1
                                                                        0
                                                                                
                               P                    k0          θk0 ,c ϕk
                                  k0 =ag,ind    α            1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
   κã   ≡ ΦΛϕ̃−1 =
                                                            θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                 P                                          
                                       k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                        0
                                                                                
                               P              k      0          θk0 ,c ϕk
                                 k0 =ag,ind α                1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
   κΣ    ≡ ΦΛϕ̃−1 =
                                                            θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                 P                                          
                                       k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                            θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                        k      k0
                                                                                     P
                                                                                       k0 =ag,ind       α −α             1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                   αk − ΦΛϕ̃−1
                                                                              
                                                                   1
   κkv   ≡                                      =
                 1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk                        1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk                                       θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                            P                                    
                                                                                                k0 =ag,ind   1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                             
                 k         ag      ind
               α    (1 − α    −  α     )
   κkα                                   − ϕkα − θk,c ϕk κkv  .
                                                            
         =                     
             1 − αk       1 + η1

Comovement in Commodity Prices First, lets write out the supply curve for commodity j,
which can be derived from (1) and reproduced here
                                            
                           ytk (j) = 1 + ε−1   k        −1   k
                                                                        
                                          k,j at (j) + εk,j pt (j) − st


and where we will use the definition
                                           −1 
                                      1                   
                             1+                   1 + ε−1   k        k
                                                       k,j at (j) ≡ υt (j).
                                  εk,j θk,c

That is, write (1) as
                                                                                 (1 + εk,j θk,c ) k
                                       pkt (j) = εk,j ytk (j) + st −                             υt (j)                                     (13)
                                                                                      θk,c
where st appears.
   Next, we can write out the demand curve for commodity j from the relative demand equation
and final good input share equation, as well as the solution for ytk,c as given in (4). That is, we get
                                                                                       
        k            1 k                   1                 θk,c − 1              1
       pt (j) = −       y (j) +                       yt −                                    υtk (14)
                    θk,c t         1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk            θk,c        1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                        (θk,c − 1) ϕk
                                                               
                                                        1
                  +                      st +                       α̃tk
                      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk          1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk


                                                                        12
where there is a dependence not just on st , but now also on yt directly.
  Lets simplify the above further by replacing the solution forst . Start with the (13), to get

                             (1 + εk,j θk,c ) k
    pkt (j) = εk,j ytk (j) −                 υt (j)                                                                                  (15)
                                  θk,c
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                             
                              1                   X                                1                        X
           +P                                                                                  υtk −              ãkt − Σt  + yt
                                      k
                                   θk,c ϕ                               1 + (θk,c −    1)ϕk
                 k=ag,ind       1+(θk,c −1)ϕk         k=ag,ind                                            k=ag,ind

                                                                         θk,c ϕk
                                                                                             
                                1                      X
           +P                                                                       α̃k .
                                                                    1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk t
                                                
                                   θk,cϕk
                 k=ag,ind       1+(θk,c −1)ϕk        k=ag,ind


Next, do the same manipulations for (14), to get
                                                                       
                   1 k                    θk,c − 1              1
   pkt (j) = −        yt (j) + yt −                                         υtk                              (16)
                 θk,c                        θk,c       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                         (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                                                        
                                                                               
                        1+(θk,c −1)ϕ k              X                1                    X
           + P                                                                 υtk −          ãkt − Σt 
                                  θk,c ϕk                    1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                  k=ag,ind 1+(θk,c −1)ϕk          k=ag,ind                              k=ag,ind
                                   k
                                      
                         (θk,c −1)ϕ
                                                   X            θk,c ϕk
                                                                                 
                        1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
           + P                                                                  α̃tk
                                  θk,c ϕk                    1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                  k=ag,ind 1+(θk,c −1)ϕk         k=ag,ind
                                     
                          1
           +                            α̃tk .
                 1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
These intermediate derivations for the commodity demand and supply are useful for intuition. We
can later derive the final formulations after we determine the solution for Σt , the level of energy
good produced in this economy.

Commodity Prices Next, we can solve for commodity prices, by combining (15) and (16) above
                                                                                           
                                                              θk,c − 1            1
(1 + εk,j θk,c ) pkt (j) = (1 + εk,j θk,c ) yt − εk,j θk,c                                       υtk           (17)
                                                                θk,c      1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                                              (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                                                                         
                            1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ    k,c −1)ϕk        X    
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                             X       0
                         +P                                                                        υtk −        ãkt − Σt 
                                               θk0 ,c ϕk0                            0 ,c − 1)ϕk
                                                                                                 0
                                         
                                                                 0
                                                                            1 + (θ k                        0
                                k0 =ag,ind   1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0              k =ag,ind                                            k =ag,ind

                                                  (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                                 "                           !            #
                       1 + εk,j θk,c             1+(θk,c −1)ϕk                 X            θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                        0
                      +P                                                                                           α̃tk
                                                θk0 ,c ϕk0                             1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                                   
                                k0 =ag,ind   1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0           k=ag,ind
                                                                
                                            1
                      + εk,j θk,c                                       α̃tk
                                   1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                        (1 + εk,j θk,c ) k
                      −                 υt (j)
                             θk,c

                                                                    13
where we have two averages of commodity producer productivity that appear in (17). We have
defined them as                                  −1 
                                            1                    
                         υtk (j) = 1 +                   1 + ε−1   k
                                                              k,j at (j)
                                        εk,j θk,c
                                             Z 1
                                      υtk =       υtk (j)dj
                                                        0
                                                       Z    1
                                            ãkt =              akt (j)dj
                                                        0
Lets assume then that there is a common and idiosyncratic component to the commodity producer
productivity at (j) (with the idiosyncratic components orthogonal across commodity producers)

                                           akt (j) = ak,a
                                                      t   + ak,j
                                                             t
                                                      −1                   
which also means, multiplying by 1 +           1
                                           εk,j θk,c              1 + ε−1
                                                                       k,j        on both sides

                                           υtk (j) = vtk,a + υtk,j

where we define
                                                                −1 
                                                     1                           
                          υtk,j    ≡       1+                            1 + ε−1   k,j
                                                                              k,j at
                                                 εk,j θk,c
                                                                −1 
                                                  1                              
                          vtk,a    ≡       1+                            1 + ε−1   k,a
                                                                              k,j at .
                                              εk,j θk,c

Then, this implies that
                                       Z   1
                            ãkt   ≡           akt (j)dj = ak,a
                                                            t
                                       0
                                       Z   1
                            υtk    ≡           υtk (j)dj = vtk,a
                                       0
                                                                −1 
                                                  1                                 
                          vtk,a    ≡       1+                               1 + ε−1   k,a
                                                                                 k,j at
                                              εk,j θk,c
                                                                −1 
                                                     1                              
                          υtk,j    ≡       1+                               1 + ε−1   k,j
                                                                                 k,j at
                                                 εk,j θk,c




                                                           14
Now lets substitute these in (17) above to get
                                                  (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                               
                                  1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ  k,c −1)ϕ
                                                              k         1 k,j
                               −1
pkt (j) = yt − (1 + εk,j θk,c ) P                                Σt −     υ                                             (18)
                                                   θk0 ,c ϕk0          θk,c t
                                               
                                          k0 =ag,ind      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                                
                           −1  θk,c − 1             εk,j θk,c       (1 + εk,j θk,c )
      − (1 + εk,j θk,c )                                          +                    vtk,a
                                 θk,c        1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk            θk,c
                                               
                        −1        εk,j θk,c
      + (1 + εk,j θk,c )                             α̃tk
                             1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk
                                            (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                           
                           1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ   k,c −1)ϕ
                                                          k     X               1             1 + εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                                                                                                                            
                        −1                                                                                             k0 ,a
      + (1 + εk,j θk,c ) P                                                                   −                        vt
                                              θk0 ,c ϕk0                1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                           
                                                              0
                                                                                               (1 + εk0 ,j ) θk0 ,c
                                    k0 =ag,ind    1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0          k =ag,ind
                                                                   k
                                                                      
                                                       (θk,c −1)ϕ                        "                           #
                                1 + εk,j θk,c         1+(θk,c −1)ϕk                               θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                   0
                         −1
                                                                              X
      + (1 + εk,j θk,c )                                                                                        α̃k .
                                                     θk0 ,c ϕk0                              1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0 t
                                P                                      
                                    k0 =ag,ind    1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0          k0 =ag,ind

                          
                    αk,j
Here, note that 1−α    k,j
                             ≡ εk,j where 1 − αk,j is the “energy-share” of each commodity producer.
    Given the endogenous determination of Σt however, we need to do further manipulations to
write this solution in terms of yt and aggregate shocks. Moreover, we need to further manipulate
to find a solution for the energy price st . For this purpose, lets first simplify the current solution
for st given in (10) to

                       1                  X                   1
                                                                             
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                −1  0 
st = P                                                                     −  1 +                     1 + ε −1
                                                                                                            k0 ,j      vtk ,a
                           θk0 ,c ϕk0                        0 ,c − 1)ϕk
                                                                         0
                                     
                                        0
                                                    1 + (θ k                      ε k 0 ,j θk 0 ,c
            k0 =ag,ind     1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0       k =ag,ind

                                1
         −P                                        Σt + yt
                                  θk0 ,c ϕk0
                           
              k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                   "                     0
                                                                                                   !            #
                                1                        X                   θk0 ,c ϕk                      0
         +P                                                                                            α̃tk
                                  θk0 ,c ϕk0                            1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                 
              k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0       k0 =ag,ind


Next, we have from the firm/supply side of the energy sector given in (8)
                                                                     −1
                                                                    1
               Σt              1                      (1 − γ)   1 + η
               Σ
                  =                  −1  Ξt +                      −1  [st − σyt ]
                                     1                                 1
                     1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η              1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η

Lets use the two expressions above to solve for Σt as a function of yt and aggregate shocks We




                                                                       15
substitute for and get
                         1
Σ−1 Σt   =                     −1  Ξt
                               1
               1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η
                                                  −1
                               (1−γ)(1+ η1 )
                                                     −1
                                                           
                              1−(1−γ)(    1+ η1   )
                                                                                                                                                                −1             
                                                                       X                       1                                         1                                      0
              +P                                                                                            − 1+                                        1 + ε−1
                                                                                                                                                             k0 ,j           vtk ,a
                                           θk0 ,c ϕk0                                 1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                              
                                                                                                                                   εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                    k0 =ag,ind          1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0            k0 =ag,ind
                                                  −1
                               (1−γ)(1+ η1 )                           −1
                                                                      1
                                                        (1 − γ)   1 +
                                                     −1
                                                           
                      1−(1−γ)(    )       1+ η1                       η
              −P                              Σt +                     −1  yt
                               θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                  
                 k0 =ag,ind 1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0          1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η1
                                                  −1
                               (1−γ)(1+ η1 )
                                                     −1
                                                                                "                 0
                                                                                                            !              #
                              1−(1−γ)(1+ η1 )                          X                   θk0 ,c ϕk                   0
              +P                                                                                                α̃tk
                                           θk0 ,c ϕk0                                 1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                              
                    k0 =ag,ind          1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0            k0 =ag,ind
                                 −1
                   (1 − γ) 1 + η1
              +                   −1  (−σyt )
                 1 − (1 − γ) 1 + η1

For ease of notation, we define
                                                                             −1
                                                                            1
                                                           γη ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +
                                                                            η
where note that γη = 0 when γ = 1, the case where energy good supply is exogenous. Then,
                                  
                            γη
 −1                      (1−γη )                                         1             γη
Σ + P                                                   Σt =                 Ξt +           ((1 − σ) yt )                                              (19)
                                                         
                                  θk0 ,c ϕk0                          (1 − γη )      (1 − γη )
                          
             k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                    γη                                                                                                                          −1             
                                  (1−γη )
                                                                     X                        1                                          1                                      0
             +P                                                                                             − 1+                                        1 + ε−1
                                                                                                                                                             k0 ,j           vtk ,a
                                        θk0 ,c ϕk0                                   1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                              
                                                                                                                                   εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                  k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0               k0 =ag,ind
                                    γη                                                             0
                                                                                                            !            !
                                  (1−γη )
                                                                     X                     θk0 ,c ϕk                 0
             +P                                                                                                 α̃tk           .
                                          θk0 ,c ϕk0                                  1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                              
                  k0 =ag,ind           1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0            k0 =ag,ind


Here, (19) is important so that we can plug this back into the earlier solution for commodity prices.
In particular, for ease of notation lets define
                                                  (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                               
                                  1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ  k,c −1)ϕk
                                                                 ≡ Σkj,c
                                                   θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                  P            
                                                      k0 =ag,ind      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0




                                                                          16
and lets define the following for use in (19)
                                                                                                         
                                                                                   γη
                                                                                 (1−γη )
                                        Ση ≡ Σ−1 + P
                                                                                                         
                                                                                        θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                                        
                                                                    k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0


where note that Ση = Σ−1 when γ = 1 as then γη = 0. Then, plugging in (19) gives
                                                          
                              −1            γη                     1 k,j
pkt (j) = 1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σkj,c Σ−1           (1 − σ)   yt −     υ                                                                                     (20)
                                      η
                                         (1 − γη )                θk,c t
                          −1
       (1 + εk,j θk,c )        Σkj,c Σ−1
                                      η
   −                                        Ξt
              (1 − γη )
                                        εk,j θk,c (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                                          
                      −1                                                             γ
     (1 + εk,j θk,c )      1+             1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                − Σkj,c Σ−1
                                                                         η
                                                                               η
                                                                            (1−γη )               X         
                                                                                                                                     1                   1 + εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                            
   +                                                                                                                                                  −                            vtk ,a
                                                    θk0 ,c ϕk0                                                   1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                                 
                       P                                                                                                                                (1 + εk0 ,j ) θk0 ,c
                                k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0                              k0 =ag,ind

                                        εk,j θk,c (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                                          
                          −1                                                         γ
                                                                − Σkj,c Σ−1    η
                                                                                                            "                                         !            #
       (1 + εk,j θk,c )            1+     1+(θk,c −1)ϕk                  η  (1−γη )               X                   θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                               0
   +                                                                                                                                                      α̃tk
                                                    θk0 ,c ϕk0                                                   1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                           P                                     
                                k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0                              k0 =ag,ind
                                                                          
                          −1θk,c − 1          εk,j θk,c       (1 + εk,j θk,c )
   − (1 + εk,j θk,c )                                       +                    vtk,a
                              θk,c       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk          θk,c
                                           
                     −1        εk,j θk,c
   + (1 + εk,j θk,c )                         α̃tk
                          1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk

where (20) now gives a version of the solution for commodity prices.

Aggregate output solution in terms of shocks We can also similarly give the final solution
for aggregate output. Currently, we have (12), where we now substitute in for the solution to Σt ,
to get
                                                                               
                                         X  0 k0 ,a             0     0    0
                                                                              
       yt   =     Ω−1 ϕy at + κn εnt +         κkv υt + κã ãkt − κkα α̃tk                (21)
                                                            k0 =ag,ind
                                                                   
                                                         1
               +      Ω−1 Σ−1 ϕy κΣ                            Ξt
                           η
                                                     (1 − γη )
                                                       γ
                                    Σ−1          η
                                        ϕy κΣ (1−γ η)
                                                                          X          
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                         vtk ,a
                 −1                  η
            +Ω                                       k0
                                                                                          1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                                   
                          P                    θk0 ,c ϕ
                               k0 =ag,ind  1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0             k0 =ag,ind
                                                 γη
                                    Σ−1 ϕy κΣ (1−γ   η)
                                                                          X          
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                   −1        0
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                          ε−1                vtk ,a
                 −1                  η
            −Ω                                                                         1+                            1+    k0 ,j
                                              θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                   
                          P                                                                    εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                               k0 =ag,ind 1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0              k0 =ag,ind

                                     −1         γη                                   "                      0
                                                                                                                     !               #
                                    Ση ϕy κΣ (1−γ   η)
                                                                          X                    θk0 ,c ϕk                         0
            +Ω−1                                                                                                          α̃tk
                                                   θk0 ,c ϕk0                             1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                          P                                        
                               k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0        k0 =ag,ind



                                                                          17
where
                                                         γη
                                     Ω = 1 − Σ−1 ϕy κΣ          (1 − σ)
                                              η
                                                      (1 − γη )
which means that the coefficients just for at , εnt are
                                   −1 
                                   Ω ϕy at , Ω−1 ϕy κn εnt
                                                              

respectively. Here, note that we have defined
                                                                                
                                                                             1
                                                                        1+   η
                               ϕy    ≡                     
                                                        1
                                                 1+     η       − (1 − σ) (1 − αag − αind )
                                             (1 − αag − αind )
                               κn    ≡                     
                                                     1 + η1
                                                                                0
                                                                                    
                                             P                k0      θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                 0
                                                k =ag,ind   α      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk 0

                             κΣ      ≡                                    k0
                                                                                   .
                                               P                           θk0 ,c ϕ
                                                    k0 =ag,ind          1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0

   This solution given in (21), above for aggregate output is the two-sector counterpart to the
version that appears in the text in Equation (1). Then as in the text, we can define,
                                                                         
                                   X  0 k0 ,a             0     0    0
                                                                        
 yt = ytnc (at , εnt ) + Ω−1 ϕy          κkv υt + κã ãkt − κkα α̃tk                    (22)
                                     k0 =ag,ind
                                                                   
                          −1    −1                    1
            +           Ω      Ση ϕy κΣ                     Ξt
                                                  (1 − γη )
                                                    γ
                                Σ−1          η
                                    ϕy κΣ (1−γ η)
                                                                          X          
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                             vtk ,a
              −1                 η
          +Ω                                     k0
                                                                                          1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                                   
                        P                  θk0 ,c ϕ
                            k0 =ag,ind 1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0                 k0 =ag,ind
                                             γη
                                Σ−1 ϕy κΣ (1−γ   η)
                                                                          X          
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                    −1      0
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                        1 + ε−1             vtk ,a
                                 η
          −Ω−1                                                                         1+                                    k0 ,j
                                           θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                   
                        P                                                                         εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                            k0 =ag,ind 1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0                 k0 =ag,ind
                                             γη
                                Σ−1
                                                                                     "                         0
                                                                                                                         !            #
                                 η
                                    ϕy κΣ (1−γ   η)
                                                                          X                    θk0 ,c ϕk                          0
          +Ω  −1
                                                                                                                             α̃tk
                                                θk0 ,c ϕk0                                1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                        P                                          
                            k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0           k0 =ag,ind

where we have defined
                                     ytnc (at , εnt ) = Ω−1 ϕy (at + κn εnt ) .                                                                    (23)
This expression given in (22) above for aggregate output and                             ytnc   (at , εnt )   is the two-sector counter-
part to the version that appears in the text of the paper.

Solution for commodity prices Consider the solution for commodity prices above in (20),
where below we sign the coefficient only on aggregate output
                                                                          
                                                −1 k   −1    γη
                   pt (j) = 1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σj,c Ση            (1 − σ) yt
                                                          (1 − γη )

                                                                   18
where we have
                                                                    (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                                 
                                                    1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ  k,c −1)ϕk
                                       Σkj,c       ≡P
                                                                     θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                 
                                                                k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                            
                                                                 αk,j
                                        εk,j ≡
                                                               1 − αk,j
                                                           Z    1
                                                                                           −1
                                           ϕk ≡                     (1 + εk,j θk,c )               dj
                                                            0
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                       γη
                                                                                     (1−γη )
                               Ση ≡ Σ−1 + P
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                            θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                                                
                                                                        k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0


                                               Z       1                                 Z         1
                               Σ       =                   (1 − αind,j ) dj +                          (1 − αag,j ) dj
                                                   0                                           0
                                                                             −1
                                                     1
                            γη         ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +
                                                     η

and 0 ≤ γ < 1; 0 ≤ αk,j < 1; η > 0; θk,c > 1.Given this, we have
                                                   
                                            αk,j
                             εk,j ≡                    >0
                                          1 − αk,j
                                        Z 1
                                                             −1
                              ϕk ≡          (1 + εk,j θk,c ) dj > 0
                                         0
                                                         (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                        
                                         1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ   k,c −1)ϕ
                                                                       k
                            Σkj,c ≡ P                                     >0
                                                            θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                      
                                                                k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0


                                           Z   1                                     Z     1
                           Σ       =               (1 − αind,j ) dj +                          (1 − αag,j ) dj > 0
                                           0                                           0
                                                  −1
                                                 1
                          γη       ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +       > 0 and γη < 1
                                                 η
                                                                    
                                                                                   γη
                                                                                 (1−γη )
                           Ση ≡ Σ−1 + P                                                                       > 0
                                                                                                              
                                                                                        θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                 
                                                                    k0 =ag,ind       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0

which means that a sufficient condition for
                                                                                                                 
                                            −1                                          γη
                        1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σkj,c Σ−1                                         (1 − σ)                >0
                                                    η
                                                                                     (1 − γη )


                                                                            19
is that
                                                              σ > 1.
Moreover, note that the two components/shocks that only affect aggregate output yt have the
following coefficients in the final solution for yt
                               "                                 −1 #
                                        −1          γη
                                  1 − Ση ϕy κΣ             (1 − σ)    ϕy a t
                                                 (1 − γη )
                               "                                 −1      #
                                        −1          γη
                                  1 − Ση ϕy κΣ             (1 − σ)    ϕy κn εnt
                                                 (1 − γη )

respectively. That is, here, we are trying to sign the coefficients on ytnc (at , εnt ) that we have defined
in (23). Note that
                                                            
                                                      1 + η1
                             ϕy ≡            
                                        1 + η1 − (1 − σ) (1 − αag − αind )
                                              (1 − αag − αind )
                             κn       ≡                     
                                                      1 + η1
                                                                                 0
                                                                                    
                                              P                k0      θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                 k0 =ag,ind α       1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                             κΣ       ≡                                    k0
                                                                                   
                                                P                        θk0 ,c ϕ
                                                       k0 =ag,ind     1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0

Then, when σ > 1, we have
                                                                            
                                                                         1
                                                                   1+    η
                           ϕy     ≡                                                    >0
                                                   1
                                              1+   η       − (1 − σ) (1 − αag − αind )
                                          (1 − αag − αind )
                           κn     ≡                            >0
                                                  1 + η1
                                                                             0
                                                                                
                                          P                k0      θk0 ,c ϕk
                                             k0 =ag,ind  α      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                           κΣ     ≡                                    k0
                                                                                >0
                                            P                          θk0 ,c ϕ
                                                 k0 =ag,ind         1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0

which implies that           "                              −1 #
                                           −1  γη
                               1 − Ση ϕy κΣ           (1 − σ)    ϕy > 0
                                            (1 − γη )
                           "                               −1      #
                                   −1         γη
                              1 − Ση ϕy κΣ           (1 − σ)    ϕy κn > 0
                                           (1 − γη )




                                                                20
   Next, consider the solution for commodity prices again, where we now look at the coefficient on
the energy shock

                                                                           −1                       1
                             pt (j) = − (1 + εk,j θk,c )                        Σkj,c Σ−1                 Ξt
                                                                                       η
                                                                                                (1 − γη )
and where we now want to check how the coefficient depends on 1 − αj . From before, note the
various definitions of the parameters above
                                                        (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                     
                                        1 + εk,j θk,c 1+(θ  k,c −1)ϕk
                                Σkj,c ≡ P
                                                         θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                     
                                                            k0 =ag,ind      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                       
                                                             αk,j
                                       εk,j ≡
                                                           1 − αk,j
                                                       Z    1
                                           k                                        −1
                                          ϕ ≡                   (1 + εk,j θk,c )          dj
                                                        0
                                                                                                         
                                                                                  γη
                                                                                (1−γη )
                             Ση ≡ Σ−1 + P
                                                                                                        
                                                                                       θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                                       
                                                                  k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0


                                              Z    1                                Z     1
                             Σ        =                (1 − αind,j ) dj +                     (1 − αag,j ) dj
                                               0                                      0
                                                     −1
                                                    1
                             γη       ≡ (1 − γ) 1 +
                                                    η
Thus, first we can manipulate the component that depends on 1 − αk,j
                                                                                     
                                                                        (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                                     
                                                     1 + ε k,j θ k,c   1+(θk,c −1)ϕ k
                       −1                       −1 
       (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σkj,c = (1 + εk,j θk,c )  P
                                                                                       
                                                                         θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                     
                                                                                k0 =ag,ind         1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                −1
                                            1 + (θk,c − 1) ϕk
                                                                                                     
                                                                             1                      k
                                  =                                                   + (θk,c − 1) ϕ
                                                        θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                   
                                          P                             1 + εk,j θk,c
                                               k0 =ag,ind           1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0

Then,
                                                    k,c                θ                                  −2
                       ∂(1 + εj θc )−1 Σj,c     1+(θ −1)ϕk
                                                           (1 + εk,j θk,c )
                                            = − P k,c                        < 0.
                                                               θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                          
                              ∂εj
                                                                     k0 =ag,ind         1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                αk,j
    The term multiplying this above, which is Σ−1 η
                                                       1
                                                    (1−γη ) is positive. Then, since ε k,j ≡   1−αk,j ,
this means that when the share of energy in the commodity production, which is given by (1 − αk,j )
increases, then the coefficient in the factor structure of commodity prices on the “energy shock”
also increases.

                                                                      21
Factor structure of commodity prices Finally, note that we use the definition of ytnc (at , εnt )
given in (23) in (20) to derive the factor structure of prices in the form presented in the text. Then,

                                                      
                                       −1γη
pkt (j) =       1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c )        Σkj,c Σ−1
                                                (1 − σ) ytnc (at , εnt )                                                                           (24)
                                      (1 − γη )    η

                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                      
                            −1 k         γ η
                                                                         X                                         00                    0            0   0
                                                                                                                                                               
      + 1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σj,c Σ−1           (1 − σ) Ω−1 ϕy                                               κkv υtk ,a    + κã ãkt − κkα α̃tk 
                                   η
                                      (1 − γη )                        0                      k =ag,ind

            Ω−1 Σ−1 
                                                         −1
                                                               
      +          η
                  ϕy κΣ − (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σkj,c Ξt
            (1 − γη )
                                                                
                  γη                                     −1 k
        Ω−1 Σ−1
             η  (1−γη )   ϕy κΣ  − (1 +    ε k,j θ k,c )   Σj, c
                                                                               X          
                                                                                                          1                        1 + εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                
      +                                                                                                                      −                                         vtk ,a
                                    θk0 ,c ϕk0                                                 1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                   
                 P                                                                                                                (1 + εk0 ,j ) θk0 ,c
                            k0 =ag,ind      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0                 k0 =ag,ind

                                    −1     εk,j θk,c
       1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c )              1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                               X      
                                                                                    1                  1 + εk0 ,j θk0 ,c
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                   
      + P                                                                                           −                                     vtk ,a
                                     θk0 ,c ϕk0                            1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                    
                                                                                                      (1 + εk0 ,j ) θk0 ,c
                    k0 =ag,ind    1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0       k0 =ag,ind
                                                            
                  γη                                  −1 k
        Ω−1 Σ−1                 −
                                                                                          "                                  !            #
             η  (1−γη )   ϕ κ
                           y Σ    (1 +    ε    θ
                                            k,j k,c )   Σj,c                   X                    θk0 ,c ϕk
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                      0
      +                                                                                                                          α̃tk
                                   θk0 ,c ϕk0                                                  1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                 P                              
                            k0 =ag,ind      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0                 k0 =ag,ind

                                    −1     εk,j θk,c                  "                   0
                                                                                                   !            #
       1 − (1 + εk,j θk,c )              1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                               X                θk0 ,c ϕk                   0
      + P                                                                                              α̃tk
                                     θk0 ,c ϕk0                            1 + (θk0 ,c − 1)ϕk0
                                                    
                    k0 =ag,ind    1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0       k0 =ag,ind

             1
      −            υtk,j
            θk,c
                                                                             
                             −1θk,c − 1          εk,j θk,c       (1 + εk,j θk,c )
      − (1 + εk,j θk,c )                                       +                    vtk,a
                                 θk,c       1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk          θk,c
                                              
                        −1        εk,j θk,c
      + (1 + εk,j θk,c )                         α̃tk
                             1 + (θk,c − 1)ϕk

This (24) above is the two-sector version of the expression that appears in Equation (4) in the text
of the paper.




                                                                   22
     The coefficient on energy shock is
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                1                   1               1
                                                                               1 −                           + 1+εk,j
     −1    −1                                                       −1    −1
    Ω     Ση    
                                       −1
                                                                  Ω     Ση               1+(θk,c −1)ϕk                θk,c   1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
−                   (1 + εk,j θk,c )        Σkj,c − ϕy κΣ Ξt = −                                                                              − ϕy κΣ 
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                           k0
    (1 − γη )                                                      (1 − γη )
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     θk0 ,c ϕ
                                                                                              P
                                                                                                  k0 =ag,ind      1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                               (θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                               Ω−1 Σ−1
                                                                     η                        1+(θk,c −1)ϕk
                                                            =−                                                           − ϕy κΣ 
                                                                                                                                 
                                                               (1 − γη ) P                              θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                                
                                                                                   k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                    −1    −1                        1
                                                                   Ω     Ση                  1+(θk,c −1)ϕk                      1
                                                              −
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                   (1 − γη )                            θk0 ,c ϕk0
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                            1 + εk,j θk,c
                                                                            P                                                            
                                                                                   k0 =ag,ind        1+(θk0 ,c −1)ϕk0


Then,
                                    "                                              #
                               ∂        Ω−1 Σ−1
                                              η
                                                  
                                                                   −1 k
                                                                                
                                      −            (1 + εk,j θk,c ) Σj,c − ϕy κΣ Ξt > 0
                              ∂εk,j     (1 − γη )

This implies that if the coefficient on the energy shock is negative, the coefficient is (in absolute
term) decreasing in εk,j .




                                                               23
                                     Appendix B: Price Observations Dropped
2500                                                                  4000
                 Restricted Safflower price series
                 Observations dropped                                 3500
2000
                                                                      3000

                                                                      2500
1500
                                                                      2000
1000                                                                  1500

                                                                      1000
 500
                                                                                                  Restricted Aluminum price series
                                                                       500
                                                                                                  Observations dropped
   0                                                                     0
    1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012


1400                                                                   250

                   Restricted Mercury price series
1200
                   Observations dropped                                200
1000
                                                                       150
 800

 600                                                                   100

 400
                                                                        50
 200
                                                                                                     Restricted Cement price series
                                                                                                     Observations dropped
   0                                                                     0
    1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012           1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

60000
                     Restricted Nickel price series
50000                Observations dropped


40000


30000


20000


10000


       0
        1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012


       Notes: Each figure presents the price series used in the empirical analysis (light blue line: “Restricted X
       price series”) and the observations dropped (thick red line: “Observations dropped).
                      Appendix C: Notes on Commodity Price Data
                                                                       Available
Commodity   Sources                   Description                                                      Additional Notes
                                                                        Sample
                                                                                   Data from 1979:1 are apple prices received by growers.
                      Wholesale price of (delicious) apples in U.S.                Data prior to that are wholesale prices of (delicious)
                                                                      1957:1–
 Apples      CRB      until 1978:12, apple price received by                       applies in U.S., rescaled by the average price ratio of the
                                                                      2011:12
                      growers starting 1979:1                                      two series from 1979:1–1980:12. Data prior to 1979
                                                                                   have numerous missing values.
                      Bananas (Central and South America), major
                                                                      1960:1–
 Bananas     WB       brands, U.S. import price, free on truck
                                                                      2013:1
                      (f.o.t.) U.S. Gulf ports
                      WB: Barley (Canada), feed, Western No. 1,
                                                                                   Data from 1957:1–1959:12 are CRB series. Data from
                      Winnipeg Commodity Exchange, spot,              1957:1–
  Barley    CRB/WB                                                                 1960:1–2013:1 are WB series rescaled by the ratio of the
                      wholesale farmers' price; CRB: No. 3            2013:1
                                                                                   two series in 1960:1.
                      straight Barley, Minneapolis Exchange
                      Australia and New Zealand, frozen boneless,
                                                                      1957:1–
  Beef       IMF      85% visible lean cow meat, U.S. import price
                                                                      2013:1
                      FOB port of entry
                      International Cocoa Organization cash price;
                      average of the three nearest active futures
                      trading months in the New York Cocoa            1957:1–
  Cocoa      IMF
                      Exchange at noon and the London Terminal        2012:12
                      market at closing time, CIF U.S. and
                      European ports
                      International Coffee Organization; cash                      Value for 1957:1 is average across all four types of
                      prices for 4 kinds of beans: Brazilian          1957:1–      coffee beans. Subsequent values are the equally
  Coffee     IMF
                      unwashed Arabica, Columbian mild                2012:12      weighted average of percent change in price of each kind
                      Arabica, other mild Arabica and Robustas                     of bean times the previous period’s price.
                      U.S. No. 2 yellow, prompt shipment, FOB
                                                                      1957:1–
  Corn       IMF      Gulf of Mexico ports (USDA, Grain and
                                                                      2012:12
                      Feed Market News, Washington, D.C.)
                      Peru Fish meal/pellets, 65% protein, CIF        1957:1–
 Fishmeal    IMF
                      United Kingdom (DataStream)                     2012:12
                        Mid-month price received by farmers for all
                                                                        1957:1–
    Hay         CRB     hay (baled) in the United States, dollars per
                                                                        2012:2
                        ton
                                                                        1957:1–
   Oats        CRB CD
                                                                        2010:11
                        Orange Juice Frozen Concentrate: nearest-       1967:1–
Orange juice   CRB CD
                        term futures contract traded on ICE             2012:10
                                                                        1957:1–
  Onions        CRB     Average price received by farmers
                                                                        2011:12
                        (1) Average black pepper (Brazilian)                      From 1984:1–2007:6, we use the Brazilian pepper price.
                                                                        1957:1–
  Pepper        CRB     arriving in New York; (2) Average black                   Prior to 1984, we use Lampong price rescaled by the
                                                                        2007:6
                        pepper (Lampong) arriving in New York                     ratio of the two prices in 1984:1.
                                                                        1957:1–
  Potatoes      CRB     Average price received by farmers
                                                                        2011:12
                        Thai, white milled, 5% broken, nominal
                                                                        1957:1–
   Rice         IMF     price quotes, FOB Bangkok (USDA, Rice
                                                                        2012:12
                        Market News, Little Rock, Arkansas).
                        Mexican, west coast, white, No. 1, shell-on,
                                                                        1957:1–
  Shrimp        IMF     headless, 26 to 30 count per pound,
                                                                        2013:1
                        wholesale price at New York
                        CRB: average price of no. 2, yellow, at                   From 1960:1–2013:1, we use the WB series. Prior to
                                                                        1957:1–
 Sorghums      CRB/WB   Kansas City, $/100 pounds; WB: no. 2 milo                 1960:1, we use the CRB series rescaled by the ratio of
                                                                        2013:1
                        yellow, FOB Gulf ports                                    the two series in 1960:1.
                                                                        1959:7–
 Soybeans      CRB CD   No. 1 yellow, Chicago Board of Trade
                                                                        2012:9
                        CSCE contract No. 11, nearest future
                                                                        1957:1–
   Sugar        IMF     position (Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa
                                                                        2012:12
                        Exchange, New York Board of Trade)
                        Mombasa auction price for best PF1, Kenyan
                                                                        1957:1–
    Tea         IMF     Tea, replaces London auction price
                                                                        2013:1
                        beginning July 1998
                        Tobacco (any origin), unmanufactured,           1968:1–
 Tobacco        WB
                        general import , CIF United States              2013:1
                             U.S. No. 1 hard red winter, ordinary protein,
                             prompt shipment, FOB $/Mt,                      1957:1–
     Wheat           IMF
                             Gulf of Mexico ports (USDA, Grain and           2012:12
                             Feed Market News)
                             Average price of coconut oil (crude) at                   Data from 1965:1–1980:12 are Pacific Coast, data from
                                                                             1965:1–
  Coconut oil        CRB     Pacific Coast of U.S. and average price of                1981:1–2010:12 are NY. Series have identical prices in
                                                                             2010:12
                             coconut oil (crude) tank cars in New York                 overlapping months: 1980:1–1980:12.
                                                                             1960:1–
 Groundnut oil       WB      Groundnut oil (any origin), CIF Rotterdam
                                                                             2013:1
                             Crude Palm Oil Futures (first contract
                                                                             1957:1–
    Palm oil         IMF     forward) 4–5% FFA, Bursa Malaysian
                                                                             2013:1
                             Derivatives Berhad
                                                                             1980:1–
  Rapeseed oil       IMF     Crude, FOB Rotterdam (Datastream)
                                                                             2013:1
                                                                                       Data from 2005:7–2005:12 and data from 2006:6–
                             Sunflower Oil, crude, U.S. export price from    1960:1–
Sun/Safflower oil    IMF                                                               2008:2 are treated as missing because of no price
                             Gulf of Mexico (Datastream)                     2013:1
                                                                                       variation.
                             London Metal Exchange, standard grade,
                             spot price, minimum purity 99.5%, CIF U.K.
                                                                             1957:1–   Data from 1957:1–1972:12 are treated as missing
   Aluminum          IMF     ports (Wall Street Journal, New York, and
                                                                             2013:1    because of infrequent price variation.
                             Metals Week, New York); prior to 1979,
                             U.K. producer price, minimum purity 99%
                                                                             1957:1–
     Burlap         CRB CD   Original source of data is USDA.
                                                                             2012:9
                             BLS PPI Index Industry (series                  1965:1–   Data prior to 1980:1 are treated as missing because of
    Cement           BLS
                             PCU32731-32731) Cement Manufacturing            2012:12   infrequent price variation.
                             London Metal Exchange, grade A cathodes,
                             spot price, CIF European ports (Wall Street
                                                                             1957:1–
    Copper           IMF     Journal, New York, and Metals Week, New
                                                                             2012:12
                             York); prior to July 1986, higher grade, wire
                             bars or cathodes
                             Middling 1–3/32-inch staple, Liverpool          1957:1–
     Cotton          IMF
                             Index "A", average of the cheapest 5 of 14      2012:12
                    styles, CIF Liverpool (Cotton Outlook,
                    Liverpool); from
                    January 1968 to May 1981 strict middling 1–
                    1/16-inch staple; prior to 1968, Mexican 1–
                    1/16-inch staple
                    London Metal Exchange, 99.97% pure, spot        1957:1–
 Lead      IMF
                    price, CIF European ports                       2012:12
                    CRB: Douglas fir softwood lumber 2x4
                                                                              From 1975:1–2012:12, we use the IMF series. Prior to
                    dried, S4S; IMF: Average export price of        1957:1–
Lumber    CRB/IMF                                                             1975:1, we use the CRB series rescaled by the ratio of
                    Douglas fir, Western hemlock and other          2012:12
                                                                              the two price series in 1975:1.
                    sawn softwood exported from Canada
                    Average cash price in New York for flask of     1957:1–   Only data from 1962:12–1995:3 are used; other periods
Mercury    CRB
                    76 pounds                                       2010:12   display infrequent price adjustment.
                    London Metal Exchange, melting grade, spot
                    price, CIF Northern European ports (Wall
                    Street Journal, New York, and Metals Week,      1957:1–   Data prior to 1979:3 are treated as missing because of
Nickel     IMF
                    New York); prior to 1980, INCO, melting         2013:1    infrequent price variation.
                    grade, CIF Far East and American ports
                    (Metal Bulletin, London)
                    Average spot crude rubber prices (smoked
                                                                    1957:1–
Rubber     CRB      sheets, no 1, ribbed, plantation rubber) in
                                                                    2010:12
                    New York, cents per pound
                    London Metal Exchange, standard grade,
                    spot price, CIF European ports (Wall Street
                    Journal, New York); from December 1985
                                                                    1957:1–
  Tin      IMF      to June 1989, Malaysian, straits, minimum
                                                                    2012:12
                    99.85% purity, Kuala Lumpur Tin Market
                    settlement price; prior to November 1985,
                    London Metal Exchange
                    23 micron (AWEX, Australian Wool                1957:1–
 Wool      IMF
                    Exchange) Sidney, Australia                     2012:12
                    London Metal Exchange, high grade 98%           1957:1–
 Zinc      IMF
                    pure, spot price, CIF U.K. ports (Wall Street   2012:12
Journal, New York, and Metals Week, New
York); prior to January 1987, standard grade
                     Appendix D: The Production and Use of Commodities
                                     Largest Producers                             Primary Uses


Agr./Food Commodities

  Apples (1990–91)        U.S. (0.21), Germany (0.10), Italy (0.10)        Food (0.86), beverage, feed

  Bananas* (1990)         India (0.15), Brazil (0.12), Ecuad. (0.07)         Food (0.84), feed, other

  Barley (1990–91)             USSR (0.28), Germany (0.08)                Feed (0.73), distillation, food

  Beef                                                                                 Food

  Cocoa (1990–91)             Ivory Coast (0.32), Brazil (0.25)                    Food (0.96)

  Coffee (1990–91)             Brazil (0.31), Columbia (0.14)                 Food/beverages (0.98)

  Corn (1990–91)                  U.S. (0.42), Brazil (0.05)           Feed (0.62), food (0.16), adhesives

  Fishmeal* (1984)         Japan (0.21), Chile (0.17), Peru (0.08)                  Feed (0.90)

  Hay                                                                                  Feed

  Oats (1990–91)                  USSR (0.39), U.S. (0.13)             Food (0.74), feed (0.09), ref. solvent

  Orange juice (1990–1)     Oranges: Brazil (0.35), Spain (0.07)           Beverage (pulp for feed, oil)

  Onions* (1990)                 China (0.16), India (0.10)                        Food (0.91)

  Pepper (1990)               Main exporters: Indonesia, India         Food (0.96), oil (medical, perfumes)

  Potatoes* (1990)              USSR (0.24), Poland (0.13)             Food (0.52), distillation, feed (0.19)

  Rice (1990–91)                 China (0.36), India (0.21)               Food (0.84), distillation, other

  Shrimp                                                                               Food

  Sorghum* (1990)          U.S. (0.26), India (0.21), Mex. (0.11)            Food (0.39), feed (0.52)

                                                                       Food/feed (0.11), industrial (paints,
  Soybeans (1990–91)              U.S. (0.50), Brazil (0.15)                        plastics)

  Sugar (1990–91)          India (0.12), Brazil (0.07), Cuba (0.07)        Food/beverages (0.96), fuel

  Tea (1990)              India (0.29), China (0.21), S. Lank (.09)              Beverage (0.98)

  Tobacco (1990)                  China (0.37), U.S. (0.10)                          Smoking

  Wheat (1990–91)          USSR (0.17), China (0.17), U.S. (0.13)            Food (0.65), feed (0.22)


Oils
   Coconut oil (1990–91)         Philippines (0.41), Indonesia (0.27)           Food (0.57), cosmetics, synth. rubber

   Groundnut oil* (1990)       India (0.45), China (0.22), Nigeria (.09)                     Food (0.98)

   Palm oil (1990–91)             Malaysia (0.55), Indonesia (0.25)            Food (0.57), soaps, machine lubricants

   Rapeseed oil (1990)         China (0.28), India (0.20), Canada (.13)         Food (0.82), inks, pharma, cosmetics

   Sun/Safflower oil (90-1)        USSR (0.29), Argentina (0.17)                          Food (0.90), fuel


 Industrial Commodities

   Aluminum (1990)             U.S. (0.22), USSR (0.12), Canada (0.09)                Transportation, containers

   Burlap* (1990)                  India (0.52), Bangladesh (0.30)                              Fabric

   Cement (1990)               China (0.18), USSR (0.12), Japan (0.07)                      Construction

   Copper (1990)                       Chile (0.18), U.S. (0.18)                    Electrical (0.75), construction

   Cotton (1990–91)             China (0.24), U.S. (0.18), Uzb. (0.14)              Clothing, furnishings, medical

   Lead (1990)                      U.S. (0.23), Kazakhstan (0.12)                  Construction, lining, batteries

   Lumber                            Russia (0.39), Canada (0.39)                    Construction, industrial uses

   Mercury (1990)                    China (0.22), USSR (0.18)                         Batteries, paints, dental

   Nickel (1990)                     USSR (0.24), Canada (0.22)                      Coins, batteries, electronics

   Natural rubber (1990)           Malaysia (0.25), Thailand (0.24)                 Household and industrial uses

   Tin (1990)                         China (0.19), Brazil (0.18)                           Industrial uses

   Wool (1990-91)               Australia (0.35), New Zealand (0.12)                Clothing/furnishing, insulation

   Zinc (1990)                 USSR (0.13), Japan (0.10), Can. (0.08)             Coating, alloy, batteries, medical




Notes: The table presents information on the largest-producing countries for each type of commodity in 1990 or as available.
These data come from the CRB or, if marked with a *, from the FAO. The third column presents the most common uses of
each commodity in 1990, as reported by the CRB (for industrials) or by the FAO (for all others).
Appendix E: Contribution of Common Factors to Individual Commodity Prices
                                     Cumulative R2 from Common Factors

       Number of Factors:      1           2          3          4        5

       Agricultural/Food

              Apples          0.20        0.22       0.22      0.23      0.38

              Bananas         0.34        0.37       0.43      0.43      0.63

              Barley          0.62        0.73       0.78      0.86      0.86

              Beef            0.74        0.77       0.77      0.85      0.85

              Cocoa           0.76        0.80       0.88      0.89      0.90

              Coffee          0.69        0.75       0.86      0.87      0.87

              Corn            0.91        0.91       0.93      0.94      0.94

              Fishmeal        0.85        0.85       0.85      0.86      0.86

              Hay             0.73        0.75       0.76      0.84      0.87

              Oats            0.82        0.82       0.82      0.84      0.84

              Orange juice    0.51        0.59       0.64      0.73      0.78

              Onions          0.24        0.43       0.46      0.47      0.53

              Pepper          0.25        0.50       0.52      0.59      0.59

              Potatoes        0.54        0.55       0.64      0.64      0.69

              Rice            0.87        0.87       0.89      0.89      0.89

              Shrimp          0.14        0.76       0.79      0.79      0.80

              Sorghums        0.90        0.90       0.93      0.93      0.93

              Soybeans        0.91        0.91       0.93      0.93      0.93

              Sugar           0.61        0.62       0.71      0.73      0.75

              Tea             0.71        0.80       0.82      0.83      0.84

              Tobacco         0.65        0.82       0.82      0.83      0.84

              Wheat           0.87        0.87       0.89      0.90      0.90

       Oils
       Coconut oil                     0.71         0.71         0.71        0.71        0.79

       Groundnut oil                   0.75         0.75         0.78        0.83        0.86

       Palm oil                        0.81         0.81         0.81        0.85        0.90

       Rapeseed oil                    0.46         0.63         0.71        0.85        0.85

       Sun/Safflower oil               0.73         0.76         0.78        0.84        0.85

   Industrials

       Aluminum                        0.62         0.62         0.68        0.78        0.79

       Burlap                          0.72         0.72         0.73        0.81        0.85

       Cement                          0.14         0.14         0.79        0.79        0.80

       Copper                          0.44         0.83         0.85        0.92        0.93

       Cotton                          0.80         0.88         0.89        0.89        0.89

       Lead                            0.60         0.86         0.87        0.87        0.87

       Lumber                          0.25         0.33         0.53        0.64        0.76

       Mercury                         0.25         0.49         0.51        0.73        0.77

       Nickel                          0.13         0.70         0.70        0.84        0.87

       Rubber                          0.71         0.84         0.86        0.86        0.86

       Tin                             0.84         0.85         0.92        0.93        0.93

       Wool                            0.78         0.79         0.79        0.79        0.79

       Zinc                            0.39         0.48         0.54        0.54        0.65


Notes: The table presents the R2 associated with the cumulative number of factors across columns for
each commodity. Imputed values are not included in R2 calculations. See section 3.2 for details.
                                                                                 Appendix F: Robustness Checks
                                                      Wheat for Grains                                                                                         Palm for Oils
    Std. Dev. from Mean   5                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                            Std. Dev. from Mean
                          0                                                                                                       0




                          -5                                                                                                      -5
                               1970   1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005   2010                                          1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010

                                                    No Food Commodities                                                                                     No Feed Commodities
                          5                                                                                                       5
    Std. Dev. from Mean




                                                                                                            Std. Dev. from Mean
                          0                                                                                                       0




                          -5                                                                                                      -5
                               1970   1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005   2010                                          1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010

                                                No USSR as Main Producer                                                                               No China-India Main Producers
                          5                                                                                                       5
    Std. Dev. from Mean




                                                                                                            Std. Dev. from Mean
                          0                                                                                                       0




                          -5                                                                                                      -5
                               1970   1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005   2010                                          1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010

                                                           U.S. Recessions         Baseline 99% CI for Common Factor                            Robustness 99% CI for Common Factor


Notes: The figures present the baseline 99% confidence interval (CI) for the (HP-filtered) IC factor (grey shaded area) and the 99% confidence intervals for the
HP-filtered IC factor for subsets of commodities (areas between blue lines). In the top two panels, we drop from the cross-section of commodities barley, hay, oats
and sorghums (left figure) and coconut oil, peanut oil, rapeseed oil and safflower oil (right figure). In the two middle panels, we drop all commodities for which
food is the primary use (left figure) and all commodities for which feed is the primary use (right figure). In the bottom two panels, we drop all commodities for
which the former USSR was the primary producer in 1990 (8 commodities, left figure) and all commodities for which China or India were primary producers (13
commodities, right figure). See section 3.3 for details.
                                                             Linear Detrending                                                                                      First-Differencing
                                5                                                                                                      5


          Std. Dev. from Mean




                                                                                                                 Std. Dev. from Mean
                                0                                                                                                      0




                                -5                                                                                                     -5
                                     1970   1975   1980    1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010                                         1970    1975   1980   1985   1990    1995    2000   2005   2010




                                                          No Imputed Commodities                                                                             Factors from Correlation Matrix
                                5                                                                                                      5
          Std. Dev. from Mean




                                                                                                                 Std. Dev. from Mean
                                0                                                                                                      0




                                -5                                                                                                     -5
                                     1970   1975   1980    1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010                                         1970    1975   1980   1985   1990    1995    2000   2005   2010

                                                            U.S. Recessions         Baseline 99% CI for Common Factor                              Robustness 99% CI for Common Factor


Notes: The figures present the baseline 99% confidence interval (CI) for the (HP-filtered) IC factor (grey shaded area) and the 99% confidence intervals for the
HP-filtered IC factor under alternative conditions (areas between blue lines). In the top left figure, we linearly detrend each real commodity price series prior to
factor analysis. In the top right figure, we implement factor analysis in first-differences. In the bottom left figure, we include only commodities for which no
imputation was necessary prior to 2010. In the bottom right figure, we extract factors from the correlation matrix of the cross-section of real commodity prices
rather than the covariance matrix. See section 3.3 for details.
                      Appendix G: Time Series of (Log) Real Commodity Prices and Imputed Values
             Apples                      Bananas                       Barley                        Beef                        Cocoa
                               2
                                                            2                            2                            2
  2
                               0
  0                                                         0                            0                            0
                               -2
  -2                                                        -2
                                                                                         -2                           -2
   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
             Coffee                       Corn                        Fishmeal                       Hay                         Oats

                               2                                                                                      2
  2                                                                                      2
                                                            2

  0                            0                                                                                      0
                                                            0                            0

  -2                                                                                     -2                           -2
                               -2                           -2
    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
          Orange Juice                   Onions                       Pepper                       Potatoes                       Rice
  2                                                         2
                               2                                                                                      2
                                                                                         2
  0                            0                            0
                                                                                         0                            0
                               -2
  -2                                                        -2
                               -4                                                        -2                           -2
   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
            Shrimp                      Sorghums                     Soybeans                       Sugar                         Tea
  2                                                                                      4
                               2                                                                                       3
                                                            2                                                          2
                                                                                         2
  0                                                                                                                    1
                               0                            0                            0                             0
  -2                                                                                                                  -1
                               -2                           -2                           -2
   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010


Notes: The figure plots real commodity prices (black lines) and imputed values (bold red values) from the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm of Stock and Watson (2002).
           Tobacco                       Wheat                      Coconut Oil                 Groundnut Oil                  Palm Oil

 2                                                                                                                   2
                              2                            2                            2

 0                                                         0                            0                            0
                              0

                                                           -2                                                        -2
 -2                           -2                                                        -2
   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
         Rapeseed Oil                 Safflower Oil                 Aluminum                       Burlap                      Cement
                                                                                         3
 2                                                                                                                   2
                              2                            2                             2
 0                                                                                       1                           0
                              0                            0                             0
 -2                                                                                     -1                           -2
                              -2                           -2
  1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
           Copper                        Cotton                        Lead                       Lumber                       Mercury

 2                            2                            2                                                         2
                                                                                        2
 0                            0                            0                                                         0
                                                                                        0

 -2                           -2                                                                                     -2
                                                           -2                           -2
  1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
            Nickel                      Rubber                          Tin                         Wool                         Zinc
                                                           2                                                         4
                              2                                                         2
 2
                                                                                                                     2
                              0                            0                            0
 0                                                                                                                   0
                              -2                                                        -2
 -2                                                        -2                                                        -2
  1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



Notes: The figure plots real commodity prices (black lines) and imputed values (bold red values) from the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm of Stock and Watson (2002).
                         Appendix H: Robustness to Dropping Commodities for which the Null
                                Hypothesis of No First-Order Speculation Is Rejected
                         5


                         4


                         3


                         2
   Std. Dev. from Mean




                         1


                         0


                         -1


                         -2


                         -3


                         -4


                         -5
                                 1970           1975       1980        1985         1990   1995         2000         2005         2010
                              U.S. Recessions          Baseline 99% CI for Common Factor   99% CI for "No First-Order Speculation" Commodities



Notes: The figure presents the baseline 99% confidence interval of the (HP-filtered) IC factor from the factor analysis
on the full cross-section of commodities in section 3.3 using the estimated rotation parameters from GMM estimates
(grey shaded area). The blue lines correspond to the 99% confidence interval for the equivalent factor using only those
commodities for which we cannot reject the null of no first-order speculative price effects in Table 4. Confidence
intervals are 3-month moving averages. See section 4 for details.
                                         Appendix I: Storage
The model in section 2 yields a factor structure of commodity prices whose properties conform closely to
the data and permit us to make causal inferences about the relationship between global real activity and
commodity-related shocks. The key to the identification in the factor structure is that all indirect shocks to
commodity markets (i.e., all shocks that affect commodity prices through the general-equilibrium response
of output) are aggregated into a single factor, the IC factor. This conclusion relies on the premise that all
indirect shocks induce identical comovement in commodity prices.
          This aggregation property of the factor structure can be broken in the presence of storage. To see
why, suppose that we extend the model to include a perfectly competitive storage sector for each primary
commodity j that purchases or sells that commodity on the spot market, leading it to hold inventories in the
steady state. As illustrated in Deaton and Laroque (1992), the key determinant of whether the storage sector
increases or decreases its inventories is the expected path of prices of the commodity. If a current increase
in prices is not expected to persist, then the storage sector sells a positive amount of its inventories on the
spot market today when prices are high and rebuilds inventories in future periods when prices are lower.
This behavior increases the current supply of the good and reduces it in the future. In contrast, if the shock
is expected to generate a persistent increase in prices, the storage sector does not have an incentive to change
its stock of inventories and therefore is not a net purchaser of the good. Thus, the persistence of the driving
process affects the size of net purchases by the storage sector through its effect on the path of expected
prices. For example, if aggregate productivity shocks in the model were highly persistent while labor supply
shocks were less persistent, the presence of storage would lead these shocks to have different supply
responses, depending on the size of the storage sector’s net purchases. The comovement in commodity
prices would then not necessarily be the same across the two shocks, potentially breaking the aggregation
result.
          In practice, this issue is unlikely to be quantitatively important for three reasons. First, if the
aggregation of indirect shocks into a single IC factor were broken, we would expect a factor decomposition
of commodity prices to indicate that many factors were required to explain the comovement of commodity
prices, since a number of different aggregate structural shocks are likely affecting commodity prices
through the indirect channel of global activity, such as financial shocks, markup shocks and fiscal shocks,
in addition to the productivity and labor supply shocks that we explicitly model. But, as documented in
Table 1, the comovement of commodity prices is well-characterized by two factors, with any additional
factors adding little explanatory power. This finding suggests that either different indirect shocks have
common effects on expected price paths of commodity prices (such that the response of the storage sector
is similar across all indirect shocks and, therefore, that the aggregation of indirect shocks still holds) or the
effects of net purchases for the storage motive are second-order in affecting commodity prices.
        The second reason why storage is unlikely to be important is precisely because the effects of net
purchases for storage motives appear to be second-order for most commodities. To examine this claim,
suppose again that we integrated a storage sector for each primary commodity into the model, in which
firms purchase or sell the commodity on the spot market as well as store it. The storage sector would
therefore affect spot markets through its forward-looking net purchases, defined as 𝑁𝑃 (𝑗) at time t for
commodity j. The market-clearing condition in the presence of an additional storage sector would then be
given by 𝑄 (𝑗) = 𝑌 (𝑗) + 𝑁𝑃 (𝑗) such that high (low) net purchases by the storage sector to accumulate
(draw down) inventories would increase (decrease) the demand for commodity j at time t, holding all else
constant. Allowing for trend growth in production such that Y/Q and NP/Q are stationary along the balanced
growth path, the log-linearized version of this equation is
                                       (𝑌/𝑄 − 1)𝑛𝑝 (𝑗) = (𝑌/𝑄)𝑦 (𝑗)
where the terms in parentheses are balanced growth path ratios. For the storage sector to have first-order
effects on equilibrium outcomes (including prices), it must be the case that net purchases are different from
zero on average, or equivalently that the ratio of consumption to production (Y/Q) of the commodity is
different from one.
        Table I.1 presents estimates of the mean annual ratio of consumption to production (minus 1) for
commodities for which such data could be collected: 𝑟 = 𝑌 /𝑄 − 1.1 Out of 32 commodities, we reject
the null hypothesis that 𝑟 = 0 on average for only nine: apples, bananas, onions, potatoes, rice, sugar, tea,
palm oil and safflower oil. Four of these are highly perishable commodities (apples, bananas, onions and
potatoes), thus one would expect some fraction of the goods to spoil while being transported from
production to retail facilities. But even in the case of these highly perishable goods, the implied gaps
between consumption and production are small—less than 1% per year. Furthermore, in the case of
potatoes, the rejection of the null has the wrong sign (i.e., consumption is larger than production on
average). Among the less perishable agricultural commodities (e.g., grains), there is little evidence that
consumption is significantly less than production, on average, with most of the point estimates being less



1
  We use measures of consumption and production of commodities from the CRB. When these are not available, we
rely on measures from the UN FAO for agricultural and oil commodities, from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s
Food and Agricultural Services (USDA FAS), and from trade associations. Aluminum data were provided to us by
the European Aluminum Association (EAA), data for copper are from the International Copper Study Group
(ICSG), data for tin were provided by the International Tin Research Institute (ITRI), nickel data are from
International Nickel Study Group (INSG), while data for zinc and lead were tabulated from the International Lead
and Zinc Study Group’s Monthly Bulletin. For many commodities, we were able to construct global production and
consumption data going back to 1968. There are only eight commodities for which we could not compile
consumption and production data: beef, hay, orange juice, shrimp, cement, lumber, mercury and wool.
than 1%. This conclusion also applies to industrial commodities, which are highly storable and for which
one would expect inventory motives to be potentially important. In fact, there is little evidence of non-zero
net purchases by the storage sector. Thus, with the exception of a few commodities, it is difficult to reject
the null that speculative motives through storage have only second-order effects on prices. 2 Furthermore,
the failure to reject the null does not typically reflect large standard errors. Rather, the point estimates of
the net ratio are typically smaller than 1%, which suggests that net flows to the storage sector are small on
average. Finally, if we replicate our baseline factor analysis using only the commodities for which we
cannot reject the null of zero net purchases on average, there is little effect on the estimated IC factor
(Appendix H).
         A third way to assess the possibility that the effects of storage could break the aggregation of
indirect commodities into a common IC factor is to note that, in the presence of storage motives, interest
rates would play an important role in affecting commodity prices (Deaton and Laroque 1992; and Frankel
2008). As a result, the logic of the model in section 2 would imply that monetary policy shocks would
directly affect commodity prices through changes in desired inventories. Therefore, in a factor
decomposition, these monetary policy shocks would not be incorporated into the indirect factor. Hence, a
testable implication of a quantitatively important storage motive is that monetary policy shocks should not
affect the IC factor.
         To test this prediction, we identify U.S. monetary policy shocks using a time-varying-coefficients
(TVC) Taylor rule
                   𝑖 =𝑐 +𝜑 𝐹𝜋            ,   +𝜑     𝐹 𝑔𝑦 + 𝜑 𝐹 𝑥 + 𝜌 𝑖           +𝜀                        (8)
in which the central bank responds to real-time forecasts (𝐹 ) of average inflation over the next two quarters
(𝜋   ,    ), the current quarter’s output growth (𝑔𝑦 ), the current quarter’s output gap (𝑥 ), and the previous
period’s interest rate, as in Kozicki and Tinsley (2009) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011). We assume
that each of the TVCs follows a random walk, including the intercept that captures changes in the central
bank’s target levels of macroeconomic variables and the natural rate of interest. Following Orphanides
(2003) and Romer and Romer (2004), we use the Greenbook forecasts prepared by the staff of the Federal
Reserve before each Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting to characterize the FOMC’s real-
time beliefs about current and future macroeconomic conditions. The TVCs allow us to distinguish between
systematic changes in the monetary policy rule from transitory deviations captured by the residuals. We
estimate this rule using data on the frequency of FOMC meetings from March 1969 until December 2008.
Because Greenbook data are not available after 2007, we use Blue Chip Economic Indicator forecasts. The
sample ends in December 2008 when the zero lower bound on interest rates was reached. We then define

2
  This evidence is also consistent with the well-documented inconsistencies between the standard storage model and
the observed data (see, among others, Ng 1996).
the residuals estimated from equation (8) as monetary policy shocks and construct a monthly time series
from the shock series.
         To quantify the effects of monetary policy shocks on the indirect common factor, we use a vector
autoregressive representation of macroeconomic dynamics with four variables: our measure of monetary
policy shocks, the log of U.S. industrial production, the log of the U.S. Consumer Price Index (CPI) and
the IC factor. We order the monetary policy shock first, given that it should already incorporate the most
recent economic information obtained from the Greenbook forecasts and to allow other variables to respond
to the impact of this shock. We use data from March 1969 until December 2008 to estimate the VAR with
18 months of lags, midway between the 12-month lag specifications typical of monetary VARs and the 24-
month lag specification used by Romer and Romer (2004). We then plot in Figure I.1 the impulse responses
of industrial production, the CPI and the IC factor to a monetary policy innovation.
         An expansionary monetary policy shock in the VAR leads to higher industrial production, with
peak effects happening one to two years after the shock. The CPI rises moderately but persistently around
six months after the shock, consistent with the delayed effect on prices of monetary policy shocks long
observed in the empirical monetary policy literature (e.g., Christiano et al. 1999). The indirect factor rises
much more rapidly, within the first three months, but does not peak until nearly two years after the shock
before gradually declining back toward zero. The responses are significantly different from zero at the 5%
level for the first 20 months and are briefly at the 1% level.3 Thus, we can statistically reject the null
hypothesis that monetary policy shocks have no effect on the IC factor. In addition, the quantitative
contribution of U.S. monetary policy shocks to the indirect factor is relatively large, accounting for much
of the sustained increase in the IC factor from late 1975 until 1980 and around two-thirds of the subsequent
decline from 1980 to 1982.




3
  The reported standard errors do not account for the fact that the IC factor is a generated regressor, and they therefore
may understate the true uncertainty around the point estimates. However, there are at least two reasons to suspect that
this is not quantitatively important. First, one could also test the null that monetary policy shocks have no effect on
the IC factor by regressing it on current and lagged monetary shocks, i.e., 𝐹 = 𝑐 + ∑ 𝛽 𝜀 + 𝑣 , setting I = 36
months to account for the gradual effects of monetary policy shocks on macroeconomic variables. From this
procedure, we can reject the null hypothesis that monetary policy shocks have no effect on the IC factor (i.e., 𝛽 =
0 ∀𝑖) with a p-value of 0.019. The generated regressor issue is not binding in this case, since the IC factor is only on
the left-hand side and the null hypothesis is that the coefficients on monetary policy shocks are zero, thus asymptotic
(Newey-West) standard errors are valid (Pagan 1984). The advantage of the VAR specification is that it also purges
the monetary policy shocks of potentially remaining predictability from macroeconomic variables and is in this respect
a more conservative approach. Second, given that we cannot reject the null of the rotation matrix being equal to the
identity matrix, one can use the unrotated first common factor in the VAR in lieu of the rotated one. Since the unrotated
factor can be treated as observable following Bai and Ng (2002) and Stock and Watson (2002) for large enough cross-
sections and time samples, the corresponding standard errors are valid. The results from this alternative specification
are almost identical, and we can reject the null of no response at the same confidence level.
         In short, while the presence of commodity storage could potentially break the aggregation of
indirect shocks into a common IC factor, there is little quantitative evidence in favor of this claim. 4 First,
the fact that the comovement in commodity prices is well characterized by a small number of factors is
difficult to reconcile with the aggregation result failing to hold. Second, for most commodities, we cannot
reject the null that storage has only second-order effects on commodity prices. And third, monetary policy
shocks have both statistically and economically significant effects on the IC factor, which suggests that the
factor decomposition is not treating them as a direct commodity-related shock, as would be the case if
speculative considerations were economically important. While storage motives are nonetheless likely to
play a role in commodity prices in periods when inventory constraints are close to binding, the results
suggest that, on average, the aggregation result from section 2 provides a succinct and adequate
characterization of the data.




4
  Another reason why one might be skeptical of the quantitative importance of the storage mechanism is that recent
work examining the role of speculative shocks in oil markets has found little evidence that these have contributed in
economically significant ways to historical oil price fluctuations, either in statistical VAR models such as in Kilian
and Murphy (2014) and Kilian and Lee (2014) or in DSGE models such as in Unalmis et al. (2012). While little
evidence exists on this question for other commodities, one would expect that oil markets would be most likely to
display sensitivity to speculation, given the relative ease with which oil can be stored (both underground and in above-
ground storage facilities) and the potentially large convenience yields to refineries associated with holding oil as
inventories. The fact that storage shocks are not quantitatively important does not imply that storage has no effects on
the response of prices to other shocks, but it is consistent with this result.
TABLE I.1: TESTING THE NULL HYPOTHESIS OF ZERO NET PURCHASES BY STORAGE SECTOR

                             Estimates of Mean Ratio of Consumption to Production – 1

Number of Factors:            𝑐̂        𝑠𝑒(𝑐̂ )       N         Sample         Source


Agr./Food Commodities

       Apples             -0.007***     (0.003)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Bananas            -0.008**      (0.004)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Barley              0.001        (0.005)       33      1979-2011         CRB

       Beef

       Cocoa               -0.009       (0.010)       43      1968-2010         CRB

       Coffee              0.016        (0.011)       41      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Corn                0.004        (0.005)       32      1980-2011         CRB

       Fishmeal           -0.014        (0.016)       45      1968-2012      USDA-FAS

       Hay

       Oats               0.002         (0.004)       45      1968-2012      USDA-FAS

       Orange juice

       Onions             -0.007***     (0.001)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Pepper              -0.000       (0.018)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Potatoes           0.005**       (0.002)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Rice                -0.010**     (0.005)       45      1968-2012      USDA-FAS

       Shrimp

       Sorghums            0.010        (0.009)       28      1983-2011         CRB

       Soybeans            -0.002       (0.006)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Sugar               -0.020***    (0.005)       45      1968-2012      USDA-FAS

       Tea                -0.022***     (0.005)       42      1968-2009       UN FAO

       Tobacco             0.004        (0.015)       37      1968-2004      USDA-FAS

       Wheat               0.000        (0.006)       34      1978-2011         CRB


Oils
            Coconut oil                      0.003           (0.009)        42        1968-2009         UN FAO

            Groundnut oil                    -0.003          (0.004)        41        1971-2011        USDA-FAS

            Palm oil                         -0.045**       (0.017)         42        1968-2009         UN FAO

            Rapeseed oil                     -0.007          (0.005)        45        1968-2012        USDA-FAS

            Sun/Safflower oil                -0.024**        (0.010)        41        1972-2012       USDA-FAS


       Industrial Commodities

            Aluminum                         -0.007          (0.005)        45        1968-2012            TA

            Burlap                           0.020           (0.012)        42        1968-2009         UN FAO

            Cement

            Copper                           0.001           (0.005)        45        1968-2011            TA

            Cotton                           0.001           (0.010)        43        1968-2010           CRB

            Lead                             -0.001          (0.004)        39        1972-2012            TA

            Lumber

            Mercury

            Nickel                           -0.009          (0.008)        45        1968-2012           BREE

            Rubber                           0.001           (0.004)        43        1968-2010           CRB

            Tin                              0.011           (0.012)        45        1968-2012            TA

            Wool

            Zinc                             -0.007          (0.006)        39        1972-2012            TA


Notes: The table presents the average ratio of consumption to production (minus one) for each commodity and associated Newey-
West standard errors. Data on global consumption and production are from the Commodity Research Bureau (CRB), trade
associations (TA), the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (UN FAO), the Food and Agricultural Services of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA-FAS), or the Bureau of Resources and Energy Economics of the Australian Government
(BREE). Series left blank are those for which consumption and production data are unavailable.
                                                                        FIGURE I.1: EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS ON THE INDIRECT COMMON FACTOR
                                                                                                                                -3
                                                                                     Industrial Production                   x 10             Consumer Price Index                                           IC Factor
                                                                0.025                                                   20                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             IRF
 IR F to a 100bp ex pa ns ionary M P s ho c k




                                                                 0.02                                                                                                        99% CI      0.2
                                                                                                                        15                                                   95% CI
                                                                0.015                                                                                                        90% CI     0.15

                                                                                                                        10
                                                                 0.01                                                                                                                    0.1

                                                                0.005                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                        5

                                                                   0                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                        0
                                                       -0.005                                                                                                                           -0.05

                                                                -0.01                                                   -5                                                               -0.1
                                                                         5     10       15       20      25   30   35                5   10      15       20        25     30      35           5    10    15       20   25   30     35
                                                                                             Months                                                   Months                                                    Months



                                                                                     Industrial Production                                        CPI Inflation                                              IC Factor

                                                                  0.1                                                                                                US Recessions
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                 H is toric al C ontribution of M P S hoc k s




                                                                                                                        6                                            MP Contribution
                                                                                                                                                                     Actual Value
                                                                 0.05                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5


                                                                   0                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.5
                                                                                                                        -2
                                                                 -0.1

                                                                    1970 1975 1980    1985 1990 1995 2000 2005           1970 1975 1980 1985 1990                 1995 2000 2005           1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005



Notes: The figures in the top row present estimated impulse responses of U.S. industrial production, the U.S. consumer
price index, and the IC factor to a 100-basis-point expansionary monetary policy shock using the vector autoregression
(VAR) described in section 4. Confidence intervals are constructed from the distribution of impulse responses
generated by drawing 2,000 times from the estimated distribution of VAR parameters. The bottom row presents actual
values of each variable normalized by the predicted values from the VAR given initial conditions and no subsequent
shocks (solid black line), U.S. recessions (light grey shaded areas) and the estimated contribution of monetary policy
shocks to historical variation in each variable (blue areas). For the CPI, the bottom figure presents year-over-year
inflation rates.
            Appendix J: Additional Tables on Out-of-Sample Forecasting
   APPENDIX TABLE J.1: RECURSIVE FORECAST ERROR DIAGNOSTICS FOR REAL COMMODITY PRICES
                                                                    Forecast Evaluation
                         h=1       h=3        h=6       h = 12
                                                                          Period

Agr./Food Commodities

 Apples                  0.886     0.738      0.598     0.703        1982:11–2011:12

 Bananas                 0.898     0.726      0.659     0.929         1968:1–2013:1

 Barley                  0.973     0.975      1.002     0.986         1968:1–2013:1

 Beef                    1.138     1.261      1.359     1.367         1968:1–2013:1

 Cocoa                   0.933     1.020      1.039     1.032        1968:1–2012:12

 Coffee                  0.959     0.986      1.072     1.088        1968:1–2012:12

 Corn                    0.904     0.943      0.924     0.910        1968:1–2012:12

 Fishmeal                1.025     1.167      1.108     1.078         1968:1–2013:1

 Hay                     1.026     0.953      0.909     0.878         1968:1–2013:3

 Oats                    0.932     0.965      0.937     0.955        1968:1–2010:11

 Orange juice            0.967     1.023      1.045     0.967        1971:2–2012:10

 Onions                  0.886     0.762      0.618     0.623        1968:1–2011:12

 Pepper                  0.906     1.073      1.197     1.375         1983:6–2007:6

 Potatoes                0.816     0.799      0.701     0.947        1968:1–2011:12

 Rice                    0.873     0.961      1.025     1.115        1968:1–2012:12

 Shrimp                  1.029     1.100      1.136     1.256         1968:1–2013:1

 Sorghum                 0.930     0.997      0.988     0.982         1968:1–2013:1

 Soybeans                0.936     1.016      1.053     1.078         1968:1–2012:9

 Sugar                   0.937     0.999      1.025     1.038        1968:1–2012:12

 Tea                     1.042     1.193      1.237     1.313         1968:1–2013:1

 Tobacco                 0.894     0.912      0.904     0.873         1968:1–2013:1

 Wheat                   0.970     1.049      0.997     0.947        1968:1–2012:12

Oils
  Coconut                              0.988            0.984           0.964            0.914               1989:7–2010:12

  Groundnut                            0.993            0.937           0.893            0.773                1968:1–2013:1

  Palm                                 0.915            1.071            1.072           1.036                1968:1–2013:1

  Rapeseed                             1.030            0.992            1.028           0.963                1984:1–2013:1

  Sunflower                            0.946            1.028            1.057           1.106                1968:1–2005:6

Industrial Commodities

  Aluminum                             0.999            1.004            1.058           1.155                1977:1–2013:1

  Burlap                               0.880            1.050            1.068           1.054                1968:1–2012:9

  Cement                               1.028            1.075            1.148           1.200               1984:1–2012:12

  Copper                               0.887            1.006            1.072           1.104               1968:1–2012:12

  Cotton                               0.762            0.927            1.000           0.950               1968:1–2012:12

  Lead                                 0.964            1.034            1.084           1.092               1968:1–2012:12

  Lumber                               1.005            1.127           1.149            1.172               1968:1–2012:12

  Mercury                              0.884            1.077            1.198           1.419                1968:1–1995:3

  Nickel                               0.955            1.157            1.444           2.422                1983:3–2013:1

  Rubber                               0.952            0.989            1.054           1.117               1968:1–2010:12

  Tin                                  0.915            0.922           0.991            1.068               1968:1–2012:12

  Wool                                 0.967            0.987            1.034           1.096                1968:1–2013:1

  Zinc                                 0.936            1.030            1.101           1.339               1968:1–2012:12

Notes: The forecast evaluation period depends on the commodity. It begins either in 1968:1 or at the earliest date that allows the initial
estimation window to contain at least 48 observations. The maximum length of the recursive sample is restricted by the end of the data
sample for each commodity and the forecast horizon. All forecasts are obtained from a bivariate VAR that includes the level of the real
commodity price and the first principal component extracted from the cross-section of real commodity prices. The lag length of the VAR
is chosen recursively using the BIC. The MSPE of the VAR forecast is expressed as a ratio relative to that of the no-change forecast.
Entries smaller than 1 indicate that the VAR forecast is superior to the no-change forecast and are shown in boldface.
APPENDIX TABLE J.2: RECURSIVE FORECAST ERROR DIAGNOSTICS FOR REAL COMMODITY PRICES

                                  h=1       h=3        h=6       h = 12

         Agr./Food Commodities

           Bananas                0.878     0.695     0.620      0.835

           Barley                 0.965     0.941     0.968      0.924

           Beef                   1.042     1.189     1.430      1.702

           Cocoa                  0.971     1.006      1.020     1.000

           Coffee                 0.962     0.947     0.987      0.957

           Corn                   0.885     0.875     0.847      0.799

           Fishmeal               0.964     1.096      1.188     1.308

           Hay                    0.956     0.838     0.703      0.598

           Rice                   0.842     0.873     0.831      0.742

           Shrimp                 1.032     1.082     1.086      1.202

           Sorghum                0.913     0.923     0.889      0.857

           Sugar                  0.946     1.013      1.006     0.944

           Tea                    0.955     0.983     0.973      1.004

           Tobacco                0.859     0.871     0.827      0.737

           Wheat                  0.923     0.928     0.850      0.782

         Oils

           Groundnut              0.858     0.863     0.806      0.678

           Palm                   0.926     1.109      1.110     1.055

           Rapeseed               1.030     0.992      1.028     0.963

         Industrial Commodities

           Aluminum               0.992     0.967     0.980      0.999

           Cement                 1.028     1.075     1.148      1.200

           Copper                 0.864     0.981      1.026     1.084
   Cotton                         0.783          0.916          1.014          0.971

   Lead                           0.989          1.041          1.074          1.118

   Lumber                         1.038          1.048          1.077          1.230

   Nickel                         0.949          1.140          1.431          2.417

   Tin                            0.891          0.882          0.939          0.955

   Wool                           0.918          0.952          1.008          1.076

   Zinc                           0.919          0.953          0.925          0.869

Notes: The forecast evaluation period is 1984:1–2012:12. The initial estimation window
begins at the earliest date that allows it to contain at least 48 observations. The maximum
length of the recursive sample is restricted by the end of the data sample for each
commodity and the forecast horizon. All forecasts are obtained from a bivariate VAR
that includes the level of the real commodity price and the first principal component
extracted from the cross-section of real commodity prices. The lag length of the VAR
is chosen recursively using the BIC. The MSPE of the VAR forecast is expressed as a
ratio relative to that of the no-change forecast. Entries smaller than 1 indicate that the
VAR forecast is superior to the no-change forecast and are shown in boldface.
APPENDIX TABLE J.3: SUMMARY OF RECURSIVE FORECAST ACCURACY DIAGNOSTICS FOR THE REAL PRICE OF OIL


                                    Forecast Evaluation Period: 1984:1–2012:8



                                             BIC                12 lags

                                    FAVAR          VAR     FAVAR          VAR

                        1 month      0.790         0.825    0.858         0.843



                        3 months     0.947         1.047    1.037         1.028



                        6 months     1.111         1.268    1.224         1.206



                        12 months    1.308         1.501    1.419         1.427




                                    Forecast Evaluation Period: 1992:1–2012:8



                                             BIC                12 lags

                                    FAVAR          VAR     FAVAR          VAR
     1 month           0.832          0.846          0.904          0.858



     3 months          0.980          1.016          1.105          0.960



     6 months          1.182          1.175          1.329          1.115



     12 months         1.459          1.336          1.524          1.172

Notes: The data for the oil market are from Baumeister and Kilian (2012) and span
the period 1973:1–2012:8. “FAVAR” refers to the bivariate factor-augmented VAR
forecasting model that includes the commodity price factor and the real price of oil.
“VAR” refers to the four-variable VAR of the oil market, as described in the text.
“BIC” indicates that the lag length is chosen recursively using the BIC. “12 lags”
indicates that the lag length is fixed at 12. The MSPE ratios of the real oil price
forecasts are computed relative to the benchmark no-change forecast. Entries smaller
than 1 indicate that the model-based forecast is superior to the no-change forecast
and are shown in boldface.
 Appendix K: The Direct Common Factor Loadings and the Energy Intensity
                            of Production

As a check on the model, we test one of its implications for the loadings on the direct common (DC)
factor. This factor represents the composition of shocks that directly affect the commodity sector in the
model via exogenous shocks to the energy sector. A direct implication of the model is that the loadings on
the DC factor are positively correlated with the share of energy inputs used in the production of the
commodity. We computed the energy input share for several commodity producing industries using the
2007 benchmark input-output table for the United States and linked these industries to the commodities in
our sample. In the cases where several commodities are in the same industry, we use the arithmetic
average of the DC factor loadings for each commodity that belongs in that industry. This approach is
similar to the one that Lee and Ni (JME 2002) used to rank industries by oil intensity.

The first two tables show the industries used in the analysis and the mapping between the commodities in
our sample and the NAICS categories. In the first table, the direct input requirement is the amount of a
commodity that is directly or initially required to produce a dollar of the industry’s output. For example, it
takes 11.9 cents of direct energy inputs to produce one dollar in the grain farming industry. The total
requirement is the direct requirement plus the indirect requirement.

The two figures depict the positive relationship between the energy input requirements and the DC factor
loadings, which is consistent with the prediction of the model. This check provides a validation of one of
the model’s predictions about the loadings and lends credibility to the framework we use to study the
common variation in commodity prices.

                              Commodity Production: Direct and Total Requirements
                                                                                          Direct               Total
Agricultural/Food
   1111B0               Grain farming                                                     0.119                0.418
   111900               Other crop farming                                                0.079                0.218
   1121A0               Beef cattle ranching and farming                                  0.065                0.260
   1111A0               Oilseed farming                                                   0.049                0.161
   111300               Fruit and tree nut farming                                        0.035                0.107
   111200               Vegetable and melon farming                                       0.033                0.114
   113000               Forestry and logging                                              0.026                0.098
   311920               Coffee and tea manufacturing                                      0.018                0.142

Industrials
   327310               Cement manufacturing                                              0.178                0.326
   33131A               Alumina refining and primary aluminum production                  0.170                0.291
   2122A0               Iron, gold, silver, and other metal ore mining                    0.154                0.325
   212230               Copper, nickel, lead, and zinc mining                             0.081                0.207
   331419               Primary smelting and refining of nonferrous metal                 0.034                0.185


Notes: The data are from 2007 benchmark input-output tables computed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/index_industry_io.cfm). For the purposes of calculating the energy input requirements,
these industries are classified as energy related: Oil and gas extraction (211000); coal mining (212100); electric
power generation, transmission, and distribution (221100); natural gas distribution (221200); petroleum refineries
(324110); other petroleum and coal products manufacturing (324190); petrochemical manufacturing (325110); and
pipeline transportation (486000). The data are ranked by the direct input requirement.
                   Commodities and NAICS Categories
                                        Industry
Agricultural/Food
   Apples                          Fruit and tree nut farming
   Bananas                         Fruit and tree nut farming
   Barley                                Grain farming
   Beef                         Beef cattle ranching and farming
   Coffee                        Coffee and tea manufacturing
   Corn                                  Grain farming
   Hay                                Other crop farming
   Oats                                  Grain farming
   Orange juice                    Fruit and tree nut farming
   Onions                        Vegetable and melon farming
   Pepper                          Fruit and tree nut farming
   Potatoes                      Vegetable and melon farming
   Rice                                  Grain farming
   Sorghums                              Grain farming
   Soybeans                              Grain farming
   Sugar                              Other crop farming
   Tea                           Coffee and tea manufacturing
   Tobacco                            Other crop farming
   Wheat                                 Grain farming
   Coconut oil                          Oilseed farming
   Groundnut oil                        Oilseed farming
   Palm oil                             Oilseed farming
   Rapeseed oil                         Oilseed farming
   Sun/Safflower oil                    Oilseed farming

Industrials
   Aluminum            Alumina refining and primary aluminum production
   Cement                            Cement manufacturing
   Copper                    Copper, lead, nickel and zinc mining
   Cotton                              Other crop farming
   Lead                      Copper, lead, nickel and zinc mining
   Lumber                             Forestry and logging
   Mercury                    Iron, Gold, Silver and other mining
   Nickel                    Copper, lead, nickel and zinc mining
   Tin                 Primary smelting and refining of nonferrous metal
   Zinc                      Copper, lead, nickel and zinc mining

Unclassified
  Cocoa; Fishmeal; Shrimp; Burlap; Rubber; Wool
