                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




OPTION VALUE OF WORK, HEALTH STATUS, AND RETIREMENT DECISIONS IN JAPAN:
   EVIDENCE FROM THE JAPANESE STUDY ON AGING AND RETIREMENT (JSTAR)

                                        Satoshi Shimizutani
                                          Takashi Oshio
                                            Mayu Fujii

                                        Working Paper 20001
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20001


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




 This study utilized micro-level data collected through the Japanese Study on Aging and Retirement
 (JSTAR), which was conducted by the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI)
 and Hitotsubashi University in 2007 and 2009. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
 and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Satoshi Shimizutani, Takashi Oshio, and Mayu Fujii. All rights reserved. Short sections
 of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Option Value of Work, Health Status, and Retirement Decisions in Japan: Evidence from
the Japanese Study on Aging and Retirement (JSTAR)
Satoshi Shimizutani, Takashi Oshio, and Mayu Fujii
NBER Working Paper No. 20001
March 2014
JEL No. H55,I14,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

This study examined the factors that affect the retirement decisions of the middle-aged and elderly
in Japan, focusing especially on their earnings, public pension benefits, and health status. Using two-year
panel data from the JSTAR and applying the OV model proposed by Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b),
we found that the probability of retirement has a negative and significant correlation with the OV of
work, and that correlation does not depend on the health status. Our counter-factual simulation based
on the OV model showed that, if the probability of being enrolled in the disability program were zero,
the average years of work when individuals are in their 50s and 60s would increase. However, it should
be emphasized that, in Japan—where being enrolled in the disability program is unlikely to make one
a candidate for the retirement path—the result of this simulation does not indicate that satisfying the
eligibility criteria for disability pension receipts will more stringently increase the labor supplied by
the middle-aged and elderly.


Satoshi Shimizutani                                  Mayu Fujii
Gender Equality Bureau                               National Institute of Population
Cabinet Office                                        and Social Security
1-6-1 Nagata-cho,Chiyoda-ku                          Hibiya Kokusai Building 6th Floor
Tokyo 100-8914                                       2-2-3 Uchisaiwaicyo, Chiyoda-ku
Japan                                                Tokyo 100-0011
sshimizutani@gmail.com                               Japan
                                                     fujii-mayu@ipss.go.jp
Takashi Oshio
Institute of Economic Research
Hitotsubashi University
2-1 Naka, Kunitachi
Tokyo 186-8603
Japan
oshio@ier.hit-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction


This study examines retirement decisions and their associations with health status in Japan, using the
option value (OV) model proposed by Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b). This model assumes that an
individual maximizes the weighted average of the utility from labor income until retirement and that
from pension income thereafter. The timing of retirement is determined by comparing the utility
gain associated with a delay in retirement, which is summarized as the OV.
    Despite the considerable attention recently paid in Japan to “late” retirement, there has been a
limited body of literature that addresses retirement decisions there. To our knowledge, only a few
studies in Japan empirically use the OV model to examine retirement decisions. The study of Oshio
and Oishi (2004) was the first empirical study of this sort in Japan: it used cross-sectional data with
insufficient control variables with respect to health status. Oshio, Shimizutani, and Oishi (2010)
employed macro-level data to explore the effect of OV on the labor force participation rate; they
show that OV significantly correlates with labor force participation among the elderly. These results
imply that the exit of the elderly from the labor force has no bearing on job creation for the young.
    More recently, Oshio, Oishi, and Shimizutani (2011)—whose study is closely related to that of
Oshio, Shimizutani, and Oishi (2010)—used macro-level data to construct several incentive
measures vis-à-vis retirement, including OV. This study shows that since 1985, the labor force
participation rate of the elderly in Japan has been significantly sensitive to both OV and social
security reforms—the latter of which featured reduced benefits generosity and thus significantly
encouraged the elderly to remain in the labor force longer.
    The current study presents further evidence concerning retirement decisions in Japan, within the
framework of the OV model; it makes specific reference to Japan’s disability pension program and
individual health status.1 It employs micro-level data collected through the Japanese Study on
Aging and Retirement (JSTAR) (Ichimura, Hashimoto and Shimizutani, 2009), which is the
Japanese version of the U.S. Health and Retirement Study (HRS), the English Longitudinal Survey
on Ageing (ELSA), and the Survey on Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). JSTAR
has a longitudinal design and features a rich variety of variables that touch on health status.
    We calculate OV for each individual working in 2007, with the disability pension program
considered a potential pathway from work to retirement; we also examine the effect of OV on
retirement decisions in 2009, while controlling for individual health status. We find that OV
negatively and significantly correlates with the probability of retirement, and that the individual’s
1
  Ichimura and Shimizutani (2012) also employed similar JSTAR data (i.e., from the first and second waves) to explore
retirement behavior in Japan. They grouped a variety of variables into health, family, and socioeconomic factors and
explored the effect of each factor in the first wave (2007) on the probability of retirement and hours worked in the second
wave (2009).

                                                              2
health does not confound the correlation.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional
background. Section 3 explains, in detail, the study’s empirical approach. Section 4 presents the
empirical results, and Section 5 assesses the fit of the model. Section 6 shows the results of the
counter-factual simulation. Section 7 provides concluding remarks.


2. Background2


2.1 History of Japan’s social security and disability program
This section provides an overview, from a historical perspective, of Japan’s disability program and
other related reforms to the social security program. We describe the “disability pension program”
below, which approximates that which is often referred to as a disability insurance (DI) program in
other countries. The disability pension program is part of Japan’s public pension program, and all
revisions to the disability program have been linked to those made to core pension programs.
Among several programs that assist the disabled, the disability pension program plays the most
important role in terms of income compensation.
    The Japanese public pension program consists of three programs: Employees’ Pension Insurance
(EPI; Kosei Nenkin), whose pensioners are private employees; National Pension Insurance (NPI;
Kokumin Nenkin), whose pensioners are self-employed or agriculture, forestry, or fishery
cooperative employees; and Mutual Aid Insurance (MAI; Kyosai Nenkin), which covers employees
in the public sector and in private schools. In terms of their numbers of pensioners, each of EPI and
NPI contribute to the total by slightly less than half, and MAI occupies the remaining small portion.
An overview of Japan’s social security programs is provided in Appendix 1.
    Below, we focus on the revisions made over time to Japan’s disability pension program, while
focusing on EPI and NPI (Table 1). The disability pension program was included as part of the EPI
program, when it was launched in 1944.3 Once disabled individuals were deemed to qualify for the
program—based on functional ability to perform activities of daily living, rather than on loss of
earning ability—they were rated through the use of two grades. Grade 1 refers to a condition
because of which a person is unable to perform activities of daily living (e.g., severe disability
affecting both hands, or complete blindness). Grade 2 refers to a condition because of which a
person faces very severe limitations in performing activities of daily living (any severe disability
affecting either hand). The program at that time, from the very beginning, insured persons with

2
 This section updates the discussion of Oshio and Shimizutani (2012).
3
 A brief review of development of the disability pension program is provided by the Ministry of Health, Labor, and
Welfare (2009).

                                                            3
mental disorders, via EPI. The 1954 revision introduced Grade 3, to cover more disabled persons
with conditions less severe than those in Grade 2.4
    Following the establishment of the EPI program, the disability pension program was expanded,
and there have been four major revisions during its development. The first revision was
accompanied by the introduction of NPI in 1961. NPI launched the universal pension system into
the Japanese public pension program, drastically expanding the coverage of the disability pension
program to more groups than just employees in the private sector. Unlike EPI, NPI did not cover
mental disease at the time of its introduction. The NPI had two types of disability programs: one for
recipients with premium contributions (“Disability Pension Program (Shogai Nenkin)”) and another
for those without (“Disability Welfare Pension Program (Shogai Fukushi Nenkin)”). Eligibility to
receive disability pension benefits is assessed at the time of the first doctor visit to survey the extent
of the condition that rendered the person disabled; thus, those who had had that first doctor visit
before reaching the age of 20 or before 1961 were not insured by the Disability Pension Program
under NPI. Instead, they were covered by the Disability Welfare Pension Program, which was
financed by the government. Eligibility for this latter program was means-tested, and its benefit
amount was lower than that of the former program.
    The second revision, in 1974, called for expanding coverage for mental disease. NPI began to
insure mental disorders in 1964 and mental deficiency in 1965, though coverage for mental
disability was very limited. Whereas those who paid premiums were eligible to receive disability
pension benefits once they satisfied Grade 1 or 2 criteria (NPI had no Grade 3), the disability
welfare program insured the disabled only if they satisfied Grade 1 criteria. In 1974, the disability
welfare program also began to cover those who satisfied Grade 2 criteria.
    The third revision was implemented in 1985 (effective from 1986) as part of the major revision
to core public pension programs, which harmonized all the public pension programs into an
integrated form. For the first time, it reduced the benefit multiplier and flat-rate benefit in the old age
pension program, and sought to restrain increases in total pension benefits. Three revisions were
implemented with respect to the disability pension programs.
    First, a double-tier structure was introduced, wherein (1) the flat rate “Disability Basic Pension
(Shogai Kiso Nenkin)” benefit was in the first tier and replaced the “Disability Welfare Pension”
funded by the government and by the premium contributions of NPI pensioners, and (2) the
wage-proportional “Disability Employees’ Pension (Shogai Kosei Nenkin)” program was the second
tier. NPI pensioners, either with or without premium contributions, were entitled to receive (1).

4
  Before 1954, EPI had in the old-age pension program only a single layer of wage-proportional benefit. While EPI was
reconstructed in 1954 so as to have a double-tier structure, the disability pension program had a single-tier structure until the
1985 revision.

                                                               4
Second, both the disabled without premium contributions and those with premium contributions
were entitled to receive the same Disability Basic Pension benefit, but the amount doubled for the
former group. Third, the grading of disability conditions was harmonized across all programs.
Nonetheless, the Disability Basic Pension covered only Grade-1 or 2 disabled individuals. EPI
additionally covered the disabled in Grade 3, and provided “disability compensation” for a disabled
pensioner with a disability less severe than Grade 3, if that disability condition were fixed.5
    Fourth and finally, the government allowed Disability Basic Pension recipients aged 65 years or
older to additionally receive EPI benefits, if they had made any EPI contributions since 2006.


2.2 Current scheme
Under the current scheme, a person who visited a doctor for the first time to consult about the cause
of disability when he/she was under the age of 20 or when he/she was an NPI pensioner is entitled to
receive the Disability Basic Pension benefit. There is no limitation in terms of age for receiving
disability pension benefits. The formulas used to calculate the benefit are as follows:
         Grade 1 = Basic Pension benefit × 1.25 + additional benefit for dependent children
         Grade 2 = Basic Pension benefit + additional benefit for dependent children


    The amount of the Basic Pension benefit is JPY786,500 per year; that of the additional child
benefit is JPY226,300 for each of the first and second children, and JPY75,400 for each for the third
and subsequent children.
    In addition to the Disability Basic Pension, any person who first consulted a doctor to identify
the cause of disability when he/she was an EPI pensioner is entitled to receive a wage-proportional
Disability Employees’ Pension benefit, or a Disability Mutual Aid Pension benefit (for the MAI
recipients). The formulas used to calculate the second-tier benefit are as follows:
    Grade 1 = Wage-proportional benefit × 1.25 + Additional benefit for a spouse
    Grade 2 = Wage-proportional benefit + Additional benefit for a spouse
    Grade 3 = Max (Wage proportional benefit, JPY589,900)


    The amount of additional benefit for a spouse is JPY226,300 per year.6




5
  Since EPI pensioners were required to join the NPI as part of the 1985 reform, the entitlement to receive disability
pension became contingent on NPI grading (Disability Basic Pension), even if the disabled person had been approved to
receive disability pension benefits through the EPI or MAI programs. Additionally, the MAI program has a Grade 3.
6
  Momose (2008) argues that the amount of benefits from Japan’s disability employee pension (Grade 1 or 2) is larger that
of the United States or Sweden, while the amount from the disability basic pension (Grade 1) is much smaller in Japan, and
that from Grade 2 in Japan is one-half the standard benefit in the United States or Sweden.

                                                            5
2.3 Change in the disability program participation over time
This subsection describes changes in disability program participation over time. The data source is
the Annual Report of Social Security Administration (Shakai Hoken Jigyo Nenpo), which is
published by Japan’s Social Security Agency. This report contains data on disability pension
recipients, aggregated at the national level. However, it provides only the numbers of disability
pension recipients by type of pension; no information on gender or age is available. Figure 1 reports
the numbers of recipients who received disability pension benefits between 1970 and 2011.7 The
numbers of recipients have increased four-fold over these four decades, from 0.5 million in 1970 to
2.2 million in 2011. The proportions of NPI, EPI, and MAI pensioners have been about 80%, 20%,
and 2–3%, respectively, during this period.8
    Figure 2 shows trends in the rate of disability pension receipt in comparison to those of the
employment rate, during 1970 and 2011. Because of data unavailability, we make the strong
assumption that the ratio of recipients aged 50–64 to all total recipients in 2009—52.5% and 28.6%
for disability EPI and NPI, respectively—has been the same over time; we also roughly estimate the
total number of disability pension recipients within this age group. As already suggested in Figure 1,
the disability pension receipt rate shows an upward trend, with some acceleration in the mid-1970s
and 2000s. More importantly, the movement of the disability pension recipient rate has been
unrelated to that of the employment rate.


2.4 Disability program participation by individual characteristics: JSTAR
We use JSTAR data to explore the characteristics of individuals participating in the disability
program. The JSTAR is a longitudinal survey that collects information on middle-aged and elderly
individuals in Japan. The first wave of the survey was conducted in 2007, with a baseline sample of
more than 4,200 individuals aged 50–75 years who lived in five municipalities in eastern Japan. The
respondents in the first wave were interviewed again in 2009; the response rate in the second wave
among the respondents from the first wave was about 80% (i.e., an attrition rate of about 20%), with
some variation across municipalities.
    Although the JSTAR sample is not nationally representative and the sample size is not large
enough to contain many disability pension recipients,9 the dataset does contain a rich set of

7
  In Japan, the fiscal year starts in April and ends in March. The figures are measured as of the end of the fiscal year.
8
  The number of MAI pensioners receiving the disability pension is not available; the number of MAI pensioners eligible to
receive benefits is available through the Annual Report on Social Security Statistics (Shakai Hoken Tokei Nenpo), compiled
by the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research. We compute the number of MAI pensioners to receive
the disability pension, assuming the proportion of those who receive out of those who are eligible—both of which are
available in the Annual Report of Social Security Administration—to be the same for the EPI and MAI programs.
9
  The JSTAR project started in 2005. Its first wave was completed in five municipalities in 2007, and its second wave in
seven municipalities (two new municipalities were added) in 2009. Ten municipalities (i.e., three new municipalities were
added) were studied in 2011–12. The baseline sample consists of individuals aged 50–75 years. The JSTAR uses random

                                                            6
variables representing individuals’ demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, pension receipt,
and health status, inter alia; hence, we are able to examine the probability of receiving disability
pension by exploiting individual-level characteristics. In the first wave of JSTAR, about 1.3% of the
sample (aged 50–75) answered that they were receiving a disability pension at the time of the
interview; in the second wave, that number was 1.2% (aged 52–78). When restricted to the sample
aged 50–64, these percentages were 1.5% in 2007 and 1.6% in 2009—both of which are smaller
than the percentages estimated from the aggregated data (Figure 2).
    Figures 3a and 3b illustrate the percentages of men and women aged 55–64, respectively, who
are receiving a disability pension, by education level and year (i.e., 2007 and 2009). For both men
and women and for both 2007 and 2009, we saw the general tendency that a more highly educated
person is less likely to receive a disability pension. For men, however, the percentage receiving a
disability pension in 2007 was much higher among those who had graduated from a two-year
college/vocational school than that among high school graduates; this result may derive simply from
the small sample size of men who had graduated from two-year college/vocational schools (60 of
864).
    Figures 3c and 3d depict the percentages of men and women aged 55–64, respectively, who are
receiving a disability pension, by health status and year (see subsection 3.3 on how the health index
is computed). For both men and women, the probability of receiving DI benefits is highest among
those in the lowest health quintile (those in the poorest health), while the probability is very small
among the other health quintiles. This is not surprising, given that the eligibility requirement for a
disability pension in Japan places emphasis on physical and mental conditions and functional
limitations (Momose, 2008).
    In Table 2, we present the percentage of disability pension receipt by education and health status,
to highlight those subpopulations in which disability pension receipt is particularly prevalent. As a
general tendency, for both men and women, most recipients are concentrated within the lowest
health quintile within each educational group. For example, among men, the probability of disability
pension receipt in 2007 of those who did not graduate from high school was 17% in the lowest
health quintile, while it was 0–1.96% in the higher health quintiles. Within each health quintile, the
percentage of disability pension receipt is lowest among those in the highest educational group. For
instance, among men, the probability of disability pension receipt in 2007 of those in the lowest
health quintile was 17% in the lowest educational group, while it was 10% in the highest
educational group.



sampling within a municipality, rather than probabilistic national sampling; it places emphasis on securing a larger sample
size within the same socioeconomic environment.

                                                             7
3. Empirical approach


To examine the differences in elderly individuals’ labor force participation across countries by the
provisions of social security programs, we estimate an “inclusive” OV model, where it is assumed
that an individual’s retirement decision at age t depends on an incentive measure OV, his or her own
health status, and other demographic and economic characteristics at age t. This section describes
the data and sample used in the estimation, the empirical model used to estimate, and how we
calculate individuals’ OV figures and health status.


3.1 Data source and sample
The data we use to estimate the OV model come from the first and second waves of the JSTAR,
conducted in 2007 and 2009, respectively. We restrict our sample to those who were interviewed in
both waves, had answered in 2007 that they were working at all, and had provided information on
their demographic, socioeconomic, and health-related characteristics in both waves. Individuals who
answered in 2007 that they were working at all consisted of company executives, regular employees,
part-time workers, casual or temporary workers, self-employed workers, employees on leave, and
others. Our final sample consists of 1,575 individuals (996 men, 579 women) who were aged 50–75
in 2007.


3.2 Empirical model
     We specify the empirical OV model as follows:
      P (Yi , 2009  1 | OVi , 2007 , Health i , 2007 , X i , 2007 ) 
                                                                                                                            (4)
       i    0   1OVi , 2007   2 Health i , 2007   3 X i , 2007 ,
The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if individual i retired in 2009, and
zero otherwise. We define an individual as “retired” if he/she answered that he/she was retired or
doing housework. OVi, 2007, one of the main independent variables, is the OV of individual i in 2007.
Healthi, 2007 is another key independent variable; it represents the health status of individual i. Finally,
Xi, 2007 represents a vector of the remaining control variables, including age, gender, marital status
(married), the existence of working spouse, total assets, occupation, and educational attainment, all
as measured in 2007.10 In the following sections, we describe how the OV and health status are
measured.




10
   There are some missing data for each variable; this is especially true for the total assets. We impute the variable by
allocating the average value of those who have attributes similar to those of the respondents.

                                                                8
3.3 OV calculations
OV at age t is defined as

     OVt   k 1 Pk OV kt ,
                   K
                                                                                                                        (1)

where k refers to the k th pathway to retirement; Pk, the probability weight on the k th pathway; and
OVkt, the OV of the k th pathway at age t. Moreover, we define the OV corresponding to each
pathway as:
     OV kt  E tVkt ( r * )  E tVkt (t ) ,                                                                             (2)

     EtVkt ( r )   s  t p s|t  s  t ( y ( s ))    s  r p s|t  s  t [Brk ( S )] ,
                         r 1                              D
                                                                                                                        (3)

where p‫ ݐ|ݏ‬is the probability of survival at age s, given survival at age t; y(s) refers to wage income at
age s while working; Brk(s) refers to pension benefits at age s when retired at age r through the k th
pathway; β is the discount rate; γ is the parameter of risk aversion; and κ is the parameter of labor
disutility.
     In the following sections, we consider in turn the essential components of the OV model:
pathways to retirement; weights on the pathways to retirement; the measurement of health, profiles
of wage, and pension income; and assumptions regarding model parameters.


3.3.1 Pathways to retirement
Based on Japan’s old age pension system and its three related programs, we set up two pathways to
retirement—namely, Normal claiming and Disability—for each of the EPI/MAI pensioners. More
explicitly, for EPI pensioners, we have:
(A) Normal claiming: “Employed” to “Normal claiming,” which entails claiming at the normal
     retirement age. In this pathway, one claims wage-proportional benefits at ages 60–65
     (depending on cohort) and a flat-rate benefit at age 65. The benefits are reduced as per the
     results of the earnings test under the Zaushoku pension scheme, if one continues to work beyond
     the normal retirement age.11
(B) Disability: “Employed” to “Claiming disability pension benefit,” which entails claiming
     EPI/MAI wage-proportional/flat-rate benefits at ages 60–64.


          For NPI pensioners, we have:
(A) Normal claiming: “Self-employed” to “Normal claiming,” which entails claiming NPI benefits
     at age 65. Note that no earnings test is applied to NPI beneficiaries.


11
  In addition, there are “early claiming (Kuriage)” and “late claiming (Kurisage),” which actuarially adjust the benefit.
Even when incorporating these claim schemes, we found the estimation results to remain virtually identical.

                                                                9
(B) Disability: “Self-employed” to “Claiming NPI disability pension benefit,” which entails
     claiming disability benefits initially at ages 60–64.


3.3.2 The weight given to each pathway
To compute the weight given to each retirement pathway in calculating OV, we employ a “stock
estimator” that uses the share of the population taking each pathway in a combined-age group at a
given point in time.12 In fact, since we assume there to be only two retirement pathways for each
pension system (EPI/MAI or NPI), we estimate the weight of one of the pathways (i.e., the disability
pathway) and assign 1 – (weight estimate on the disability pathway) to the normal claiming pathway.
The stock estimator of the weight of the disability path is calculated by year, gender, and education.
More specifically, we calculate the estimate of the weight of each pathway as follows:
(A) EPI/MAI “Disability”: Share of EPI/MAI disability pension enrollees aged 60–64, among all
     EPI/MAI enrollees, by year, gender, and education
(B) EPI/MAI “Normal claiming”: Others (1 – (A))
(C) NPI “Disability”: Share of NPI disability pension enrollees aged 60–64, among all NPI
     enrollees, by year, gender, and education
(D) NPI “Normal claiming”: Others (1 – (C))


Administrative data from the Annual Report on Social Security Administration are used to obtain
information by gender; since administrative data lack information by education, data from the
JSTAR are exploited to complement the information in terms of education.
     Figures 4a and 4b illustrate the weight on each pathway for the EPI/MAI and NPI groups,
respectively, by JSTAR wave year and gender. The proportion of “Disability” is negligible for both
the male and female EPI/MAI groups, while the amount is somewhat higher for the NPI group.


3.3.3 Earnings and pension benefits
The major components of the OV calculation are the labor income until retirement and the pension
income between retirement and death. Labor income until retirement is calculated by taking the
following steps. First, we obtain the median earnings by age, gender, and pension membership (NPI
or EPI/MAI), using 2007 data (Figure 5). Second, for each gender-by-pension-membership group,
we calculate (Median earnings among individuals aged A + 1 – Median earnings among individuals
age A)/(Median earnings among individuals aged A) (A = 50, ..,74) and assume that the rates
12
  There are two alternatives to the “stock estimator.” One is the “age-specific flow” (i.e., the share of workers at each age
who enter a pathway at that age). Another is the “aggregated flow” (i.e., the share of workers starting at an initial age who
eventually enter a pathway at any point). This latter approach reflects the actual ultimate experience of the cohort, but it
does need to assume perfect foresight vis-à-vis future changes to stringency.

                                                             10
represent how an individual’s earnings grow as one ages. Then, to obtain an individual’s wage
profile from age 50 to 75, we multiply the individual’s actual earnings observed in 2007 back and
forward by the “growth” rate of median earnings. Finally, we need to “estimate” the earnings for
individuals under age 50 or over 75, because the JSTAR sample does not contain individuals within
these age ranges. Therefore, for simplicity, we assume that the earnings of those under age 50 are the
same as those of individuals at age 50. We also assume that all individuals will stop working by age
75, so we do not need to impute an earnings profile beyond age 75.
     The pension benefit between retirement and death of an individual is then estimated, using
information on the individual’s pension membership, years of premium contributions, career
average monthly wage (CAMW), and benefit multiplier. Since information on an individual’s years
of premium contributions is not available through the JSTAR data, we use the years worked as a
proxy. The CAMW is estimated via the earnings projection, as explained in the previous paragraph.
The benefit multiplier is determined exogenously by gender and birthday. For technical reasons,
spouse and survivor benefits are not included.


3.3.4 Other parameters
In calculating the OV, we assume several parameter values. We set the value of  , the parameter of
risk aversion, to equal 0.03; κ, the parameter of labor disutility, to equal 1.5; and  to equal 0.75.
All of these parameters are uniform across countries.13 The mortality rates are taken from the 2007
“Life Table,” published by the Japanese government.


3.3.5 OV calculations and descriptions
To examine the retirement behavior in 2009 of individuals who were working in 2007, we calculate
the OV of these individuals in 2007, using the information described in previous subsections.
Figures 6a and 6b show the mean OV by age in 2007 for men and women, respectively. Figure 6a
shows that, for men, the mean OV for the normal claiming path (OV-Normal) constantly declines
with age, but remains positive even among those aged 74. The mean OV for the disability path
(OV-Disability) levels off in the 50s and then begins to decline from the mid-60s, where it overlaps
with the mean OV-Normal. The inclusive OV overlaps with the mean OV-Normal, because the
weight of the disability path is very small. The result—that the inclusive OV decreases with
age—indicates that the utility gained from working until the optimal retirement age, compared to
that from retiring at the current age, tends to decline as people age. At the same time, however, the

13
   The likelihood function is very flat, and the greater the assumed value for the risk aversion parameter γ, the lower the
estimated OV coefficient will be. Given the flat likelihood function, we believe that little is to be gained from showing
estimates based on other values.

                                                              11
result that the inclusive OV remains positive until age 74 implies that, in our OV model, it is optimal
to delay retirement until age 74. The relationship between the OV and age is similar for women,
except that the OV level is much lower than that of men (Figure 6b).
     To further examine the relationship between OV and age, Figures 6c and 6d illustrate—by age
in 2007 and for men and women, respectively—the mean present discounted value (PDV) of
pension benefits obtained, if retired. Figure 6c shows that, for men, the mean PDV of the normal
claiming path (PDV-Normal) rises until age 65 (i.e., the eligibility age for the basic public pension).
Beyond age 65, the mean PDV-Normal declines because, by delaying retirement beyond age 65,
individuals must relinquish years of benefit receipt. In contrast, the mean PDV of the disability path
(PDV-Disability) declines continuously with age and, beyond age 65, becomes the same as that of
PVD-Normal (i.e., the age at which the disability program is unified into the core public pension
programs (EPI/MAI or NPI)). Figure 6d shows that a similar pattern also holds for women. These
results indicate that the mean OV remains positive until age 74, not because the PVD increases with
age, but because the additional earnings obtained through continued work more than compensate for
the decline in the PVD.


3.4 Health measurements
A measure of individual health status is calculated using the method of Poterba, Venti, and Wise
(2010). The idea behind this approach is to construct a single index by using information from many
health indicators. More specifically, using data pooled from the first and second JSTAR waves, we
apply a principal component analysis to 22 health indicators and use the first principal component to
construct a continuous health index.14 The health index is then converted into percentile values,
with 1 representing the worst health and 100 the best health. The Appendix Table 1 reports the
loadings on each health indicator.
     Figure 7 shows the average percentile of the health index by age, for both men and women. We
observe that (1) the mean percentile of the health index declines with age, (2) the speed of the
decline is slightly higher in the 60s than in the 50s, and (3) men and women share almost the same
pattern, although the mean is slightly higher for men in the late 60s.




14
   The 22 items are as follows: (1) difficulty in walking 100 m, (2) difficulty in lifting/carrying, (3) difficulty in
pushing/pulling, (4) difficulty with an activity of daily living, (5) difficulty in climbing a few steps, (6) difficulty in
stooping/kneeling/crouching, (7) difficulty in getting up from a chair, (8) self-reported health fair/poor, (9) difficulty in
reaching/extending an arm up, (10) body mass index, (11) difficulty in sitting for two hours, (12) difficulty in picking up a
dime, (13) ever experienced heart problems, (14) hospital stay, (15) doctor visit, (16) ever experienced psychological
problems, (17) ever experienced a stroke, (18) ever experienced high blood pressure, (19) ever experienced lung disease,
(20) ever experienced diabetes, (21) ever experienced arthritis, and (22) ever experienced cancer.

                                                              12
4. Results


Table 3a reports the results of estimating the OV model in Equation (4). Columns 1–8 relate to
different model specifications, which vary by whether the effect of age is being controlled for
linearly or with dummy variables, whether the effect of health is being controlled for using quintile
health dummies or a continuous health index, and whether covariates other than OV and health are
included. Column 1, which controls only for a continuous age variable and health quintile dummies,
shows that the coefficient on OV-Inclusive is negative and statistically significant. The result
indicates that OV-Inclusive has a negative effect on retirement. More specifically, a 10,000-unit
increase in OV decreases the probability of retirement by 2.2 percentage points; a standard deviation
increase in the OV (shown in the brackets), meanwhile, decreases the probability of retirement by
4.8 percentage points. These results also hold for other specifications (Columns 2–8). The
coefficients on the other variables generally have the expected signs. Columns 1–4 show that,
compared to individuals in the lowest health quintile (i.e., those in the poorest health), those in the
higher health quintiles are less likely to retire, although the health effects are neither monotonic nor
statistically significant. Similarly, the results in Columns 5–8 indicate that having a larger
continuous health index value (i.e., being healthier) makes one less likely to retire, although again
the coefficient is not significantly different from zero.
    To confirm that the above results are robust to the scale of the OV measure, we also estimate the
model using a percent gain in the inclusive OV as a key explanatory variable, instead of its level.
Here, the measure of a percent gain in the inclusive OV is calculated by dividing the OV (i.e., the
difference between the peak level and the current level of utility) by the current level of utility. Table
3b shows the results of the estimations. The estimated coefficients are again negative and significant,
and robust to specification choice.
    To investigate whether the effects of OV vary by individual health, we estimate the OV model
separately for each health quintile; the estimations results are summarized in Table 4a.
Specifications 1–4 in Columns 1–4 are the same as those in Columns 1–4 of Table 3a. The results
show that the coefficient on the inclusive OV is negative for all the health quintile groups, but
statistically significant only for the second, third, and fifth quintile groups. Similar results hold when
we use a percent gain in the inclusive OV (Table 4b). While insignificant coefficients on the OV
among some of the health quintile groups may derive from the small sample size used in the
estimations (indeed, the standard error of the coefficient on the OV is larger when the model is
estimated separately for each health quintile), the results in Table 4c also indicate that the effects of
OV on the retirement decision do not vary monotonically with individual health. This table reports


                                                    13
the results of estimating a model that includes an interaction between OV and the continuous health
index, instead of estimating the model separately for each health quintile. While the estimated
coefficient on the interaction term is negative—which may indicate that the financial incentives for
retirement matter more for those in better health—it is not statistically significant. .
    In Table 5a, we present the results of OV model estimation, for each education group. The
results show no consistent pattern of OV effects across the various education groups: the coefficient
on the OV is negative and significant only for those who graduated from high school and those
graduated from two-year college or vocational school. Using the measure of percent gain in
OV-Inclusive does not essentially change this result (Table 5b).


5. Model fit


To examine the fit of the OV model, we first compare the retirement “hazard rate” predicted by the
OV model (specified in Column 4 of Table 3a) with the actual “hazard rate.” Two things should be
noted, however, in conducting the examination. First, since our dataset is a short panel, the “hazard
rate” is obtained not by following the same individuals over time, but by assuming that the variation
in hazard rates by cohort at a given point in time is the same as that by age of a single cohort. More
specifically, we calculate the “hazard rate” by taking the average by age in 2007 of the probability of
retirement within a year, given that the individual is working in 2007. Second, the retirement hazard
rate averaged by age can be a noisy measure, because the number of observations at each age is
small. As an extreme example, in 2007, only three female individuals aged 74 were still working.
   Figures 8a and 8b compare the predicted versus actual retirement hazard rates for men and
women, respectively. Figure 8a shows that, for men, there are some gaps between the predicted and
actual retirement hazard rates; in particular, the actual retirement hazard rate is much higher at age
65 and ages 69–70. For women, the retirement hazard rate is underpredicted by the OV model at
higher ages, particularly at ages 71 and 74 (Figure 8b). These results indicate that the model does not
seem to predict well the spike in the hazard rate at certain ages, as seen in the actual data.
    Figures 8c and 8d illustrate the predicted versus actual survival rates of retirement for men and
women, respectively. Figure 8c shows that, for men, the actual survival rate is close to 100%
between ages 50 and 56, declines quickly up to age 66, and then decreases moderately up to age 74.
Meanwhile, the predicted survival rate declines steadily between ages 50 and 74. The result that the
predicted survival rate decreases monotonically with age is the same for women (Figure 8d): the
difference in the rate of decline in the actual survival rate by age is not captured by the predicted
survival rate.


                                                    14
   Figure 9 shows the percentage of people for whom the maximum utility from retirement occurs
(i.e., OV becomes zero) at a given age, according to the OV model. That figure also presents the
actual proportion of individuals who have retired, at each age. We observe that, for most of the
individuals in the sample, the maximum utility from retirement is not achieved until age 74. In other
words, the OV continues to be positive until the end point of our calculation. This is because, in our
OV model, the additional earnings from continued work exceed the decline in the PDV of pension
benefits (see Figures 6c and 6d). In contrast, the actual proportion of individuals who have retired
evolves more gradually with age. Hence, the results of the examinations of the model fit presented
in this section suggest that our model is not necessarily successful in predicting individuals’ actual
retirement behavior. The small sample size at each age may be one of the reasons for such results.


6. Counter-factual simulation


As a counter-factual simulation analysis, we examine how individual retirement behavior would
change if there existed only one retirement path—that is, either the normal retirement path or the
disability path. More specifically, using the regression results in Column 4 of Table 3a, we calculate
retirement probabilities and survival rates to retirement, under the two counter-factual cases: when
the weight placed on the normal retirement path in calculating OV is zero, and when the weight
placed on the disability path is zero.
    The results of the simulation are presented in Figures 10a and 10b. If the probability of being
part of the disability program is zero, then the probability of retirement would decrease over the age
range of 50 to around 60, compared to the case where individuals have no choice but to be on the
disability program. Hence, if the possibility of being on the disability program were absent, the
survival rate would be higher than the rate where the disability program were the only path to
retirement: for example, at age 60, the survival rate would be 80.8% in the former case, but 70.1% in
the latter case. This leads to a difference in the simulated average number of work years over the
ages of 50–69, between the two counter-factual cases: 15.924 years in the case of there being no
disability program, and 14.411 years in the case of there being no normal retirement. Thus, the
average number of work years from age 50 to 69 would be 9.5% higher if every individual were on
the normal retirement path, rather than the disability path.


7. Conclusion


This study examined the factors that affect the retirement decisions of the middle-aged and elderly


                                                   15
in Japan, focusing especially on their earnings, public pension benefits, and health status. Using
two-year panel data from the JSTAR and applying the OV model proposed by Stock and Wise
(1990a, 1990b), we found that the probability of retirement has a negative and significant correlation
with the OV of work, and that correlation does not depend on the health status. Our counter-factual
simulation based on the OV model showed that, if the probability of being enrolled in the disability
program were zero, the average years of work when individuals are in their 50s and 60s would
increase. However, it should be emphasized that, in Japan—where being enrolled in the disability
program is unlikely to make one a candidate for the retirement path—the result of this simulation
does not indicate that satisfying the eligibility criteria for disability pension receipts will more
stringently increase the labor supplied by the middle-aged and elderly.
    We recognize that there remains much to be addressed in future research. First, we should
further elaborate the specifications of the OV model. The value of an OV depends on the parameters
of the utility function, such as parameters for converting income to utility, and the discount rate;
these parameters are tentatively assumed in the current study. Second, we should more precisely
project wage profiles and capture different pathways to retirement, on the basis of further
information obtained from official statistical sources. Third, we should also model couples, rather
than individuals, as retirement decisions are likely to be made jointly by elderly couples: we should
therefore incorporate information about spouses’ and survivors’ pension benefits, which are ignored
in this study.




                                                    16
Acknowledgements


This study utilized micro-level data collected through the Japanese Study on Aging and Retirement
(JSTAR), which was conducted by the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI)
and Hitotsubashi University in 2007 and 2009.


References


Ichimura, Hidehiko, Hideki Hashimoto and Satoshi Shimizutani. (2009). JSTAR First Results: 2009
      Report. RIETI Discussion Paper Series 09-E-047. Research Institute on Economy, Trade and
      Industry; Project on Intergenerational Equity and Center for Intergenerational Studies (CIS)
      Discussion Paper, nos. 443–447, Hitotsubashi University.
Ichimura, Hidehiko and Satoshi Shimizutani (2012). “Retirement Process in Japan: New Evidence
      from the Japanese Study on Aging and Retirement (JSTAR),” in Aging in Asia: Findings from
      New and Emerging Data Initiatives. James P. Smith and Malay Majmundar, eds. Panel on
      Policy Research and Data Needs to Meet the Challenge of Aging in Asia. Committee on
      Population, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The
      National Academies Press, pp. 173–204.
Momose, Yu (2008). “Income Security Systems for the Disabled with a Special Reference to the
      Disability Pension Programs (Shougai Sha ni taisuru Shotoku Hosho Seido: Shougai Nenkin
      o Chushin ni),” The Quarterly of Social Security Research (Kikan Shakai Hosho Kenkyu),
      vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 171–185.
Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare (2009). “Textbook for the Study Programme for the Senior
      Social Insurance Administrators (abstract).” Available at
      http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/org/policy/p36-37a.html.
Oshio, Takashi and Satoshi Shimizutani (2012). “Disability Pension Program and Labor Force
      Participation in Japan: A Historical Perspective,” in David Wise, ed. Social Security Programs
      and Retirement around the World: Historical Trends in Mortality and Health, Employment,
      and Disability Insurance Participation and Reforms, University of Chicago Press, pp.
      391–417.
Oshio, Takashi, Akiko Oishi and Satoshi Shimizutani (2011). “Social Security Reforms and Labor
      Force Participation of the Elderly in Japan,” Japanese Economic Review, vol. 62, no. 2,
      pp. 248–271.
Oshio, Takashi, Satoshi Shimizutani and Akiko Sato Oishi (2010). “Does Social Security Induce


                                                 17
      Withdrawal of the Old from the Labor Force and Create Jobs for the Young? The Case of
      Japan,” in Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, eds. Social Security Programs and Retirement
      around the World: The Relationship to Youth Employment, Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, pp. 217–241.
Oshio, Takashi, and Akiko Oishi (2004). “Social Security and Retirement in Japan: An Evaluation
      Using Micro-data,” in Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, eds. Social Security and Retirement
      around the World: Micro Estimation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Poterba, James, Steven Venti and David Wise (2010). “Family Status Transitions, Latent Health and
      the Post-Retirement Evolution of Assets,” NBER Working Paper no. 15789.
Shimizutani, Satoshi (2013). “Social Security Earnings Test and the Labor Supply of the Elderly:
      New Evidence from Unique Survey Responses in Japan,” Japanese Economic Review, vol. 64,
      no. 3, pp. 399-413.
Shimizutani, Satoshi and Takashi Oshio (2012). “Claiming Behavior of Public Pension Benefits:
      New Evidence from Japanese Study on Aging and Retirement (JSTAR),” Mimeograph.
Shimizutani, Satoshi and Takashi Oshio (2013). “Revisiting the Labor Supply Effect of Social
      Security Earnings Test: New Evidence from its Elimination and Reinstatement in Japan,”
      Japan and the World Economy, vol. 28, pp.99-111.
Stock, James and David Wise (1990a). “Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and Retirement,”
      Econometrica, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1151–1180.
Stock, James and David Wise (1990b). “The Pension Inducement to Retire,” in David Wise, ed.,
      Issues in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 205–229.
Wise, David (2012). Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Historical Trends
      in Mortality and Health, Employment, and Disability Insurance Participation and Reforms,
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.




                                                18
Appendix 1. An overview of social security programs in Japan



Japan’s public old age pension system consists of three program types: National Pension Insurance
(NPI; Kokumin Nenkin), Employees’ Pension Insurance (EPI; Kosei Nenkin), and Mutual Aid
Insurance (MAI; Kyosai Nenkin). It has been mandatory since 1961 for every Japanese national to
participate in one of these public pension programs, and every citizen in Japan is eligible for one of
them.15
     NPI covers self-employed workers, or forestry or fishery cooperative employees; those covered
by NPI constitute slightly less than half of all pensioners in Japan. NPI benefits are disbursed on a
flat-rate basis, depending on the number of contribution years (minimum of 25 years and maximum
of 40 years). In 2000, the normal eligibility age for NPI was set at age 60, for both genders; every
three years, this age has been scheduled to increase by one year to 65. This reform has been in effect
since 2001 for males, and since 2006 for females.16 As a result of this reform, in 2007—the
benchmark year of JSTAR—the normal eligibility age was 63 for males and 61 for females.
     EPI covers employees in the private sector, and the individuals whom it covers constitute
slightly less than half of all pensioners. Unlike that of NPI, the EPI benefit structure consists of two
tiers: a flat-rate component and a wage-proportional component. The calculation of the flat-rate
benefit (i.e., the “basic pension benefit”) is identical to that of NPI. The wage-proportional benefit is
calculated by considering the career average monthly wage (CAMW; Hyojyun Hoshu Getsugaku)
and the number of months of premium contributions, as well as a gender and birthday-dependent
benefit multiplier. The normal eligibility age for the wage-proportional component has been set at
age 60, but as of 2013 (2018), every three years that age is scheduled to increase by one year,
reaching age 65 in 2025 (2030) for males (females).
     MAI covers employees of the public sector and of private schools; those covered by MAI
constitute the small portion of pensioners covered by neither NPI nor EPI. The contribution–benefit
structure and the normal retirement age for MAI benefits resemble those for EPI benefits, in most
respects; thus, in the analysis below, we combine EPI and MAI pensioners.
     In addition to the core programs, there are three additional features relevant to setting up Japan’s
retirement pathways: the social security earnings test, early/late claiming, and the disability pension
program. Most of the previous studies implicitly assume that the age at which one starts to claim
pension benefits corresponds to the retirement age (i.e., marked by one’s departure from the labor
15
   The studies of Oshio, Shimizutani, and Oishi (2010) and Oshio, Oishi, and Shimizutani (2011) each describes in detail
Japan’s old age pension program.
16
   Japan’s social security program has undergone several large reforms over the last 40 years. The studies of Oshio,
Shimizutani, and Oishi (2010) and Oshio, Oishi, and Shimizutani (2011) each provides detailed descriptions of past
reforms.

                                                           19
force). However, this is not the case in Japan, and such an assumption ignores some important
aspects of the association between pension benefits and labor force participation among the elderly.
    First, the social security earnings test (Zaishoku Rorei Nenkin) can result in a suspension of
payment of part or all of one’s pension benefits, if one’s labor income exceeds a certain threshold;
the discouraging effect of this test on labor supply has been studied intensively in Japan and in other
countries. Among recent studies in Japan, Shimizutani (2013) reveals the discouraging effect of the
earnings test on the labor supply decisions of workers aged 60–64 years. Shimizutani and Oshio
(2013) show that the repeal in 1985 of the earnings test for workers aged 65–69 did not affect the
earnings distribution of the elderly, but that its reinstatement in 2002 partially altered earnings
distribution.
    Under the current program, the earnings test focuses on the average monthly wage and bonus
income.17 For workers aged 60–64, pension benefit payments are not suspended if the average wage
and bonus income per month is less than JPY280,000; however, benefits are suspended by
JPY0.5 per JPY1 increase in labor income (i.e., a marginal tax rate of 50%) between JPY280,000
and JPY460,000, and suspended by JPY1 per JPY1 increase in labor income (i.e., a marginal tax
rate of 100%) in excess of JPY460,000. For workers aged 65 and over, the pension benefit payment
is not suspended if the average wage and bonus income per month is less than JPY460,000, but it is
suspended by JPY0.5 per JPY1 increase in labor income (i.e., a marginal tax rate of 50%) in excess
of JPY460,000. Note that the earnings test is applicable only to the second-tier (i.e.,
wage-proportional) benefit for EPI beneficiaries, and not at all to NPI or MAI beneficiaries.
    Second, all three social security programs allow their beneficiaries to claim within a “window”
period; indeed, a nontrivial proportion of those beneficiaries claim at ages other than the normal
eligibility ages. First, NPI allows a 10-year window in claiming benefits, and an individual
undergoes benefit reductions if he or she claims early, at ages 60–64 (Kuriage Jyukyu); alternatively,
he or she receives a benefit reward if he or she claims late, at ages 66–70 (Kurisage Jyukyu). The
actuarial adjustment rate differs across birth cohorts; for example, for those individuals born after
April 2, 1941, the actuarial reduction rate before age 65 is 0.5% per month, and the actuarial credit
rate after age 65 is 0.7% per month (Shimizutani and Oshio, 2012). Second, EPI also allows some
flexibility in terms of claim-timing, and it differs between flat-rate and wage-proportional benefits.
As of 2011, one cannot claim the special benefit (i.e., corresponding to the wage-proportional
benefit prior to age 65) earlier or later than the normal eligibility age of 60 years, regardless of
gender; however, in 2007—when the normal eligibility ages for men and women were 63 and 61,
respectively—one could claim the flat-rate component earlier, at ages 60–62 for males and 60 for

17
   The earnings test has been revised many times. Shimizutani (2013) and Shimizutani and Oshio (2013) each reviews
previous reforms vis-à-vis the earnings test, over long-term periods.

                                                          20
females.18 Moreover, an EPI beneficiary can claim either the flat-rate or wage-proportional
component later than age 65, and thus enjoy an incremental benefit. Note that once one claims his or
her benefits—either before or after the normal eligibility age—one cannot change his or her take-up
decision.
     Third, the disability pension program—, which is not specific to the aforementioned old age
pension programs—covers some elderly individuals in Japan. While the participation rate in Japan
with regard to the disability pension program remains low, many European countries have expanded
their respective DI programs since the 1970s; in some countries, receiving DI benefits is a typical
feature of early retirement (Wise, 2012). Oshio and Shimizutani (2012) argue that this is not the case
in Japan, and that the low participation in Japan’s disability pension program can be attributed to the
stringency of its eligibility criteria. Under the current program, if one consults with a doctor about
the cause of disability for the first time before the age of 20, or if one is an NPI pensioner, one is
entitled to receive the Disability Basic Pension benefit, which is disbursed on the basis of disability
severity (Grade 1 or 2) and the number of dependent children. In addition, if one consulted a doctor
to identify the cause of the disability when one was an EPI (MAI) pensioner, one is entitled to
receive a wage-proportional Disability Employees’ Pension benefit or Disability Mutual Aid
Pension benefit (for MAI recipients), the amount of which depends on the disability severity
(Grades 1–3) and whether or not one has a spouse (Oshio and Shimizutani, 2012).




18
   There are two types of early claiming in the EPI program: total early claiming (Zenbu Kuriage) and partial early claiming
(Ichibu Kuriage). In the former, one can receive a flat-rate benefit at a reduced rate that is identical to that for an NPI
beneficiary, but it is no longer eligible for the special benefit. In the latter, one can receive both part of the flat-rate
component of the special benefit and part of the flat-rate component of the formal benefit (as well as the wage-proportional
component). See Shimizutani and Oshio (2012) for the detailed formula. If the duration of EPI participation is lengthy, the
flat-rate benefit of the special benefit and the formal component are almost identical, and partial early claiming is in general
more advantageous than total early claiming. In the current study, we assume that an EPI beneficiary chooses partial early
claiming if he or she claims benefits earlier than the normal eligibility age.

                                                              21
Table 1 Development of Disability Pension Programs in Japan

                                              National Pension Insurance
                                                                                              Employee Pension Insurance
                                     (Self-employed, agricultural, forestry and fishery
                                                                                               (private firm employees)
                                                        Sector)
                                     Disability Pension          Disability Welfare Pension
                                     (with contribution)            (without contribution)
                                                                                                  Grade 1 and Grade 2
   1944
                                                                                              (including mental diseases)
  1954                                                                                            Grade 3 was added
  1959                              Grade 1 and Grade 2            Grade 1
 1964-65                                       Covered mental diseases
  1974                                                        Grade 2 was added
                                                                                               Disability Basic Pension +
  1986-                                      Merged to Disability Basic Pension
                                                                                               Wage-proportional Benefit

Source: Oshio and Shimizutani (2012).




             Figure 1. The number of recipients of disability pension benefits
                      2200
                                    Disability MAI
                      2000
                                    Disability EPI
                      1800          Disability Welfare Pension
                                    Disability Basic Pension
                      1600          Disability NPI (old)
   thousand persons




                      1400

                      1200

                      1000

                       800

                       600

                       400

                       200

                        0
                             1970                    1980          1990            2000            2010
                                                                  year




                                                                  22
                           Figure 2. DI and employment for those aged 50-64

         Disability rate                                               Employment rate
0.05                                                                                     0.72
                                        DI   Employment rate

0.04


                                                                                         0.70
0.03



0.02
                                                                                         0.68


0.01



0.00                                                                                     0.66
       1970                  1980             1990             2000             2010




                                                23
                                Figure 3a: Probability Men Age 55-64 in JSTAR
                               Receiving Disability Pension, by Education and Year
 0.05




 0.04




 0.03




 0.02




 0.01




 0.00
                              2007                                                                  2009
                            <High school   High school    2yr college/vocational school   >=4yr college




Note: The total number of observations in 2007 and 2009 were 864 and 591, respectively. In 2007/2009, the sample sizes of

those whose final educational attainment is less than high school were 218/137; high school, 399/263; two-year

college/vocational school, 60/51; and four-year college, 187/140.
                                     Figure 3b: Probability Women Age 55-64 in JSTAR
                                     Receiving Disability Pension, by Education and Year
 0.05




 0.04




 0.03




 0.02




 0.01




 0.00
                             2007                                                                  2009
                            <High school   High school    2yr college/vocational school   >=4yr college


Note: The total number of observations in 2007 and 2009 were 799 and 514, respectively. In 2007/2009, the sample sizes of

those whose final educational attainment is less than high school were 202/96; high school, 409/274; two-year

college/vocational school, 150/113; and four-year college, 38/31.




                                                                     24
                      Figure 3c: Probability Men Age 55-64 in JSTAR Receiving Disability Pension,
                                              by Health Quintile and Year
 0.14




 0.12




 0.10




 0.08




 0.06




 0.04




 0.02




 0.00
                               2007                                                                     2009
                                       Quint1 (lowest)   Quint2   Quint3    Quint4   Quint5 (highest)



Note: The total number of observations in 2007 and 2009 were 864 and 591, respectively. In 2007/2009, the sample sizes of

those in the lowest health quintile were 93/62; the second health quintile, 181/117; the third health quintile, 206/125; the

fourth health quintile, 154/116; and the fifth health quintile, 230/171.

                                 Figure 3d: Probability Women Age 55-64 in JSTAR
                               Receiving Disability Pension, by Health Quintile and Year
 0.14




 0.12




 0.10




 0.08




 0.06




 0.04




 0.02




 0.00
                                2007                                                                    2009
                                       Quint1 (lowest)   Quint2   Quint3    Quint4   Quint5 (highest)



Note: The total number of observations in 2007 and 2009 were 799 and 514, respectively. The sample sizes of those in the

lowest health quintile were 119/58; the second health quintile, 142/84; the third health quintile, 146/91; the fourth health

quintile, 223/155; and the fifth health quintile, 169/126.


                                                                           25
Table 2: Percentage of Disability Pension Recipients: JSTAR Men and Women Aged 55–64,
by Health Quintile and Education, 2007 and 2009
Year 2007
                                               Men
                                         Percent Receiving
Education                                 Health Quintile
                  1                  2           3             4           5
<High school     17                  0           0             0          1.96
High school     12.50                0           0             0            0
2yr college/voc  25                  5           0             0            0
>=4yr college   10.00                0           0             0            0


                                            Women
                                       Percent Receiving
Education                               Health Quintile
                       1            2          3         4                 5
<High school          9.09         2.04        0         0                 0
High school             0            0       1.19       1.53               0
2yr college/voc         0            0         0         0                 0
>=4yr college           0            0         0         0                 0
Note: The total numbers of observations are 864 men and 799 women.



Year 2009

                                                      Me n
                                              Pe rce nt Re ce iving
Education                                      He alth Quintile
                         1                2             3           4             5
<High school           11.11              0             0          6.90           0
High school            14.81              0             0          2.08           0
2yr colle ge /vo         0                0           6.67           0            0
>=4yr colle ge          7.14              0             0            0            0


                                                   Wome n
                                             Pe rce nt Re ce iving
Education                                     He alth Quintile
                         1                2            3             4            5
<High school           16.67              0            0             0             0
High school             2.94             4.26          0             0           1.59
2yr colle ge /vo       25.00              0            0             0             0
>=4yr colle ge           0                0            0             0             0

Note: The total numbers of observations are 591 men and 514 women.




                                                        26
       Figure 4a: Weights on pathways to retirement,
                           EPI
  1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
  0
      2007-Male     2009-Male      2007-Female   2009-Female

                       Normal   Disability




       Figure 4b: Weights on pathways to retirement,
                           NPI
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
 0
      2007-Male     2009-Male      2007-Female   2009-Female

                       Normal   Disability




                                 27
           Figure 5: Monthly wage projection (in 2011 Euros),
                              aged 50–75
6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

  0
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75

              Male, EPI       Male, NPI        Female, EPI       Female, NPI




                                          28
                   Figure 6a: Mean OV by Age for Men, aged 50–74
    80,000

    70,000

    60,000

    50,000

    40,000

    30,000

    20,000

    10,000

        0
             50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                         OV_Inclusive        OV_Normal         OV_Disability




–

                Figure 6b: Mean OV by Age for Women, aged 50–74
    50,000
    45,000
    40,000
    35,000
    30,000
    25,000
    20,000
    15,000
    10,000
     5,000
        0
             50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                         OV_Inclusive        OV_Normal         OV_Disability




                                               29
            Figure 6c: Mean PDV-Normal and PDV-Disability by
                     Age, Men (2011 Euros) aged 50–74
300,000

250,000

200,000

150,000

100,000

 50,000

      0
          50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                              PDV-Normal         PDV-Disability




            Figure 6d: Mean PDV-Normal and PDV-Disability by
                    Age, Women (2011 Euros) aged 50–74
300,000

250,000

200,000

150,000

100,000

 50,000

     0
          50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                               PDV-Normal        PDV-Disability




                                            30
           Figure 7: Mean Percentile of Health Index, by Age and
                           Gender, aged 50–78
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
     50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78

                                        Male        Female




                                               31
                                               Table 3a: Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement

                                                                                   Specification
                              (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)         (8)

OV_Inclusive               -0.0213**       -0.0224**        -0.0204**       -0.0219**        -0.0216**       -0.0226**       -0.0207**    -0.0221**
                            (0.0056)        (0.0056)         (0.0061)        (0.0061)         (0.0056)        (0.0056)        (0.0061)     (0.0061)
                            [-0.048]        [-0.051]         [-0.047]        [-0.052]         [-0.049]        [-0.052]        [-0.047]     [-0.052]

Health Quint 2               -0.0159         -0.0154          -0.0179         -0.0166
(Second Lowest)             (0.0184)        (0.0180)         (0.0173)        (0.0169)


Health Quint 3               0.0064          0.0068           -0.0004         0.0003
                            (0.0209)        (0.0205)         (0.0191)        (0.0187)

Health Quint 4               -0.0077         -0.0086          -0.012          -0.012
                            (0.0206)        (0.0200)         (0.0192)        (0.0186)


Health Quint 5               -0.0047         -0.0054          -0.0069         -0.0073
(Highest)                   (0.0205)        (0.0198)         (0.0193)        (0.0186)


Health Index                                                                                 -0.000162        -0.00017        -0.000216   -0.00022
                                                                                              (0.0003)        (0.0003)         (0.0003)   (0.0002)


Age                        0.00355*                         0.00321*                         0.00335*                         0.00300+
                            (0.0016)                         (0.0016)                         (0.0016)                         (0.002)


Age Dummies                                 Included                         Included                        Included                     Included


                                                              0.0152          0.0128                                           0.0159      0.0136
Female
                                                             (0.0172)        (0.0167)                                         (0.0171)    (0.0166)


                                                             0.0267+          0.0244                                          0.0271+      0.0247
Married
                                                             (0.0160)        (0.0159)                                         (0.0160)    (0.0159)


                                                            -0.0528**       -0.0512**                                        -0.0530**    -0.0513**
Spouse works
                                                             (0.0161)        (0.0157)                                         (0.0162)    (0.0157)


                                                             0.00003         0.00002                                           0.00002     0.00001
Total Assets
(in millions of Euros)                                       (0.0001)        (0.0001)                                         (0.0001)    (0.0001)


Occup Dummies                                               Included         Included                                         Included    Included

Educ: <High School                                            -0.0263         -0.0257                                          -0.0274     -0.027
                                                             (0.0216)        (0.0210)                                         (0.0216)    (0.0209)

Educ: High School                                             -0.0258         -0.0276                                          -0.0284     -0.0302
                                                             (0.0217)        (0.0212)                                         (0.0216)    (0.0211)

Educ: 2yr
College/Vocational                                           -0.0036         -0.00286                                         -0.00537    -0.00451
School
                                                             (0.0265)        (0.0262)                                         (0.0262)    (0.0259)



# of Observations            1575             1575            1575             1575            1575             1575            1575        1575

Mean Ret. Rate               0.096            0.096           0.096            0.096           0.096           0.096            0.096      0.096
Mean of OV                   32185            32185           32185            32185           32185           32185            32185      32185
Std. Dev. of OV              20581            20581           20581            20581           20581           20581            20581      20581


Note:
1) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000-unit change in OV from probit models. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
   The effect of a one standard deviation change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated as the effect of increasing inclusive OV
   from the current value - 0.5 std. dev to the current value + 0.5 std dev).
                                                                          32
                    Table 3b: Effect of % Gain in Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                                             Specification
                                     (1)              (2)                    (3)      (4)

% Gain in OV                     -0.0416**         -0.0424**           -0.0416**   -0.0422**
                                  (0.0126)          (0.0131)            (0.0123)    (0.0126)


Linear Age                           X                                       X
Age Dummies                                              X                            X
Health Quintiles                     X                   X                   X        X
Other Xs                                                                     X        X

# of Observations                   1575             1575                1575        1575

Mean Ret. Rate                      0.096            0.096               0.096       0.096
Mean of % Gain in OV                1.380            1.380               1.380       1.380
Std. Dev. of % Gain in OV           1.011            1.011               1.011       1.011
Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 in Table 1.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                    33
                                                Table 4a: Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                                              by Health Quintile

                       # of Obs       Mean           Mean       Std. Dev.                                 Specification
                                     Ret. Rate       of OV       of OV           (1)                (2)                   (3)      (4)

OV: Lowest Quintile        311         0.1190      27268.89     18995.95        -0.0166           -0.0168           -0.00508    -0.00307
   (Worst Health)                                                              (0.0159)          (0.0141)           (0.0158)    (0.0140)
                                                                               [-0.0322]         [-0.0329]          [-0.0104]    [-0.006]



OV: 2nd Quintile           303         0.0957      30907.59     21073.72      -0.0270**          -0.0322**          -0.0154+    -0.0212*
                                                                               (0.0103)           (0.0096)          (0.0088)    (0.0085)
                                                                                [-0.08]           [-0.0969]         [-0.0505]   [-0.0715]



OV: 3rd Quintile           287         0.1185      31893.59     20732.61      -0.0394**          -0.0393**         -0.0488**    -0.0443**
                                                                               (0.0134)           (0.0139)          (0.0159)     (0.0154)
                                                                               [-0.0887]          [-0.0924]          [-0.135]     [-0.132]


OV: 4th Quintile           306         0.0784      35057.42     19704.55      -0.00833           -0.00523           -0.00883    -0.00741
                                                                              (0.0110)           (0.0108)           (0.0100)    (0.0089)
                                                                              [-0.0172]           [-0.012]           [-0.02]    [-0.0188]



OV: Highest Quintile       286         0.0944      34728.72     21178.41       -0.0168           -0.0199+           -0.0171+    -0.0202*
    (Best Health)                                                              (0.0108)          (0.0107)           (0.0100)    (0.0103)
                                                                                [-0.04]          [-0.0504]          [-0.0455]   [-0.0531]


Linear Age                                                                        X                                       X
Age Dummies                                                                                          X                              X
Other Xs                                                                                                                  X         X


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 1, but are estimated separately by health quintile; each coefficient on the
   table is from a different regression.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000-unit change in OV from probit models. Standard errors are shown in
   parentheses. The effect of a one standard deviation change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated as the effect of
   increasing inclusive OV from the current value - 0.5 std. dev to the current value + 0.5 std dev).




                                                                     34
                                          Table 4b: Effect of % Gain in Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                                              by Health Quintile

                                                                                                           Specification
                                         Mean Ret      Mean of %     Std. Dev. Of
                         # of Obs
                                           Rate           OV           % OV
                                                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
OV: Lowest Quintile           311          0.1190       1.217062      0.9589739        -0.035         -0.0452         -0.0331        -0.0395
    (Worst Health)                                                                    (0.0288)        (0.0277)       (0.0268)        (0.0250)

OV: 2nd Quintile              303          0.0957       1.166729      0.8397144       -0.0602*       -0.0850**       -0.0403+       -0.0577**
                                                                                      (0.0289)        (0.0256)       (0.0222)        (0.0217)

OV: 3rd Quintile              287          0.1185       1.426323       1.122353        -0.0525         -0.0435       -0.0558+         -0.0464
                                                                                      (0.0328)        (0.0342)       (0.0299)        (0.0302)

OV: 4th Quintile              306          0.0784       1.572716       1.028707        -0.0362         -0.0236       -0.0319+         -0.0227
                                                                                      (0.0242)        (0.0207)       (0.0193)        (0.0161)

OV: Highest Quintile          286          0.0944       1.545694       1.059786      -0.0611**       -0.0676**      -0.0534**       -0.0604**
     (Best Health)                                                                    (0.0190)        (0.0225)       (0.0169)        (0.0198)

Linear Age                                                                               X                                 X
Age Dummies                                                                                              X                              X
Other Xs                                                                                                                   X            X

Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 in Table 1, but are estimated separately by health quintile; each coefficient on the table is from a
different regression.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                                     35
                          Table 4c: Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                  with Health Index Interaction

                                                          Specification
                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)                (4)


OV                            -0.0167             -0.019              -0.016            -0.0185
                              (0.0116)           (0.0124)            (0.0113)           (0.0121)


OV*Health Index               -0.00005           -0.00003            -0.00004           -0.00002
                              (0.0001)           (0.00005)           (0.0001)           (0.0000)


Health Index                  0.00004             -0.00002            -0.00002         -0.00007
                             (0.00045)           (0.00046)           (0.00043)         (0.00044)


Linear Age                       X                                         X
Age Dummies                                         X                                         X
Other Xs                                                                   X                  X


# of Observations               1575               1575                   1575               1575

Mean Ret. Rate                 0.096              0.096               0.096              0.096
Mean of OV                     32185              32185               32185              32185
Std. Dev. of OV                20581              20581               20581              20581


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 5-8 in Table 1, with the addition of an
   OV*health index interaction.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000-unit change in OV from probit models.
   Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The effect of a one standard deviation
   change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated as the effect of increasing
   inclusive OV from the current value - 0.5 std. dev to the current value + 0.5 std dev).




                                                     36
                                          Table 5a: Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                                        By Education Group

                         # of Obs       Mean          Mean       Std. Dev.                                Specification
                                       Ret. Rate      of OV       of OV            (1)              (2)                   (3)      (4)

OV: < High School            428         0.1332      22957.77     17059.07       0.00112          -0.0124            0.0122     -0.00545
                                                                                 (0.0146)         (0.0125)          (0.0164)    (0.0144)
                                                                                  [0.002]         [-0.022]           [0.022]     [-0.01]



OV: High School              690         0.0899      30463.16     17817.6       -0.0304**        -0.0305**         -0.0360**    -0.0347**
                                                                                 (0.0081)         (0.0080)          (0.0085)     (0.0081)
                                                                                 [-0.0613]         [-0.067]         [-0.0764]    [-0.0801]


OV: 2yr College
                             177         0.0904      36432.72     18626.52       -0.0346*         -0.0339*          -0.0259*    -0.0217*
/Vocational School
                                                                                 (0.0138)         (0.0132)          (0.0116)    (0.0108)
                                                                                 [-0.0708]        [-0.0704]         [-0.0653]   [-0.0585]


OV: 4yr College              195         0.0821      49046.99     23500.44       0.00135          0.00532            0.00814     0.0122
                                                                                 (0.0093)         (0.0095)          (0.0105)    (0.0098)
                                                                                [0.00358]         [0.0158]          [0.02271]   [0.0423]


Linear Age                                                                          X                                     X
Age Dummies                                                                                          X                              X
Health Quintiles                                                                    X                X                    X         X
Other Xs                                                                                                                  X         X


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 in Table 1, but are estimated separately by education group; each coefficient on the
   table is from a different regression.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000-unit change in OV from probit models. Standard errors are shown in
   parentheses. The effect of a one standard deviation change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated as the effect of
   increasing inclusive OV from the current value - 0.5 std. dev to the current value + 0.5 std dev).




                                                                    37
                                Table 5b: Effect of % Gain in Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                                    By Education Group
                         # of Obs       Mean         Mean        Std. Dev.                         Specification
                                       Ret. Rate    of % OV      of % OV              (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)
OV: < High School            428        0.1332      1.007337     0.7619505         -0.0477    -0.0598+        -0.0432      -0.0557+
                                                                                  (0.0347)    (0.0326)       (0.0351)      (0.0320)

OV: High School              690         0.0899     1.371689     0.9535805        -0.0745**   -0.0701**     -0.0753**      -0.0705**
                                                                                   (0.0165)    (0.0170)      (0.0157)       (0.0157)

OV: 2yr College
                             177         0.0904     1.692081     0.8150037         -0.0118     -0.0185       -0.00832        -0.016
/Vocational School
                                                                                  (0.0337)     (0.0334)      (0.0256)       (0.0247)

OV: 4yr College              195         0.0821     1.818536     1.306513          -0.011      0.00103        -0.0118       -0.00073
                                                                                  (0.0155)     (0.0147)      (0.0139)       (0.0116)
Linear Age                                                                           X                          X
Age Dummies                                                                                       X                            X
Other Xs                                                                                                        X              X

Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 1, but are estimated separately by education group; each coefficient on the table is
from a different regression.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                                 38
            Figure 8a: Actual vs. Predicted Retirement Rate, Men
                                  Aged 50–74
0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                                   Actual        Predicted




              Figure 8b: Actual vs. Predicted Retirement Rate,
                            Women Aged 50–74

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                                   Actual        Predicted




                                            39
            Figure 8c: Actual vs. Predicted Retirement Survival,
                              Men Aged 50–74
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                                   Actual        Predicted




            Figure 8d: Actual vs. Predicted Retirement Survival,
                                   Women
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                                   Actual        Predicted




                                            40
         Figure 9: Share Having Reached Max OV-Inclusive and
                          Retired, Aged 50–74
100

80

60

40

20

  0
      50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

                         % Reached max retirement incentive, Men
                         % Reached max retirement incentive, Women
                         % Retired, Men
                         % Retired, Women




                                          41
            Figure 10a: Retirement probabilities by pathway,
             Disability and Normal retirement, Aged 50–69

0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69

                             Disability   Normal




             Figure 10b: Survival probabilities by pathway,
             Disability and Normal retirement, Aged 50–70
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
 0
       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70

                             Disability   Normal




                                     42
Appendix Table 1. Principal component analysis on health indicators
Factor loadings of the 1st principle component health index
1. Difficulty walking 100 m                      0.311   12. Difficulty pick up a dime                 0.248

2. Difficulty lifting/carrying                   0.337   13. Ever experienced heart problems           0.094

3. Difficulty pushing/pulling                    0.340   14. Hospital stay                             0.109

4. Difficulty with an activity of daily living   0.242   15. Doctor visit                              0.082

5. Difficulty climbing a few steps               0.315   16. Ever experienced psychological problems   0.017

6. Difficulty stooping/kneeling/crouching        0.309   17. Ever experienced a stroke                 0.126

7. Difficulty getting up from a chair            0.304   18. Ever experienced high blood pressure      0.075

8. Self-reported health fair/poor                0.211   19. Ever experienced lung disease             0.040

9. Difficulty reaching/extending arm up          0.269   20. Ever experienced diabetes                 0.071

10. Ever experienced arthritis                   0.122   21. Body mass index                           0.026

11. Difficulty sitting two hours                 0.277   22. Ever experienced cancer                   0.035




                                                         43
Appendix Table 2. Summary statistics of the variables
                                                     All      Male    Female
Continuous variable
OV (in ten thousand euro)                     M     3.22      3.59    2.58
                                             S.D.   2.06      2.16    1.70
Health index                                  M     56.89     56.45   57.65
                                             S.D.   26.57     26.09   27.38
Monthly wage (in ten thousand yen)            M     25.41     31.22   15.23
                                             S.D.   18.15     18.40   12.28
Enrolled years                                M     36.54     39.62   31.24
                                             S.D.   13.36     11.91   14.04
Assests (in million yen)                      M     11.37     13.44   7.99
                                             S.D.   68.07     85.48   15.45

Binary variables
Age:
 Less than 55                                       0.21      0.20     0.23
 55-59                                              0.31      0.31     0.31
 60-64                                              0.22      0.21     0.23
 65-69                                              0.17      0.18     0.14
 70-                                                0.10      0.11     0.08
Education:
 Less than high school                              0.29      0.31     0.25
 High school                                        0.44      0.40     0.50
 2 year college/Vocational school                   0.12      0.08     0.20
 4 year college or more                             0.15      0.21     0.06
Married                                             0.84      0.90     0.75
Spouse working                                      0.57      0.55     0.60
Occupation:
 Specialist                                         0.10      0.10     0.09
 Managers                                           0.08      0.11     0.02
 Clerk                                              0.16      0.12     0.24
 Salesperson                                        0.13      0.13     0.13
 Service                                            0.14      0.07     0.26
 Guards                                             0.01      0.02     0.00
 Farmers                                            0.05      0.05     0.05
 Trans and com.                                     0.05      0.08     0.01
 Construction                                       0.25      0.29     0.17
 Unknown                                            0.03      0.03     0.04
Retired in 2009                                     0.10      0.09     0.11
Public pension enrollee:
 EPI/MAI enrollee                                   0.60      0.67     0.50
 NPI enrollee                                       0.40      0.33     0.50
                                                       1575   996      579

Note: M = mean; S.D. = standard deviation.




                                               44
