NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEBT, TAXES, AND LIQUIDITY
Patrick Bolton
Hui Chen
Neng Wang
Working Paper 20009
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20009

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We thank Phil Dybvig, Wei Jiang, Hong Liu, Gustavo Manso, Jonathan Parker, Steve Ross, and seminar
participants at MIT Sloan, Stanford, UC Berkeley Haas, Washington University, University of WisconsinMadison, TCFA 2013, and WFA 2013 for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Patrick Bolton, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Debt, Taxes, and Liquidity
Patrick Bolton, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20009
March 2014
JEL No. E22,G32,G35,H24,H25
ABSTRACT
We analyze a model of optimal capital structure and liquidity choice based on a dynamic tradeoff theory
for financially constrained firms. In addition to the classical tradeoff between the expected tax advantages
of debt and bankruptcy costs, we introduce a cost of external financing for the firm, which generates
a precautionary demand for liquidity and an optimal liquidity management policy for the firm. An
important new cost of debt financing in this context is an endogenous debt servicing cost: debt payments
drain the firm's valuable liquidity reserves and thus impose higher expected external financing costs
on the firm. The precautionary demand for liquidity also means that realized earnings are separated
in time from payouts to shareholders, implying that the classical Miller-formula for the net tax benefits
of debt no longer holds. Our model offers a novel perspective for the "debt conservatism puzzle" by
showing that financially constrained firms choose to limit debt usages in order to preserve their liquidity.
In some cases, they may not even exhaust their risk-free debt capacity.

Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu
Hui Chen
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-637
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
huichen@mit.edu

Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

We develop a dynamic tradeoff theory for financially constrained firms by integrating
classical tax versus bankruptcy cost considerations into a dynamic framework in which
firms face external financing costs. As in Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011, 2013), these
financing costs generate a precautionary demand for holding liquid assets and retaining
earnings.1 Financially constrained firms incur an additional endogenous debt servicing cost
arising from the cash drain associated with interest payments. Given that firms face this
endogenous debt servicing cost, our model predicts lower optimal debt levels than those
obtained for unconstrained firms with no precautionary cash buffers. We thus provide a
novel perspective on the “debt conservatism puzzle” documented in the empirical capital
structure literature (see Graham (2000, 2003)).
The precautionary savings motive for financially constrained firms introduces another
novel dimension to the standard tradeoff theory: personal tax capitalization and the
changes this capitalization brings to the net tax benefit of debt when the firm chooses
to retain its net earnings (after interest and corporate tax payments) rather than pay
them out to shareholders. As Harris and Kemsley (1999), Collins and Kemsley (2000),
and Frank, Singh, and Wang (2010) have pointed out, when firms choose to build up
corporate savings, personal taxes on future expected payouts must be capitalized, and
this tax capitalization changes both the market value of equity and the net tax benefit
calculation for debt. In our model, the standard Miller formula for the net tax benefit of
debt only holds when the firm is at the endogenous payout boundary. When the firm is
away from this payout boundary, and therefore strictly prefers to retain earnings, the net
tax benefits of debt are lower than the ones implied by the Miller formula. As we show,
the tax benefits can even become substantially negative when the firm is at risk of running
out of cash. Importantly, this is not just a conceptual observation, it is also quantitatively
important as the firm is almost always in the liquidity-hoarding region.
Our dynamic model of financially constrained firms also have new predictions on
1

Corporate cash holdings of U.S. publicly traded non-financial corporations have been steadily increasing
over the past twenty years and represent a substantial fraction of corporate assets, as Bates, Kahle, and
Stulz (2009) have shown.

1

the effects of changes in depreciation tax allowances on capital structure and liquidity
management. Unlike the standard result in the static tradeoff theory by DeAngelo and
Masulis (1980) that depreciation tax shields are a substitute for debt tax shields, and
therefore that an increase in depreciation tax allowances lowers leverage, for a financially
constrained firm depreciation tax allowances are a complement to debt tax shields. That
is, an increase in depreciation tax allowances induces the financially constrained firm to
issue more debt and hold more cash. The reason is that the firm’s debt servicing costs are
reduced when the firm can retain a higher fraction of its EBITDA and therefore the firm
responds by taking on more debt and holding more cash.
Another important change introduced by external financing costs and precautionary
savings is that the conventional assumption that cash is negative debt is no longer valid, as
Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) have emphasized.2 In our model, drawing down
debt by depleting the firm’s cash stock involves an opportunity cost for the financially
constrained firm, which is not accounted for when cash is treated as negative debt. As a
result, standard net debt calculations tend to underestimate the value of cash. The flaw
in treating cash as negative debt becomes apparent in situations where the firm chooses
not even to exhaust its risk-free debt capacity given the endogenous debt servicing costs
involved and the scarcity of internal funds. In addition, we show that net debt is a poor
measure of credit risk, as the same value for net debt can be associated with two distinct
levels of credit risk (a high credit risk with low debt value and low cash, and a low credit
risk with high debt value and high cash).
The tradeoff theory of capital structure is often pitted against the pecking order theory,
with numerous empirical studies seeking to test them either in isolation or in a horse race
(see Fama and French (2012) for a recent example). The empirical status of the tradeoff
theory has been and remains a hotly debated question. Some scholars, most notably Myers
(1984), have claimed that they “know of no study clearly demonstrating that a firm’s tax
2

Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) observe that issuing debt and hoarding the proceeds in cash
is not equivalent to preserving debt capacity for the future. In their model, risky debt is disproportionately
a claim on high cash-flow states, while cash savings are equally available in all future cash-flow states.
Therefore, preserving debt capacity or saving cash has different implications for future investment by a
financially constrained firm.

2

status has predictable, material effects on its debt policy.” In a later review of the capital
structure literature Myers (2001) further added “A few such studies have since appeared
· · · and none gives conclusive support for the tradeoff theory.”
However, more recently a number of empirical studies that build on the predictions
of structural models in the vein of Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), Leland (1994),
Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001) and Ross (2005) – but augmented with various transaction
costs incurred when the firm changes its capital structure – have found empirical support
for the dynamic tradeoff theory (see e.g., Hennessy and Whited (2005), Leary and Roberts
(2005), Strebulaev (2007), and Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2008). But it is important
to observe that in reality corporate financial decisions are not only shaped by tax-induced
tradeoffs, but also by external-financing-cost and liquidity considerations. We therefore
need to better understand how capital structure and other corporate financial decisions are
jointly determined, and how the firm is valued, when it responds to tax incentives while
simultaneously managing its cash reserves in order to relax its financial constraints. This
is what we attempt to model in this paper, by formulating a tractable dynamic model of a
financially constrained firm that seeks to make tax-efficient corporate financial decisions.
As Decamps, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve (2011) (DMRV) and Bolton, Chen, and
Wang (2011) (BCW) show, when a financially constrained firm has low cash holdings,
its marginal value of cash can be significantly higher than one. In this context, the firm
incurs a significant flow shadow cost for every dollar it pays out to creditors. This cost
has to be set against the tax shield benefits of debt. As a result, a financially constrained
firm could optimally choose a debt level that trades off tax shield benefits against the
endogenous debt servicing costs such that the firm would never default on this debt. In
such a situation, it would not pay the firm to take on a little bankruptcy risk in order
to increase its tax shield benefits because the increase in endogenous debt servicing costs
would outweigh the incremental tax shield benefits.
The financial constraint can make the firm’s equity value concave in the cash holdings
even when debt is risky. This is in contrast to the standard risk-shifting intuition
as in Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Leland (1998). Nonetheless, a conflict between

3

equityholders and debtholders still arises in our model because they have different exposures
to the risk of liquidation and hence different degrees of effective risk aversion. For this
reason, we show that covenants can have important effects on corporate financial policies.
By retaining its earnings, the firm is making a choice on behalf of its shareholders to
defer the payment of their personal income tax liabilities on this income. It may actually
be tax-efficient sometimes to let shareholders accumulate savings inside the firm, as Miller
and Scholes (1978) have observed. Thus, the tax code influences not just leverage policies
but also corporate savings. This in turn has important implications for standard corporate
valuation methods such as the adjusted present value method (APV, see Myers (1974)),
which are built on the assumption that the firm does not face any financial constraints.
The APV method is commonly used to value highly levered transactions, as for example
in the case of leveraged buyouts (LBOs). A standard assumption when valuing such
transactions is that the firm pays down its debt as fast as possible (that is, it does not
engage in any precautionary savings). Moreover, the shadow cost of draining the firm of
cash in this way is assumed to be zero. As a result, highly levered transactions tend to
be overvalued and the risks for shareholders that the firm may be forced to incur costly
external financing to raise new funds are not adequately accounted for by this method.
We model a firm in continuous time with a single productive asset generating a
cumulative stochastic cash flow, which follows an arithmetic Brownian motion process
with drift (or mean profitability) µ and volatility σ. The asset costs K to set up and the
entrepreneur who founds the firm must raise funds to both cover this set-up cost and
endow the firm with an initial cash buffer. These funds may be raised by issuing either
equity or term debt to outside investors. The firm may also obtain a line of credit (LOC)
commitment from a bank. Once an LOC is set up, the firm can accumulate cash through
retained earnings. As in BCW, the firm only makes payouts to its shareholders when it
attains a sufficiently large cash buffer. And in the event that the firm exhausts all its
available sources of internal cash and LOC, it can either raise new costly external funds or
it is liquidated. Corporate earnings are subject to a corporate income tax and investors
are subject to a personal income taxes on interest income, dividends, and capital gains.

4

There are two main cases to consider. The first is when the firm is liquidated when it
exhausts all its sources of liquidity (cash and credit line) and the second is when the firm
raises new external funds when it runs out of cash. In the former case term debt issued by
the firm is risky, while in the latter it is default-free. Most of our analysis focuses on the
case where term debt involves credit risk. We solve for the optimal capital structure of
the firm, which involves both a determination of the liability structure (how much debt to
issue) and the asset structure (how much cash to hold). This also involves solving for the
value of equity and term debt as a function of the firm’s cash holdings, determining the
optimal line of credit commitment, and characterizing the firm’s optimal payout policy.
We then analyze how firm leverage varies in response to changes in tax policy, or in the
underlying risk-return characteristics of the firm’s productive asset.
The financially constrained firm has two main margins of adjustment in response to a
change in its environment. It can either adjust its debt or its cash policy. In contrast, an
unconstrained firm only adjusts its debt policy when its environment changes. We show
that this key difference produces fundamentally different predictions on debt policy, so
much so that existing tradeoff theories of capital structure for unconstrained firms offer
no reliable predictions for the debt policy of constrained firms. Consider for example the
effects of a cut in the corporate income tax rate from 35% to 25%. This significantly
reduces the net tax advantage of debt and should result in a reduction in debt financing
under the standard tradeoff theory. But this is not how a financially constrained firm
responds. The main effect for such a firm is that the after-tax return on corporate savings
is increased, so that it responds by increasing its cash holdings. The increase in cash
holdings is so significant that the servicing costs of debt decline and compensate for the
reduced tax advantage of debt. On net, the firm barely changes its debt policy in response
to the reduction in corporate tax rates.
Consider next the effects of an increase in profitability of the productive asset (an
increase in the drift rate µ). Under the standard tradeoff theory the firm ought to respond
by increasing its debt and interest payments so as to shield the higher profits from corporate
taxation. In contrast, the financially constrained firm leaves its debt policy unchanged but

5

modifies its cash policy by paying out more to its shareholders, as it is able to replenish
its cash stock faster as a result of the higher profitability. Once again, the cash policy
adjustment induces an indirect increase in the firm’s debt servicing costs so that the firm
chooses not to change its debt policy. Interestingly, the adjustment we find is in line with
the empirical evidence and provides a simple explanation for why financially constrained
firms do not adjust their leverage to changes in profitability.
The effects of an increase in volatility of cash flows σ are also surprising. While
financially constrained firms substantially increase their cash buffers in response to an
increase in σ, they also choose to increase debt! Indeed, as a result of their increased cash
savings, the debt servicing costs decline so much that it is worth increasing leverage in
response to an increase in volatility. This is the opposite to the predicted effect under the
standard tradeoff theory, whereby the firm ought to respond by reducing leverage to lower
expected bankruptcy costs.
The importance of endogenous debt servicing costs is most apparent in the case where
the firm raises new financing whenever it runs out of cash. In this situation, the firm’s
debt is risk free. In contrast, under the classical tradeoff theory a financially unconstrained
firm always issues risky debt. The reason why the financially constrained firm limits its
indebtedness is that it seeks to avoid running out of cash too often and paying an external
financing cost, and it wants to avoid creating a debt overhang situation, which could
induce equityholders to inefficiently liquidate the firm ex post.
As relevant as it is to analyze an integrated framework combining both tax and
precautionary-savings considerations, there are, surprisingly, only a few attempts in the
literature at addressing this problem. Hennessy and Whited (2005, 2007) consider a
dynamic tradeoff model for a firm facing equity flotation costs in which the firm can
issue short-term debt.3 Unlike in our analysis, they do not fully characterize the firm’s
cash-management policy nor do they solve for the value of debt and equity as a function
3

Gamba and Triantis (2008) extend Hennessy and Whited (2005) by introducing debt issuance costs
and hence obtain the simultaneous existence of debt and cash. Riddick and Whited (2009) develop a
corporate savings model and show that corporate savings and cash flow can be negatively related after
controlling for q, because firms may use cash reserves to invest when receiving a positive productivity
shock.

6

of the firm’s stock of cash. Also, we allow for term debt while Hennessy and Whited (2005,
2007) assume one-period debt. More recently, DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Whited (2011)
have developed and estimated a dynamic capital structure model with taxes and external
financing costs of debt and show that while firms have a target leverage ratio, they may
temporarily deviate from it in order to economize on debt servicing costs.
An important strength of our analysis is that it allows for a quantitative valuation
of debt and equity as well as a characterization of corporate financial policy that can
be closely linked to methodologies applied in reality, such as the adjusted present value
method. Importantly, our model highlights that the classical structural credit-risk valuation
models in the literature are missing an important explanatory variable: the firm’s cash
holdings, which affect both equity and debt value. Starting with Merton (1974) and Leland
(1994), the standard structural credit risk models mainly focus on how shocks to asset
fundamentals or cash flows affect the risk of default, but do not explicitly consider liquidity
management.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 sets up the model. Section 3
presents the Miller Benchmark. Section 4 characterizes the solution for a financially
constrained firm. Section 5 continues with the main quantitative analysis. Section 6
discusses key comparative statics results. Section 7 introduces debt covenants. Section 8
introduces depreciation shocks as in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and depreciation tax
allowances. Section 9 considers the solution when the firm raises new external funds when
it runs out of cash. Section 10 concludes.

2

Model

A financially constrained risk-neutral entrepreneur has initial liquid wealth W0− and a
valuable investment project which requires an up-front setup cost K > 0 at time 0.

Investment project. Let Y denote the project’s (undiscounted) cumulative cash flows
(profits). For simplicity, we assume that operating profits are independently and identically

7

distributed (i.i.d.) over time and that cumulative operating profits Y follow an arithmetic
Brownian motion process,
dYt = µdt + σdZt ,

t ≥ 0,

(1)

where Z is a standard Brownian motion. Over a time interval ∆t, the firm’s profit is
√
normally distributed with mean µ∆t and volatility σ ∆t > 0. This earnings process is
widely used in the corporate finance literature.4 Note that the earnings process (1) can
potentially accumulate large losses over a finite time period. The project can be liquidated
at any time (denoted by T ) with a liquidation value L < µ/r. That is, liquidation is
inefficient. To avoid or defer inefficient liquidation, the firm needs funds to cover operating
losses and to meet various payments. Should it run out of liquidity, the firm either
liquidates or raises new funds in order to continue operations. Therefore, liquidity can be
highly valuable under some circumstances as it allows the firm to continue its profitable
but risky operations.

Tax structure. As in Miller (1977), DeAngelo and Masulis (1980), and the subsequent
corporate taxation literature, we suppose that earnings after interest (and depreciation
allowances) are taxed at the corporate income tax rate τc > 0. At the personal level,
income from interest payments is taxed at rate τi > 0, and income from equity is taxed
at rate τe > 0. For simplicity, we ignore depreciation tax allowances for now and will
incorporate in Section 8. At the personal level, given that capital gains may be deferred,
we generally expect that τe < τi even when interest, dividend and capital gains income is
taxed at the same marginal personal income tax rate.

External financing: equity, debt, and credit line. Firms often face significant
external financing costs due to asymmetric information and managerial incentive problems.
We do not explicitly model informational asymmetries nor incentive problems. Rather, to
be able to work with a model that can be calibrated, we directly model the costs arising
4

See, for example, DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) and Decamps, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve
(2011), who use the same continuous-time process (1) in their analyses). Bolton and Scharfstein (1990),
Hart and Moore (1994, 1998), and DeMarzo and Fishman (2007) model cash flow processes using the
discrete-time counterpart of (1).

8

from informational and incentive frictions in reduced form. To begin with, we assume
that the firm can only raise external funds once at time 0 by issuing equity, term debt
and/or credit line, and that it cannot access capital markets afterwards. In later sections,
we allow the firm to repeatedly access capital markets.
As in Leland (1994) and Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001) we model debt as a
potentially risky perpetuity issued at par P with regular coupon payment b. Should the
firm be liquidated, the debtholders have seniority over other claimants for the residual
value from the liquidated assets. In addition to the risky perpetual debt, the firm may
also issue external equity. We assume that there is a fixed cost Φ for the firm to initiate
external financing (either debt or equity or both). As in BCW, equity issuance involves a
marginal cost γE and similarly, debt issuance involves a marginal cost γD .
We next turn to the firm’s liquidity policies. The firm can save by holding cash and
also by borrowing via the credit line. At time 0, the firm chooses the size of its credit line
C, which is the maximal credit commitment that the firm obtains from the bank. This
credit commitment is fully collateralized by the firm’s physical capital. For simplicity, we
assume that the credit line is risk-free for the lender. Under the terms of the credit line the
firm has to pay a fixed commitment fee ν(C)C per unit of time on the (unused) amount
of the credit line. We specify ν(C) = ηC where η > 0 is the credit line commitment
fee parameter. Intuitively, once it draws down an amount |Wt | < C it must pay the
commitment fee on the residual, ν(C)(C + Wt ). The economic logic behind this cost
function is that the bank providing the LOC has to either incur more monitoring costs
or higher capital requirement costs when it grants a larger LOC. The firm can tap the
credit line at any time for any amount up the limit C after securing the credit line C at
time 0. For the amount of credit that the firm uses, the interest spread over the risk-free
rate r is δ. This spread δ is interpreted as an intermediation cost in our setting as credit
is risk-free. Note that the credit line only incurs a flow commitment fee and no up-front
fixed cost. Sufi (2009) documents that the typical firm on average pays about 25 basis
points per annum on C, which implies that η = 2.8%. For the tapped risk-free credit, the
typical firm pays roughly 25 basis points per year, so that δ = 0.25%.

9

Liquidity management: cash and credit line. Liquidity hoarding is at the core of
our analysis. Let Wt denote the firm’s liquidity holdings at time t. When Wt > 0, the
firm is in the cash region. When Wt < 0, the firm is in the credit region. As will become
clear, it is suboptimal for the firm to draw down the credit line if the firm’s cash holding
is positive. Indeed, the firm can always defer using the costlier credit line option as long
as it has unused cash on its balance sheet.

Cash region: W ≥ 0. We denote by Ut the firm’s cumulative (non-decreasing) after-tax
payout to shareholders up to time t, and by dUt the incremental after-tax payout over
time interval dt. When the firm does not pay out, dUt = 0, which often happens in the
model, as we will show. Distributing cash to shareholders may take the form of a special
dividend or a share repurchase.5 The firm’s cash holding Wt accumulates as follows in the
region where the firm has a positive cash reserve:
dWt = (1 − τc ) [dYt + (r − λ)Wt dt − ν(C)Cdt − bdt] − dUt ,

(2)

where λ is a cash-carry cost, which reflects the idea that cash held by the firm is not
always optimally deployed. That is, the before-tax return that the firm earns on its cash
inventory is equal to the risk-free rate r minus a carry cost λ that captures in a simple
way the agency costs that may be associated with free cash in the firm.6 The firm’s cash
accumulation before corporate taxes is thus given by operating earnings dYt plus earnings
from investments (r − λ)Wt dt minus the credit line commitment fee ν(C)Cdt minus the
interest payment on term debt bdt. The firm pays a corporate tax rate τc on these earnings
net of interest payments and retains after-tax earnings minus the payout dUt .
5

A commitment to regular dividend payments is suboptimal in our model. For simplicity we assume
that the firm faces no fixed or variable payout costs. These costs can, however, be added at the cost of a
slightly more involved analysis.
6
This assumption is standard in models with cash. For example, see Kim, Mauer, and Sherman (1998)
and Riddick and Whited (2009). Abstracting from any tax considerations, the firm would never pay out
cash when λ = 0, since keeping cash inside the firm then incurs no opportunity costs, while still providing
the benefit of a relaxed financing constraint. If the firm is better at identifying investment opportunities
than investors, we would have λ < 0. In that case, raising funds to earn excess returns is potentially a
positive NPV project. We do not explore cases in which λ < 0.

10

Note that an important simplifying assumption implicit in this cash accumulation equation is that profits and losses are treated symmetrically from a corporate tax perspective.
In practice losses can be carried forward or backward only for a limited number of years,
which introduces complex non-linearities in the after-tax earnings process. As Graham
(1996) has shown, in the presence of such non-linearities one must forecast future taxable
income in order to estimate current-period effective tax rates. To avoid this complication
we follow the literature in assuming that after-tax earnings are linear in the tax rate (see
e.g., Leland (1994) and Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001).

Credit region: W ≤ 0. In the credit region, credit Wt evolves similarly as Wt does in
the cash region, except for one change, which results from the fact that in this region the
firm is partially drawing down its credit line:
dWt = (1 − τc ) [dYt + (r + δ)Wt dt − ν(C)(Wt + C)dt − bdt] − dUt ,

(3)

where δ denotes the interest rate spread over the risk-free rate, and the commitment fee
is charged on the unused LOC commitment Wt + C. If the firm exhausts its maximal
credit capacity, so that Wt = −C, it has to either close down and liquidate its assets or
raise external funds to continue operations. In the baseline analysis of our model, we
assume that the firm will be liquidated if it runs out of all available sources of liquidity
including both cash and credit line. In an extension, we give the firm the option to raise
new funds through external financing. But in the baseline case, after raising funds via
external financing and establishing the credit facility at time 0, the firm can only continue
to operate as long as Wt > −C.
Optimality. We solve the firm’s optimization problem in two steps. Proceeding by
backward induction, we consider first the firm’s ex post optimization problem after the
initial capital structure (external equity, debt, and credit line) has been chosen. Then, we
determine the ex ante optimal capital structure.
The firm’s ex post optimization problem. The firm chooses its payout policy U
11

and liquidation timing T to maximize the ex post value of equity subject to the liquidity
accumulation equations (2) and (3):7
Z
max
U, T

T
−r(1−τi )t

e

E

−r(1−τi )T

dUt + e


max{LT + WT − P − GT , 0} .

(4)

0

Note that P denotes the proceeds from the debt issue. The first term in (4) is the present
discounted value of payouts to equityholders until stochastic liquidation, and the second
term is the expected liquidation payoff to equityholders. Here, GT is the tax bill for
equityholders at liquidation. It is possible that equityholders realize a capital gain upon
liquidation. In this event liquidation triggers capital gains taxes for them. Capital gains
taxes at liquidation are given by:
GT = τe max{WT + LT − P − (W0 + K), 0} .

(5)

Note that the basis for calculating the capital gain is W0 + K, the sum of liquid and
illiquid initial asset values. Let E(W0 ) denote the value function (4).
The ex ante optimization problem. What should the firm’s initial cash holding
W0 be? And in what form should W0 be raised? The firm’s financing decision at time 0
is to jointly choose the initial cash holding W0 , the line of credit with limit C, and the
optimal capital structure (debt and equity). Specifically, the entrepreneur chooses any
combination of (i) a perpetual debt issue with coupon b, (ii) a credit line with limit C,
and (iii) an equity issue of a fraction a of total shares outstanding.
There is a positive fixed cost Φ > 0 in tapping external financial markets, so that
securities issuance is lumpy as in BCW. We also assume that there is a positive variable
cost in raising debt (γD ≥ 0) or equity (γE ≥ 0). Let F denote the proceeds from the
equity issue. We focus on the economically interesting case where some amount of external
financing is optimal. After paying the set-up cost K > 0, and the total issuance costs
7
Note that this objective function does not take into account the benefits of cash holdings to debtholders.
We later explore the implications of constraints on equityholders’ payout policies that might be imposed
by debt covenants.

12

(Φ + γD P + γE F ) the firm ends up with an initial cash stock of:
W0 = W0− − K − Φ + (1 − γD )P + (1 − γE )F,

(6)

where W0− is the entrepreneur’s initial cash endowment before financing at time 0.
The entrepreneur’s ex ante optimization problem can then be written as follows:
max (1 − a)E(W0 ; b, C) ,

(7)

a, b, C

where E(W ) is the solution of (4), and where the following competitive pricing conditions
for debt and equity must hold:
P = D(W0 ),

(8)

F = aE(W0 ).

(9)

and

In addition, the value of debt D(W0 ) must satisfy the following equation:
Z
D(W0 ) = E

T

e

−r(1−τi )s

−r(1−τi )T

(1 − τi )b ds + e


min{LT − C, P } .

(10)

0

Note that implicit in the debt pricing equation (10) is the assumption that in the event of
liquidation the ‘revolver debt’ due under the credit line is senior to the ‘term debt’ P . We
use θD and θE to denote the Lagrange multipliers for (8) and (9), respectively.
There are then two scenarios, one where the term debt is risk-free and the other where
it is risky. When term debt is risk-free, debtholders collect P , the principal value of debtn.
In this case the price of debt is simply the value of perpetuity:
b
P = .
r

(11)

When debt is risky, creditors demand an additional credit spread to compensate for the
default risk they are exposed to under the term debt.
Before formulating debt value D(W0 ) and equity value E(W0 ) as solutions to differ13

ential equations and proceeding to characterize the solutions to the ex post and ex ante
optimization problems we begin by describing the classical Miller irrelevance solution in
our model for the special case where the firm faces no financing constraints.

3

The Miller Benchmark

Under the Miller benchmark, the firm faces neither external financing costs (Φ = γP =
γF = η = δ = 0) nor any cash carry cost (λ = 0). Without loss of generality we shall
assume that in this idealized world the firm never relies on a credit line and simply issues
new equity if it is in need of cash to service the term debt. Given that shocks are i.i.d.
the firm then never defaults. Miller (1977) argues that the effective tax benefit of debt,
which takes into account both corporate and personal taxes, is
τ∗ =

(1 − τc )(1 − τe )
(1 − τi ) − (1 − τc )(1 − τe )
=1−
.
(1 − τi )
(1 − τi )

(12)

For a firm issuing a perpetual interest-only debt with coupon payment b, its ex post
equity value is then:
∗

Z

E =E

∞

e
0

−r(1−τi )t


1
(1 − τc )(1 − τe )(dYt − bdt) = (1 − τ ∗ ) (µ − b) .
r

(13)

For a perpetual debt with no liquidation (T = ∞), ex post debt value is simply D∗ = b/r
as both the after-tax coupon and the after-tax interest rate are proportional to before-tax
coupon b and before-tax interest rate r with the same coefficient (1 − τi ).
The firm’s total value, denoted by V ∗ , is given by the sum of its debt and equity value:
V ∗ = E ∗ + D∗ =

µ
b
(1 − τ ∗ ) + τ ∗ ,
r
r

(14)

where the first term is the value of the unlevered firm and the second term is the present
value of tax shields. First, as long as τ ∗ > 0, (14) implies that the optimal leverage for a
financially unconstrained firm is the maximally allowed coupon b. Given that the firm

14

cannot borrow more than its value (or debt capacity), it may pledge at most 100% of
its cash flow by setting b∗ = µ. In this case, firm value satisfies the familiar formula
V ∗ = µ/r. As we will show, for a financially constrained firm, even with τ ∗ > 0, liquidity
considerations will lead the firm to choose moderate leverage.

4

Analysis

We now characterize the solutions to the ex post and ex ante problems for the firm. We
show that the firm will find itself in one of the following three possible regions: (i) the
liquidation region, (ii) the interior (internal financing) region, and (iii) the payout region.
As we will show below, the firm is in the payout region when its cash stock W exceeds
an endogenous upper barrier W , and liquidates itself once it exhausts its LOC (when
W = −C). Finally, in the interior region, −C ≤ W ≤ W , the firm services interest
payments for its term debt and accumulates liquidity.

4.1

Optimal Payout Policy and the Value of Debt and Equity

There are two sub-regions in the interior region, the cash-hoarding region and the credit
region. In the interior credit region, −C ≤ W ≤ 0, the firm’s after-tax credit evolution
equation is given by
dWt = (1 − τc ) (µ + (r + δ)W − ν(C)(Wt + C) − b) dt + (1 − τc ) σdZt .

(15)

In the interior cash-hoarding region, 0 < W ≤ W , the firm’s after-tax cash accumulation
is given by
dWt = (1 − τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) dt + (1 − τc ) σdZt .

(16)

Note that the corporate tax rate τc lowers both the drift and the volatility of the liq-

15

uidity accumulation processes (15-16).8 In this cash-hoarding region, the firm effectively
accumulates savings for its shareholders inside the firm. Shareholders’ interest income on
their corporate savings is then taxed at the corporate income tax rate τc rather than the
personal interest income tax rate τi if earnings were disbursed and accumulated as personal
savings. An obvious question for the firm with respect to corporate versus personal savings
is: which is more tax efficient? If (r − λ)(1 − τc ) > r(1 − τi ) it is always more efficient to
save inside the firm and the firm will never pay out any cash to its shareholders. Thus, a
necessary and sufficient condition for the firm to eventually payout its cash is:
(r − λ)(1 − τc ) < r(1 − τi ) .

(17)

By holding on to its cash and investing it at a return of (r − λ) the firm earns
[1 + (r − λ)(1 − τc )] (1 − τe )
per unit of savings. If instead the firm pays out a dollar to its shareholders, they
only collect (1 − τe ) and earn an after-tax rate of return r(1 − τi ). Therefore, when
[1 + r(1 − τi )] (1 − τe ) ≥ [1 + (r − λ)(1 − τc )] (1 − τe ), which simplifies to (17), the firm
will eventually disburse cash to its shareholders. It may not immediately pay out its
earnings so as to reduce the risk that it may run out of cash. Thus, the payout boundary
is optimally chosen by equityholders to trade off the after-tax efficiency of personal savings
versus the expected costs of premature liquidation when the firm runs out of cash.

Equity value E (W ). Let E (W ) denote the after-tax value of equity. In the interior
cash hoarding region 0 ≤ W ≤ W , equity value E(W ) satisfies the following ODE:
1
(1 − τi ) rE(W ) = (1 − τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) E 0 (W ) + σ 2 (1 − τc )2 E 00 (W ) .
2
(18)
8

The tax implications on the volatility of after-tax labor income have first been explored by Kimball
and Mankiw (1989) in a precautionary savings model for households.

16

Note that we discount the after-tax cash flow using the after-tax discount rates (1 − τi ) r,
as the alternative of investing in the firm’s equity is to invest in the risk-free asset earning
an after-tax rate of return (1 − τi )r.
Next, we turn to the interior credit region, −C ≤ W ≤ 0. Using a similar argument as
the one for the cash hoarding region, E(W ) satisfies the following ODE:
1
(1 − τi ) rE(W ) = (1 − τc ) (µ + (r + δ)W − ν(C)(C + W ) − b) E 0 (W )+ σ 2 (1−τc )2 E 00 (W ) .
2
(19)
Note that the firm pays the spread δ over the risk-free rate r on the amount |W | that it
draws down from its LOC.9
Next, we turn to various boundary conditions. At the endogenous payout boundary W ,
equityholders must be indifferent between retaining cash inside the firm and distributing
it to shareholders, so that:

E 0 W = 1 − τe .

(20)

In addition, since equityholders optimally choose the payout boundary W the following
super-contact condition must also be satisfied:

E 00 W = 0.

(21)

Substituting (20) and (21) into the ODE (18), we then obtain the following valuation
equation at the payout boundary W :

(1 − τ ∗ ) µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b
E W =
,
r


(22)

where τ ∗ is the Miller tax rate given by (12). The expression (22) for the value of equity
E(W ) at the payout boundary W can be interpreted as a “steady-state” perpetuity
valuation equation by slightly modifying the Miller formula (13) with the added term
(r − λ)W − ν(C)C for the interest income on the maximal corporate cash holdings W and
9

Using a standard argument, one can show that E(W ) is continuously differentiable at W = 0. See
Karatzas and Shreve (1991).

17

the running cost of the whole unused LOC C. Because W is a reflecting boundary, the
value attained at this point should match this steady-state level as though we remained
at W forever. If the value is below this level, it is optimal to defer the payout and allow
cash holdings W to increase until (21) is satisfied. At that point the benefit of further
deferring payout is balanced by the cost due to the lower rate of return on corporate cash
as implied by condition (17).
At the payout boundary W , each unit of cash is valued at (1 − τ ∗ )(r − λ)/r < 1 by
equity investors for two reasons: (i) the effective Miller tax rate τ ∗ > 0 and (ii) the cash
carry cost λ. That is, cash is disadvantaged without a precautionary value of cash-holdings,
and hence the firm pays out for W ≥ W .
At the left boundary W = −C, equity value is given by
E (−C) = max {0, L − C − P − G} ,

(23)

where G denotes the capital gains taxes given in (5) at the moment of exit. There are two
scenarios to consider. First, term debt is fully repaid at liquidation and debt is risk-free.
If debt is risky, the seniority of debt over equity implies that equity is worthless, so that:
E (−C) = 0. Recall that credit line is fully repaid.

Debt value D (W ). Let D (W ) denote the after-tax value of debt. Taking the firm’s
payout policy W as given, investors price debt accordingly. In the cash hoarding region,
D(W ) satisfies the following ODE:
1
(1−τi )rD(W ) = (1 − τi ) b+(1−τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) D0 (W )+ σ 2 (1−τc )2 D00 (W ),
2
(24)
And, in the credit region, −C < W < 0, the ODE for debt pricing D(W ) is
1
(1−τi )rD(W ) = (1 − τi ) b+(1−τc ) (µ + (r + δ)W − ν(C + W ) − b) D0 (W )+ σ 2 (1−τc )2 D00 (W ).
2
(25)

18

The boundary conditions are:
D (−C) = min {L − C, P } , and

D0 W = 0 .

(26)
(27)

Condition (26) follows from the absolute priority rule which states that debt payments have
to be serviced in full before equityholders collect any liquidation proceeds. Condition (27)
follows from the fact that the expected life of the firm does not change as W approaches
W (since W is a reflective barrier),


D K, W − D K, W − ε
lim
= 0.
ε→0
ε
Firm value V (W ) and Enterprise value Q(W ). Since debtholders and equityholders
are the firm’s two claimants and credit line use is default-free and is fully priced in the
equity value E(W ), we define the firm’s total value V (W ) as
V (W ) = E(W ) + D(W ) .

(28)

Following the standard practice in both academic and industry literatures, we define
enterprise value as firm value V (W ) netting out cash:
Q(W ) = V (W ) − W = E(W ) + D(W ) − W .

(29)

Note that Q(W ) is purely an accounting definition and may not be very informative about
the economic value of the productive asset under financial constraints. Indeed, under MM,
the (net) marginal value of liquidity is zero, Q0 (W ) = 0. Here, we know that’s not the
case indicating the value of liquidity for a financially constrained firm.
Having characterized the market values of debt and equity as a function of the firm’s
stock of cash W , we now turn to the firm’s ex ante optimization problem, which involves
the choice of an optimal ‘start-up’ cash reserve W0 , an optimal credit line commitment

19

with limit C, and an optimal debt and equity structure.

4.2

Optimal Capital Structure

At time 0, the entrepreneur chooses the fraction of outside equity a, the coupon on the
perpetual risky debt b, and the credit line limit C (with implied W0 ) to solve the following
problem:
max (1 − a)E(W0 ; b, C),

(30)

W0 = W0− + F + P − (γE F + γD P + Φ) − K,

(31)

a, b, C

where

F = aE(W0 ; b, C), and

(32)

P = D(W0 ; b, C) .

(33)

Without loss of generality we set W0− = 0. The optimal amount of cash W0 the firm starts
out with (after the time-0 financing arrangement) is then given by the solution to the
following equation, which defines a fixed point for W0 :
(1 − γE ) aE(W0 ) + (1 − γD ) D(W0 ) = W0 + K + Φ.

(34)

The entrepreneur is juggling with the following issues in determining the firm’s start-up
capital structure. The first and most obvious consideration is that by raising funds through
a term debt issue with coupon b, the entrepreneur is able to both obtain a tax shield benefit
and to hold on to a larger fraction of equity ownership. That is in essence the benefit of
(term) debt financing. One cost of debt financing is that the perpetual interest payments
b must be serviced out of liquidity W and may drain the firm’s stock of cash or use up the
credit line. To reduce the risk that the firm may run out of cash, the entrepreneur can
start the firm with a larger cash cushion W0 , and she can take out an LOC commitment
with a larger limit C. The benefit of building a large cash buffer is obviously that the
firm can collect a larger debt tax shield and reduce the risk of premature liquidation. The
20

cost is, first that the firm will pay a larger issuance cost at time 0, and second that the
firm will invest its cash inside the firm at a suboptimal after-tax rate (1 − τc )(r − λ). To
reduce the second cost the firm may choose to start with a lower cash buffer W0 but a
larger LOC commitment C. The tradeoff the firm faces here is that while it economizes
on issuance costs and on the opportunity cost of inefficiently saving cash inside the firm,
it has to incur a commitment cost ν(C)C on its LOC. In addition, by committing to a
larger LOC C, the firm will pay a spread δ when tapping the credit line. Finally, as the
credit line is senior to term debt, the firm increases credit risk on its term debt b and the
likelihood of inefficient liquidation.
Depending on underlying parameter values, the firm’s time-0 optimal capital structure
can admit three possible solutions: (i) no term debt (equity issuance only, with possibly an
LOC); (ii) term debt issuance only (with, again, a possible LOC); and (iii) a combination
of equity and term debt issuance (with a possible LOC).

Solution procedure. We now briefly sketch out our approach to solving numerically
for the optimal capital structure at date 0. We focus our discussion on the most complex
solution where the firm issues both debt and equity. The objective function in this case
is given by (30). We begin by fixing a pair of (b, C) and solving for E(W ) and D(W )
from the ODEs for E and D. We then proceed to solve for the range of a, as specified by
(amin , amax ), for which there is a solution W0 to the budget constraint (31). Next, we solve
for W0 from the fixed point problem (31) for a given triplet (b, C, a). There is either one or
two fixed points, each representing an equilibrium. The intuition for the case of multiple
equilibria is that outside investors can give the firm high or low valuation depending on
the initial cash holding W0 being high or low, which in turn result in the actual W0 being
high or low. Finally, we find (b∗ , C ∗ , a∗ ) that maximizes (1 − a)E(W0 ; b, C).

4.3

Net Tax Benefit of Debt for a Financially Constrained Firm

Miller (1977) provides a simple formula of the net tax benefit of debt for an unconstrained
firm, which nets out the tax benefit of debt at firm level against the tax disadvantage of
21

debt at individual level. How does the net tax benefit of debt for the financially constrained
firm compare to that for an unconstrained firm? To address this question, we consider how
an extra dollar in income generated inside the firm may be used. A marginal ∆ increment
in income can be used in one of the following ways: (i) paid out to service debt, (ii) paid
out to equityholders as a dividend, or (iii) retained inside the firm as part of the liquidity
reserve. The after-tax interest income to debt holders is (1 − τi )∆, while the after-tax
dividend income to equity holders is (1 − τc )(1 − τe )∆. If the amount ∆ is retained, the
firm’s cash reserve will increase by (1 − τc )∆, resulting in an after-tax capital gain of
E(Wt + (1 − τc )∆) − E(Wt ), or approximately E 0 (Wt )(1 − τc )∆ for small ∆.
In the absence of external financing costs there is no need to retain cash. The net tax
benefit of debt is then based on the comparison between choices (i) and (ii), which yields
the effective Miller tax rate in (12). In the presence of external financing costs, the firm
prefers to retain cash instead of paying it out whenever Wt is away from the endogenous
payout boundary, Wt < W . The net marginal tax benefit of debt then becomes
(1 − τi )∆ − (1 − τc )E 0 (Wt )∆
(1 − τc )E 0 (Wt )
τ (Wt ) =
=1−
.
(1 − τi )∆
(1 − τi )
∗

(35)

In other words, for a financially constrained firm the payout choice (2), and hence the
Miller formula for the net tax benefit of debt, is only relevant when a firm is indifferent
between paying out and retaining cash inside the firm, i.e., when W = W . Note that since
E 0 (W ) = 1 − τe , the right-hand side of (35) reduces to Miller’s effective tax rate in (12) at
the payout boundary W .

5

Quantitative Results

Parameter values and calibration. We choose the model parameters as follows. First,
we set the corporate income tax rate at τc = 35% as in Leland (1994), the personal equity
income tax rate at τe = 12%, as well as personal interest income tax rate at τi = 30%, as
in Hennessy and Whited (2007) and Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001). The tax rate τe
on equity income is lower than the tax rate on interest income τi to reflect the fact that
22

Table 1: Parameters. This table reports the parameter values for the baseline model.
All the parameter values are annualized when applicable.

Risk-free rate
r
Risk-neutral mean ROA
µ
Volatility of ROA
σ
Initial investment
K
Liquidation value
L
Tax rate on corporate income τc
Tax rate on equity income
τe
Tax rate on interest income
τi

6%
12%
10%
1
0.9
35%
12%
30%

Fixed financing cost
Prop. debt financing cost
Prop. equity financing cost
Cash-carrying cost
Credit line spread
LOC commitment fee parameter

Φ
γD
γE
λ
δ
η

1%
1%
6%
0.5%
0.25%
2.8%

capital gains are typically taxed at a lower rate than interest, as well as the fact that the
taxation of capital gains can be deferred until capital gains are realized. Based on our
assumed tax rates, the Miller effective tax rate as defined in (12) is τ ∗ = 18.3%.
In most dynamic structural models following Leland (1994), the Miller tax rate τ ∗
is sufficient to capture the combined effects of the three tax rates (corporate, personal
equity, and personal interest incomes) on leverage choices. However, in a dynamic model
with financing frictions and cash accumulation (as our model), the Miller tax rate τ ∗ is
no longer sufficient to capture the effects of corporate and personal equity/debt tax rates
because the time when the firm earns its profit is generally separate from the time when
it pays out its earnings. The reason for this separation is that it is often optimal for a
financially constrained firm to hoard cash rather than immediately pay out its earnings.
Hence, most of the time, the conventional double-taxation Miller calculation for tax shields
is not applicable for a financially constrained firm.
Second, we set the annual risk-free rate to r = 6%. We set the annual risk-neutral
expected return on capital to µ = 12% based on the estimates of Acharya, Almeida, and
Campello (2013), and the volatility of the annual return on capital to σ = 10% based on
Sufi (2009). For the interest spread on the LOC, we choose δ = 0.25% to capture the
costs for banks to monitor the firm (there is no default risk for the LOC). For the LOC
commitment fee, we calibrate η = 0.028 to match the average (unused) LOC-to-asset ratio

23

Table 2: Optimal capital structure. This table reports the optimal capital structure
results from the baseline case.
credit
line
C

coupon
rate
b

0.100

0.080

outside
payout
initial
equity boundary cash
W
W0
a
0

0.326

0.303

project
value
J0

debt
value
D0

interest
coverage
µ/b

market
leverage
L0

0.763

1.326

1.497

0.635

(C = 0.10) in Sufi (2009). The implied average proportional commitment fee is 28 basis
points, close to the median commitment fee of 25 basis points as documented by Sufi
(2009).
Third, we set external financing costs as follows: we take the fixed cost to be Φ = 1%
of the setup cost K as in BCW. The firm incurs this cost when it raises external funds,
whether in the form of debt or equity or both. We further take the marginal debt issuance
cost γD = 1% and the marginal equity issuance cost γE = 6% based on the empirical
findings of Altinkilic and Hansen (2000).
Fourth, we set the cash-carrying cost to λ = 0.5%, which is somewhat lower than in
BCW. The reason is that here λ only reflects the cash-carry costs that are due to agency
or governance factors, while the parameter λ in BCW also includes the tax disadvantage
of holding cash, which we model explicitly here. Finally, the liquidation value is set at
L = 0.9 as in Hennessy and Whited (2007). Table 1 summarizes all the parameter values.

The Ex-Post Value of Equity E(W ). Based on our baseline parameter values, the
optimal LOC commitment is C = 0.10, the optimal coupon is b = 0.08, and there is no
outside equity stake, a = 0. Moreover, the optimal start-up cash buffer is W0 = 0.303 and
the optimal payout boundary is W = 0.326. The entrepreneur obtains an initial equity
value of U0 = 0.763 under the optimal capital structure. These results are summarized in
Table 2.
Figure 1 plots the value of equity E(W ) in Panel A and the marginal equity value of
liquidity E 0 (W ) in Panel B. When W reaches the endogenous lower boundary W = −C =

24

−0.10, the firm has run out of its maximal liquidity supply and is liquidated. At that
point equity is worthless, because the liquidation value of the assets is lower than the face
value of debt. When W hits W = 0.326, it is optimal for the firm to pay out any cash
in excess of W . Indeed, at that point the marginal value of liquidity inside the firm for
equityholders is equal to the after-tax value of a dollar of payout: E 0 (W ) = 1 − τe = 0.88,
as can be seen in Panel B. In the interior region, equity value E(W ) increases with W with
a slope E 0 (W ) > 1 − τe , reflecting the value of a higher cash buffer as insurance against
the risk of early liquidation. As Panel B shows, when the firm is close to running out of
cash, the marginal value of one dollar of cash to equity holders exceeds six dollars.
Remarkably, Figure 1 reveals that E(W ) is concave in W even though the firm is
levered with risky debt. The standard intuition in corporate finance suggests that the
value of equity for a firm with risky debt is equivalent to the value of a call option with
strike price equal to the face value of the firm’s debt. It follows that the value of equity is
convex in the value of the firm’s underlying assets. However, in our baseline model, default
is entirely driven by (diffusive) liquidity shocks. When a firm is forced to liquidate, it
generates discrete losses for both debt holders and equity holders. In particular, it makes
the equity holders dynamically risk averse and engage in precautionary corporate savings.10
Consistent with our results, Rauh (2009) finds that firms with more poorly funded pension
plans tend to hold more safe assets in their portfolios suggesting that they are reluctant
to engage in risk-shifting by holding risky financial assets. In our calibrated model, the
firm starts with a relatively large cash buffer W0 = 0.303, sets the payout boundary at
W = 0.326, and secures a LOC commitment of C = 0.10, all of which contribute to
reducing liquidity risk. In Section 8, we show that large liquidity shocks can generate
convexity in the equity value.

The Ex-Post Value of Debt. In Figure 2, we examine the property of debt in our
model. A first observation that emerges from Figure 2 is that the market value of debt
D(W ) is increasing and concave in W (Panel A), while the credit spread is decreasing in W
10

Technically, the concavity of the equity value is easiest to see in the case without uncertainty, where
the equity value will be linearly increasing in cash holding when W > −C but drops discretely at W = −C.

25

B. Marginal equity value of liquidity: E ′ (W )

A. Equity value: E(W )

8

1

7
0.8
6
0.6

5
4

0.4

W →
3

0.2

W0 →

2
1

0
←W
−0.2
−0.2

1 − τe
↓

0
0

0.2

0.4

−0.2

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 1: Equity value E(W ) and the marginal equity value of liquidity E 0 (W ).
This figure plots E(W ) and E 0 (W ) for the baseline case.

(Panel D). This is intuitive, given that the firm is less likely to default when it has a higher
cash buffer. This is also in line with the evidence provided in Acharya, Davydenko, and
Strebulaev (2012).11 Second, the marginal debt value of liquidity D0 (W ) is highly sensitive
to W (Panel B). As W increases towards the endogenous payout boundary W = 0.326,
D0 (W ) approaches zero, indicating that debt becomes insensitive to changes in W .
A third striking observation is that net debt, D(W ) − W , is non-monotonic in W
(Panel C), which suggests that net debt (based on market value of debt) is a poor measure
of a firm’s credit risk. Analysts commonly use net debt as a measure of a firm’s credit risk
based on the logic that the firm could at any time use its cash hoard to retire some or
all of its outstanding debt. As our results show, information may be lost by netting debt
with cash. For example, a netted value of 1.1 could reflect either a high credit risk (if the
firm is drawing down on its LOC) or a low credit risk if the firm holds a comfortable cash
buffer W in excess of 0.2.
11

Acharya, Davydenko, and Strebulaev (2012) first run an OLS regression of yield spreads on cash-tototal assets and other variables. They obtain a positive coefficient, suggesting that surprisingly higher
cash holdings are associated with higher spreads. However, when they run an instrumental variable
regression (using the ratio of intangible-to-total assets as an instrument) they find that the coefficient on
the cash-to-total assets variable is negative.

26

B. Marginal debt value of liquidity: D′ (W )

A. Debt value: D(W )
1.4

8

1.2

6
W →

4

1
W0 →

2

L−C
←W
0.6
−0.2

0
0

0.2

−0.2

0.4

C. Net debt value: D(W ) − W
500

1.2

400

1.1

300

1

200

0.9

100

0

0.2

0.2

0.4

D. Credit spread: S(W )

1.3

0.8
−0.2

0

0
−0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 2: Debt value D(W ), the marginal debt value of liquidity D0 (W ), net debt
value D(W ) − W , and credit spread S(W ) = b/D(W ) − r.
Finally, Panel D plots the credit spread, defined as the difference between the yield on
long-term debt and the risk-free rate, S(W ) = b/D(W ) − r. The spread drops to merely
5 basis points as W approaches the endogenous payout boundary, and when the firm
exhausts its the credit line limit the credit spread increases beyond 400 basis points. Note
that even at the payout boundary, the firm’s debt is not risk free as there is still a small
probability that the firm ends up in liquidation in the future.

The Ex-Post Enterprise Value. Figure 3 plots the enterprise value Q(W ) = V (W ) −
W in Panel A, and the marginal enterprise value of liquidity Q0 (W ) in Panel B. Given
that both equity value and debt value are increasing and concave in W , we expect that
enterprise value Q(W ) is more concave than equity value E(W ). This means that an

27

B. Marginal enterprise value of liquidity: Q′ (W )

A. Enterprise value: Q(W )
2

14
12
10

1.5

W →

8
6

W0 →
1

4
2
←W
0

0.5
−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

−0.2

Liquidity: W

−τe
↓
0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 3: Enterprise value Q(W ) = V and the marginal enterprise value Q(W ).
This figure plots the enterprise value Q(W ) = V (W ) − W and Q0 (W ). Note that Q0 (W ) can be
negative near the payout boundary W .

investor holding a portfolio of debt and equity in this firm would be more averse to cash-flow
risk than an equity holder. Thus, although equity holders are dynamically risk-averse,
they are not risk-averse enough to be in a position to optimally control risk from the point
of view of total firm value. This is why it is optimal in general to include debt covenants
into the term debt contract that limit equity holders’ ability to control risk or pay out
dividends ex post, which we study in Section 7.
Note that the marginal enterprise value of liquidity Q0 (W ) can become negative for
values of W that exceed 0.205. This is simply due to the fact that paying out excess cash
triggers personal equity income tax at 12%. Therefore, at the payout boundary W = 0.326,
Q0 (0.326) = −0.12 < 0. Because Q0 (W ) can be negative, we should be somewhat cautious
with the economic interpretation of enterprise value Q(W ) in environments with (personal
equity) taxes.

28

Leverage. We define market leverage, L(W ), as the ratio between the market value of
debt D(W ) and the firm’s market value V (W ),
L(W ) =

D(W )
.
V (W )

(36)

Another common definition of leverage replaces debt value with net debt D(W ) − W and
accordingly replaces firm value V (W ) by enterprise value Q(W ). We refer to this leverage
ratio as “net leverage” and denote it by LN (W ),12
LN (W ) =

D(W ) − W
.
Q(W )

(37)

Figure 4 plots both leverage L(W ) and net leverage LN (W ) as a function of W in the
interior region. Both measures of leverage are decreasing in W . Under our baseline
parameters, the value of equity is zero when the firm is liquidated, E(−C) = 0, so
that leverage takes its maximum value of 100%. At the payout boundary W , market
leverage reaches its minimum value of 62.9%. This may appear to be a high level of
leverage. However, note that for an unconstrained firm, the Miller solution described
above prescribes optimal market leverage of 100%. An important reason why we obtain
high leverage ratios even for a financially constrained firm is that underlying cash lows in
our model are i.i.d. This assumption implies that the issuance of long-term debt does not
generate any solvency risk. It only affects the liquidity risk of the firm.

The Tax Advantage of Debt for a Financially Constrained Firm. Equation (35)
shows that the net tax benefit of debt depends crucially on the financing constraint. The
net tax benefit is reduced when the firm’s precautionary savings motive is high, i.e., when
the marginal value of liquidity is high. As Figure 5 shows, the size of this effect on the net
tax benefit of debt can be quite large when the firm’s cash holdings are low. The net tax
benefit turns negative for W < 0.13, and can be as low as −4.91 when the firm is close to
12

Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) argue that cash should not be treated as negative debt.
Cash can help financially constrained firms hedge future investment against income shortfalls, so that
constrained firms would value cash more. Our model provides a precise measure of this distortion.

29

1

L(W )
LN (W )

0.95

0.9

0.85

Leverage

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5
−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 4: Leverage L(W ) and net leverage LN (W ). This figure plots market leverage
L(W ) and net leverage LN (W ) against liquidity W .

running out of cash, compared to 0.183 in the Miller formula.

6

Comparative Statics

The solution illustrated above shows that a financially constrained firm will only exploit
the tax advantage of debt to a very limited extent. For example, when it is close to the
endogenous payout boundary W , our financially constrained firm’s market leverage L(W )
is about 40% lower than the optimal market leverage for an unconstrained firm. In this
section, we further examine the impact of financing constraints on the capital structure
using comparative statics analysis.
Unlike for the classical dynamic tradeoff theory where the firm’s only margin of
adjustment is debt versus equity financing, a financially constrained firm has an additional
margin along which it can respond to, say, a change in tax policy: it can change its cash
policy. The tradeoff between the tax benefits of debt and the costs of financial distress
implies that debt financing increases with the effective tax benefit of debt τ ∗ ; moreover,

30

1

Net tax benefit of debt

0

↑
τ ∗ = 0.183

−1

−2

−3

−4

−5
−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 5: Measuring tax benefits. This figure plots the net tax benefits of debt for the
financially constrained firm (conditional on its cash holding W ). The dash-line denotes the Miller
tax rate, which is the effective tax benefit for an unconstrained firm.

debt usage increases with the firm’s profitability but decreases with higher cash-flow
risk. However, the presence of external financing constraints alter these predictions both
quantitatively and qualitatively, because the constrained firm will now be concerned with
the impact that changes in financial policies have on liquidity. We examine this question
by exploring how the optimal capital structure of a financially constrained firm varies in
response to changes in tax rates and the underlying cash-flow characteristics.

6.1

Corporate Financial Policy and Taxation

In Table 3, we report the financially constrained firm’s optimal financial policy, market
value, and leverage under three different tax policy scenarios. In the first scenario, we lower
the corporate tax rate from τc = 35% to 25%, keeping other parameters the same. The
effects of this change on corporate financial policy are reported in the second row of Table
3 and plotted in Figure 6. Cutting the corporate tax rate substantially reduces the Miller
tax rate τ ∗ from 18.3% to 5.7%. Based on the intuition of the classical dynamic tradeoff

31

Table 3: Comparative statics: tax rates. This table reports the results from comparative statics on different tax rates.

baseline
τc = 25%
τe = 0%
τi = 15%

Miller
tax rate

credit
line

coupon
rate

payout
bound

initial
cash

project
value

debt
value

interest
coverage

market
leverage

τ∗

C

b

W

W0

J0

D0

µ/b

L0

18.3%
5.7%
7.1%
32.7%

0.100
0.097
0.100
0.098

0.080
0.077
0.080
0.086

0.326
0.507
0.326
0.288

0.303
0.258
0.303
0.661

0.763
0.887
0.867
0.960

1.326
1.281
1.326
1.688

1.497
1.557
1.497
1.393

0.635
0.591
0.605
0.637

model, one would expect such a decline to significantly lower the firm’s reliance on debt
financing. However, this is not the case for our financially constrained firm, which barely
changes its reliance on term debt, with the coupon b changing from 0.08 to 0.077. The
reason is that a financially constrained firm issues term debt not only to take advantage of
the tax shield, but also to build a liquidity reserve. In fact, even when the tax shield is
completely removed, the firm will still have strong incentive to issue debt.
Instead of significantly reducing its term debt, by far the main change in response
to the lower corporate tax rate concerns the firm’s cash management. On the one hand,
the reduction in the corporate tax rate raises the firm’s after-tax return on its savings
(r − λ)(1 − τc ) from 3.575% to 4.125%. On the other hand, it also raises the volatility
of the after-tax cash flows (1 − τc )σ from 7.8% to 9%. Both changes will encourage the
firm to increase its cash savings, which is reflected in the large upward shift in the payout
boundary from W = 0.326 to 0.507. Thus, should such a tax reform be introduced in the
US, our model predicts that corporations would increase their already substantial cash
holdings. The other changes that such a tax reform would induce is a small reduction in
the reliance on LOC (from C = 0.10 to C = 0.097) as cash holding is less expensive and
credit line is less valuable.13 Naturally, the reduction in corporate taxation will also result
in higher equity value and the enterprise value, as shown in Panel A and C in Figure 6.
The market value of debt falls due to the smaller coupon, and the credit spread is lower
13

Note that as a result of the lower amount of debt issued, the firm also decreases its initial cash hoard
from W0 = 0.303 to W0 = 0.258.

32

B. Debt value: D(W )

A. Equity value: E(W )
1.2

1.4

1

1.3
1.2

0.8

1.1
0.6
1
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

W0 (τc = 35%) →

0.9

W0 (τc = 25%) →
0

0.2

τ c = 35%
τ c = 25%

0.8
0.4

0.7
−0.2

0.6

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

D. Credit spread: S(W )

2

500

1.8

400

1.6
300
1.4
200
1.2
100

1
0.8
−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0
−0.2

0.6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Liquidity: W

Liquidity: W

Figure 6: Comparative statics with respect to corporate income tax rate τc .
for most levels of cash holding.
In the second scenario, we eliminate the personal tax rate on equity income, i.e.,
changing τe from 12% to 0%. The effects of this change are reported in the third row of
Table 3 and plotted in Figure 7. This change reduces the Miller tax rate τ ∗ from 18.3% to
7.1%, but the firm’s financial policy remains essentially unchanged. While the reduction
in equity income tax τe does raise the equity and enterprise value, it has a negligible
effect on the amount of term debt issued and on the cash policy (including the payout
boundary and the initial cash holding). The reason is that these policies are predominately
determined by the financial constraint. Indeed, as we have demonstrated in the net tax
benefit calculation in equation (35) and in Figure 5, unlike for the Miller tax rate, changes
in τe only directly affect the net tax benefit of debt at the payout boundary.
In the third scenario, we lower the personal tax rate on interest income, τi , from 30%
to 15%. The effects of this change are reported in the fourth row of Table 3 and plotted in

33

B. Debt value: D(W )

A. Equity value: E(W )
1.4

1

1.3

0.8

1.2
0.6

1.1

0.4

W0 (τe = 0%) →

0.2

W0 (τe = 12%) →

1
0.9

0
−0.2

0

0.2

τ e = 12%
τ e = 0%

0.8
0.7
−0.2

0.4

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

0

0.2

0.4

D. Credit spread: S(W )

2

500

1.8

400

1.6
300
1.4
200
1.2
100

1
0.8
−0.2

0

0.2

0
−0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 7: Comparative statics with respect to personal equity income tax rate
τe
Figure 8. The cut in τi almost doubles the Miller tax rate τ ∗ from 18.3% to 32.7%. As
indicated by equation (35), a lower τi also directly increases the net tax benefit of debt,
which results in a significant increase in the coupon rate from b = 0.08 to 0.086. The
higher coupon combined with the reduction in τi raises the value of outstanding term debt
D(W ), as seen in Panel A of Figure 8. In fact, the higher tax benefit of debt induces
the firm to raise substantially more cash via debt issuance at time 0 than it wants for
precautionary reasons, with W0 = 0.661 exceeding the payout boundary W = 0.288, which
generates an immediate payout of W0 − W = 0.373 to the entrepreneur.
Interestingly, the other significant change in corporate financial policy is an overall
reduction in the cash buffer the firm chooses to retain, with both a slight reduction in the
LOC commitment C from 0.10 to 0.098 and a downward shift in the payout boundary
W from 0.326 to 0.288. The reason is that, with a higher debt burden the ex-post value
of equity E(W ) (plotted in Panel A of Figure 8) is now lower, so that equityholders–
34

A. Equity value: E(W )

B. Debt value: D(W )

1

1.7

0.8

1.5

0.6

1.3
W0 (τi = 15%) →

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

1.1
W0 (τi = 30%) →

0

0.2

0.9

0.4

0.7
−0.2

0.6

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

τ i = 30%
τ i = 15%
0

0.2

0.4

D. Credit spread: S(W )

2.2

600

2

500

1.8

400

1.6
300
1.4
200

1.2

100

1
0.8
−0.2

0

0.2

0
−0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 8: Comparative statics with respect to personal interest income tax rate
τi
who determine the firm’s optimal cash policy–are now less concerned with ensuring the
continuation of the firm and more interested in getting higher cash payouts. Thus, although
equityholders are dynamically risk averse, from the point of view of maximizing total
firm value they are in effect willing to hold less cash to be able to get a somewhat higher
short-term payout. The lower interest income tax rate raises the enterprise value (see Panel
C), while the credit spread is higher due to the increase in term debt and reduction in cash
holding (see Panel D). Overall, the effects of the change in τi for financially constrained
firms is close to the predictions from the classical dynamic tradeoff solution: the increase
in τ ∗ results in higher debt financing, higher market leverage, higher credit spreads, and a
higher probability of default.

35

Table 4: Comparative statics: cash flow parameters and cash holding cost. This
table reports the results from comparative statics on the mean and volatility of return to
capital, µ and σ, and the cash holding cost λ.

baseline
σ = 20%
µ = 14%
λ = 0.75%

6.2

credit
line

coupon
rate

outside
equity

payout
boundary

initial
cash

project
value

debt
value

interest
coverage

market
leverage

C

b

a

W

W0

J0

D0

µ/b

L0

0.100
0.101
0.100
0.144

0.080
0.086
0.094
0.076

0
0.205
0
0

0.326
0.774
0.313
0.266

0.303
0.506
0.538
0.233

0.763
0.633
1.049
0.752

1.326
1.376
1.564
1.255

1.497
1.391
1.481
1.579

0.635
0.634
0.599
0.625

Profitability, Earnings Volatility, and Financial Policy

In Table 4 we report how the firm’s optimal financial policy changes with: i) cash-flow
volatility σ; ii) profitability µ; and iii) the cash-carrying cost λ.
The effects of an increase in σ on corporate financial policy are reported in the second
row of Table 4 and plotted in Figure 9. One well known prediction from the dynamic
tradeoff theory is that an increase in cash-flow risks reduces leverage. Riskier firms are
expected to reduce their indebtedness because they face higher expected bankruptcy costs.
In this context it is striking to observe that, as we increase the volatility from σ = 10% to
20%, the amount of term debt the firm issues actually increases, with the coupon b rising
from 0.08 to 0.086, and the interest coverage dropping from 1.497 to 1.391.
Another significant change in the financial policy is that the firm chooses to issue
outside equity in addition to term debt, with the outside equity share increasing from
a = 0 in the baseline case to 0.205. The purpose of issuing more debt as well as outside
equity is to build up a sufficient initial cash buffer W0 , which nearly doubles from 0.303
to 0.506. Moreover, the firm also adopts a significantly more conservative payout policy,
with the endogenous payout boundary W shifting from 0.326 to 0.774. In other words,
the main margin of adjustment to an increase in volatility of earnings is a substantial
increase in corporate savings. Overall, an increase in volatility is bad news for the firm,
as witnessed by the decline in ex-ante project value from 0.763 to 0.633. Intuitively, the
36

A. Equity value: E(W )

B. Debt value: D(W )

1.2
1.4

1
0.8

1.2

0.6
1

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

W0 (σ = 20%) →
W0 (σ = 10%) →
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

−0.2

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

D. Credit spread: S(W )
500

1.8

400

1.6
1.4

300

1.2

200

1

100

0.8
−0.2

σ = 10%
σ = 20%

0.8

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0
−0.2

0.8

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Liquidity: W

Figure 9: Comparative statics with respect to earnings volatility σ
firm attempts to make up for this worsening situation by holding more cash to reduce
the probability of an early liquidation and by exploiting the tax-shield benefits of debt
more aggressively. In sum, the main lesson emerging from this comparative statics exercise
is that the observation of higher debt and leverage for riskier firms is not necessarily a
violation of the tradeoff theory. It points to the importance of incorporating into the
standard model a precautionary savings motive.
The effects of an increase in profitability µ on corporate financial policy are reported
in the third row of Table 4 and plotted in Figure 10. Under the Miller benchmark, an
increase in profitability µ will result in a proportional increase in the coupon b. Simply
put, higher profits require a higher tax shield, which is obtained by committing to higher
interest payments, b. Remarkably, this seemingly obvious prediction is not borne out
for a financially constrained firm. As can be seen in Table 4, the firm keeps its LOC
commitment unchanged at C = 0.10 and mainly adjusts its coupon from b = 0.08 to 0.094,

37

A. Equity value: E(W )

B. Debt value: D(W )

1.2
1.6
1
0.8

1.4

0.6

1.2
W0 (µ = 14%) →

0.4

1

W0 (µ = 12%) →

0.2

µ = 12%
µ = 14%

0.8
0
−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

−0.2

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

0

0.2

0.4

D. Credit spread: S(W )

2.2

600

2

500

1.8

400

1.6
300
1.4
200

1.2

100

1
0.8
−0.2

0

0.2

0
−0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 10: Comparative statics with respect to profitability µ
and its payout boundary W from 0.326 to 0.313. In other words, the firm raises more debt
to take advantage of the tax shield, but can afford to reduce its cash holding thanks to a
higher profitability µ.
Figure 10 shows that equity value, debt value, and enterprise value all increase as
a result of higher profitability, and the credit spread can become higher as well when
the level of cash holding is low. Initial market leverage actually is lower (dropping from
0.635 to 0.599) due to the valuation effects. It has often been pointed out that in practice
market leverage appears to be unresponsive to changes in profitability, which is generally
interpreted as a violation of the static tradeoff theory (see e.g. Rajan and Zingales, 1995).
A common explanation given for this violation is that more profitable firms have more
growth options and therefore face greater debt-overhang costs. In our model the firm does
not have any growth options, yet its leverage is unresponsive to changes in profitability.
The reason is that the firm adjusts its cash policy as well as its debt. Thus, if one takes

38

B. Debt value: D(W )

A. Equity value: E(W )
1

1.4
1.3

0.8

1.2
0.6

1.1
1

W0 (λ = 0.5%) →

0.4

0.9
0.2

−0.2

0

0.2

0.7

0.4

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

D. Credit spread: S(W )
500

1.8

400

1.6
1.4

300

1.2

200

1

100

0.8

λ = 0.5%
λ = 0.75%

0.8

W0 (λ = 0.75%) →
0

−0.2

0

0.2

0

0.4

Liquidity: W

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

Liquidity: W

Figure 11: Comparative statics with respect to cash-carrying cost λ
into account the reality that financially constrained firms have a precautionary savings
motive and also seek to reduce their tax burdens, their financial policies may no longer be
so puzzling.
Finally, the effects of an increase in the cash-carrying cost λ on corporate financial
policy are reported in the fourth row of Table 4 and plotted in Figure 11. The main effect
of an increase in the cash-carrying cost λ from 0.5% to 0.75% is to substantially reduce the
firm’s cash holding. The initial stock of cash drops from W0 = 0.303 to W0 = 0.233, and
the endogenous payout boundary W shifts down from 0.326 to 0.266. The firm makes up
for its lower cash reserves by taking out a substantially larger LOC, with the commitment
C increasing from 0.10 to 0.144. The firm also reduces its term debt coupon from 0.08 to
0.076 in response to the increase in its debt servicing costs. The overall effect of this policy
on the value of equity, debt, enterprise value, and credit spreads are shown in Figure 11.

39

6.3

Capital Structure, Cash-Flow Risk, and Setup Costs

In Figure 12, we explore more systematically how the firm’s financial policy varies with
the underlying cash-flow risk and the size of the required initial setup cost K, which
are informative about how capital structure decisions differ in settings with and without
liquidity constraints.
The three panels in the left column plot the optimal coupon b, the outside equity share
a, the payout boundary and the initial cash holding as we vary cash-flow volatility σ from
4% to 40%. Under the classical tradeoff theory the firm should respond to an increase
in cash-flow risk by relying less on debt financing. This is indeed how our financially
constrained firm responds when σ increases from 4% to 10%: it progressively lowers the
coupon b from 0.093 to 0.08. In this region, the firm chooses high coupon for the tax
shield, but the precautionary demand for cash is low due to low cash-flow risks. As a
result, there is excess cash that is paid out immediately after debt issuance, as captured
by W0 − W in Panel E. As cash-flow risk rises, the firm reduces the amount of debt issued,
which causes the initial cash holding W0 to fall as well, until it is equal to the payout
boundary W when the volatility rises to σ = 10%.
When σ increases further from 10% to 16%, the firm responds by issuing more debt:
the coupon increases from 0.08 to 0.088. The reason behind this increased reliance on
debt is that the financially constrained firm at that point prefers to raise its initial cash
buffer W0 and further delay its payout to hedge against the increased cash-flow risk. Since
the firm chooses not to issue any outside equity in the meantime (see Panel C), issuing
more term debt is the only way to boost the firm’s initial cash holding.
Finally, when σ further increases from 16% to 40%, the firm again responds by reducing
the amount of debt issued. As we see in Panel C, in this region the firm starts to issue
outside equity, with outside equity share a rising from 0 to 0.6. This is because when
cash-flow volatility reaches sufficiently high levels (σ > 0.16), debt financing becomes more
costly than equity due to the toll of debt servicing costs on corporate liquidity. As a result,
the firm substitutes away from debt and into equity financing instead.

40

A. Coupon rate: b

B. Coupon rate: b

0.1

0.1

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.08
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

C. Outside equity share: a
1

0.5

0.5

0

0.1

0.2

1

1.5

D. Outside equity share: a

1

0

0.5

0.3

0

0.4

E. Payout boundary and initial cash

0

0.5

1

1.5

F. Payout boundary and initial cash

1.5

W
W0

1
1
0.5
0.5
0

W
W0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

0.4

Volatility: σ

0

0.5

1

1.5

Initial investment: K

Figure 12: Optimal long-term debt and outside equity share as functions of
cashflow volatility σ (left panels) and initial setup cost K (right panels).
In the right columns (Panels B, D, and F) of Figure 12, we vary the setup cost K from
0.1 to 1.7. When the initial amount of required funding K is low, the firm’s financing
decisions are purely driven by tax tradeoff considerations. Thus, for K ≤ 0.96 the optimal
coupon remains flat at b = 0.079. When K increases from 0.96 to 1.27, the firm responds
by issuing more debt (b increases from 0.079 to 0.095) to make sure that it is able to pay
for the setup costs while maintaining a sufficiently large initial cash buffer W0 (see Panel
F). And when K increases further from 1.27 to 1.7, the firm starts to finance part of the
setup costs by issuing outside equity so as to avoid further increasing the debt servicing
costs.

41

7

Covenants and Agency Conflicts

Bond covenants that protect bondholders in situations where a conflict arises between
equityholders and debtholders are ubiquitous. In our model such a conflict can arise over
payout policies, as the payout boundary is determined to maximize equity value and not
total firm value. Although equityholders in our model are effectively risk averse, a conflict
between equityholders and debtholders still arises because they have different exposures
to the risk of liquidation and hence different degrees of effective risk aversion. How do the
firm’s financial policies change when we introduce debt covenants into the bond contract?
This is the question we address in this section.
There are many different forms of bond covenants, ranging from interest service
coverage ratios to restrictions on capital expenditures and new debt issuance. Leland
(1994) considers both covenants on the firm’s bankruptcy decision and its cash payouts.
He models covenants that regulate “cash payouts” as a reduction in the rate of return on
the firm’s asset (the expected return on V is (r − d) instead of r). He considers payouts d
that cover both dividend payments and a fraction of the coupon payment C, and shows
that any payouts d ≥ 0 lower the value of the firm, as they increase the incidence of costly
bankruptcy. The modeling of cash payouts in Leland (1994) is inevitably in reduced form
given that neither cash-flows nor retained earnings are explicitly modeled.
In our framework covenants on cash payouts can be explicitly modeled. An optimal
covenant on cash payouts is a payout boundary that is chosen to maximize total firm value
V (W ) = E(W ) + D(W ) instead of just equity value E(W ). Thus, an optimal payout
∗

boundary W must satisfy the optimality conditions
∗

V 0 (W ) = 1 − τe
and
∗

V 00 (W ) = 0.
The effects of this payout covenant are reported in Table 5. For comparison, the first

42

Table 5: Payout covenant. This table reports the results on the impact of payout
covenant.
covenant
inclusion
no
yes (fix a, b, C)
yes

credit
line

coupon
rate

payout
boundary

initial
cash

project
value

debt
value

interest
coverage

market
leverage

C

b

W

W0

J0

D0

µ/b

L0

0.100
0.100
0.099

0.080
0.080
0.101

0.326
0.373
0.494

0.303
0.308
0.639

0.763
0.765
0.769

1.326
1.331
1.666

1.497
1.497
1.194

0.635
0.635
0.684

row repeats the baseline model solution without covenants, while the third row reports
the solution with covenants. To isolate the effect of the covenant on the payout boundary,
the second row reports the results from the case where the choice of outside equity share
a, term debt coupon b, and credit-line limit C are the same as in the baseline model, and
only the payout boundary W is allowed to be adjusted. Then, by comparing the three
rows, we are able to break down the source of the gains from imposing a payout covenant.
Comparing the first and second rows we find that the introduction of a payout covenant
∗

shifts the payout boundary from W = 0.326 to W = 0.373, so that the firm on average
holds a larger buffer of internal funds that can be used to service its term debt. As a result,
debt value at issuance rises slightly from D0 = 1.326 to D0 = 1.331, so that the firm can
start out with a slightly higher initial cash buffer (W0 = 0.308 instead of W0 = 0.303).
Overall project value J0 also rises slightly as a result of the introduction of the payout
covenant.
These results suggest that the gains from the introduction of a payout covenant
on project value or initial debt value are small in our model when we hold the other
financing decisions fixed. When the firm fully re-optimizes its capital structure under
payout covenant protection, the gains are larger, as the comparison between the second
and third rows illustrates. The firm chooses to issue significantly more term debt under
covenant protection, with the coupon increasing from b = 0.080 to 0.101. The payout
boundary is also significantly higher (W = 0.494 instead of 0.373). This results in a higher
debt capitalization at issuance (D0 = 1.666 instead of 1.331), a higher initial cash buffer

43

A. Equity value: E(W )

B. Debt value: D(W )

0.8

1.7
1.5

0.6

1.3

W0 (no covenant) →

0.4

1.1

W0 (covenant) →
0.2

0.9

0
−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.7

0.6

without covenant
with covenant
−0.2

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

D. Credit spread: S(W )

2

700

1.8

600
500

1.6

400
1.4
300
1.2

200

1
0.8

100
−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0

0.6

Liquidity: W

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Liquidity: W

Figure 13: Impact of debt covenant. This figure plots the model solution when the
financial policies are chosen to maximize the value of the firm instead of the value of
equity.
(W0 = 0.639 instead of 0.308), and higher leverage (L0 = 0.684 instead of 0.635).
The effects of the payout covenant can be seen in greater detail in Figure 13. Panels
A and B reveal that the main effect of the covenant is a transfer of ex-post value from
equity to debt. Panel C shows that the covenant increases enterprise value Q(W ) only
for high values of W , and then not by much. Finally, Panel D illustrates a result that is
surprising at first sight: the credit spread for debt protected by covenants is higher. In
other words, covenant-protected debt appears to be riskier after controlling for the firm’s
financial slack. However, this is only due to the fact that the firm chooses to be more
highly levered when its debt is protected with a covenant. Still, this result is a warning
for non-structural empirical studies seeking to determine the value of a covenant based on
corporate debt pricing data.
In sum, the most significant effect of the covenant is to substantially increase debt
44

value and optimal leverage.

8

Depreciation Shocks and Depreciation Allowances

We now extend the model in another important direction by introducing capital depreciation
and depreciation-tax allowances. In reality, capital depreciates stochastically over time.
For example, a machine may operate smoothly for some time interval and suddenly break
down. At that point it must be repaired or replaced, which means that the firm needs to
incur capital expenditure I to keep the asset productive and continue its operations. In
addition, the firm will be granted depreciation-tax allowances, which should reflect the
average life and replacement cost of the asset.
To capture such depreciation dynamics we now introduce into the model a depreciation
shock, which is in the form of a lumpy capital expenditure I and are timed according to a
Poisson arrival process with mean arrival rate ζ. For illustrative purposes, we fix I to be a
constant. The firm may want to set aside depreciation allowances and increase its liquidity
reserve in anticipation of such depreciation shocks. Additionally, these depreciation
allowances are tax deductible. Specifically, we model depreciation-tax allowances by letting
the firm subtract the expected depreciated amount of capital, ζI, from its taxable earnings
in every period.
The depreciation shock is in effect a large liquidity shock to the firm, as in Holmstrom
and Tirole (1997). Such a large liquidity shock will have qualitatively different effects on
the firm’s liquidity and capital structure decisions from the small diffusive shocks (the
Brownian shocks in equation (1)) we have considered so far.
We continue to maintain the assumption that there is no new external financing
available after t > 0, so that the firm has to use either cash or credit line to meet the
required capital expenditure I. Following the realization of a depreciation shock the firm
can continue to operate as long as it has sufficient liquidity to cover the capital expenditure
I, i.e., as long as W ≥ W ∗ ≡ I − C. If the firm has insufficient liquidity, it is forced to
liquidate. Without loss of generality, we focus on the case where W ∗ > 0 (or I > C).
45

In addition, we restrict our attention to the case where the firm’s liquidation value is
sufficiently low relative to the debt issued such that the equity value will be 0 at liquidation
(L − C > P ), but it is sufficiently high relative to the credit-line limit C and the size of
the depreciation shock to ensure the credit line to be risk-free (L − C − I > 0).
In the presence of real depreciation shocks, equity value E(W ) satisfies the following
ODE in the region W ∗ ≤ W ≤ W :
(1 − τi ) rE(W ) = [(1 − τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) + τc ζI] E 0 (W )

(38)

1
+ σ 2 (1 − τc )2 E 00 (W ) + ζ (E (W − I) − E (W )) .
2
The ODE (38) differs from (18) in the baseline model in two aspects: (i) the depreciation-tax
allowance τc ζI in the coefficient for E 0 (W ), and (ii) the last term ζ (E (W − I) − E (W ))
which reflects the impact of depreciation shocks on equity value.
Next, in the region 0 ≤ W < W ∗ , the ODE for E(W ) becomes:
(1 − τi ) rE(W ) = [(1 − τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) + τc ζI] E 0 (W )

(39)

1
+ σ 2 (1 − τc )2 E 00 (W ) + ζ (0 − E (W )) .
2
The ODE (39) differs from (38) in that the arrival of a depreciation shock in this region
will force immediate liquidation and drive the equity value to zero.
Finally, if W < 0, the ODE for E(W ) is given by:
(1 − τi ) rE(W ) = [(1 − τc ) (µ + (r + δ)W − ν(C) (W + C) − b) + τc ζI] E 0 (W )

(40)

1
+ σ 2 (1 − τc )2 E 00 (W ) + ζ (0 − E (W )) .
2
The boundary conditions for E(W ) at the endogenous payout boundary W = W and
the liquidation boundary W = −C are identical to those in the baseline model, as given by
equations (20) and (23). The fact that E (W ) is continuously differentiable at W = 0 and
W = W ∗ gives us four additional conditions. Finally, the same super-contact condition

46

(21) determines the optimal payout boundary W .
Similarly, the value of debt D(W ) now satisfies the following ODE in the region
W∗ ≤ W ≤ W:
(1 − τi )rD(W ) = (1 − τi ) b + [(1 − τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) + τc ζI] D0 (W )
1
+ σ 2 (1 − τc )2 D00 (W ) + ζ (D (W − I) − D (W )) .
2

(41)

In the region 0 ≤ W < W ∗ , the ODE for D(W ) is:
(1 − τi )rD(W ) = (1 − τi ) b + [(1 − τc ) (µ + (r − λ)W − ν(C)C − b) + τc ζI] D0 (W )
1
+ σ 2 (1 − τc )2 D00 (W ) + ζ (L − I + W − D (W )) .
2

(42)

The last term follows from the fact that when a depreciation shock arrives for W < W ∗ ,
the value of debt is equal to the full liquidation value L net of the depreciation capital
expenditure I plus the remaining cash (or minus the credit line −W if W < 0). Finally,
when W < 0, the ODE for D(W ) is:
(1 − τi ) rD(W ) = (1 − τi ) b + [(1 − τc ) (µ + (r + δ)W − ν(C) (W + C) − b) + τc ζI] D0 (W )
1
+ σ 2 (1 − τc )2 D00 (W ) + ζ (L − I + W − D (W )) .
2

(43)

The boundary conditions for D(W ) at the liquidation boundary W = −C and the
payout boundary W = W are the same (26) and (27). The fact that D (W ) is continuously
differentiable at W = 0 and W = W ∗ also gives us four additional conditions.
We calibrate the model with depreciation shocks by setting the size of the shock to
I = 0.25 and the shock intensity to ζ = 0.15. These parameter choices imply that the large
depreciation shocks happen on average once per 6.7 years, and the size of these shocks
is 2.5 times the annualized volatility of cash flows σ in the baseline model. In order to
make the model with depreciation shocks more comparable with the baseline model, we
compensate for the impact of the depreciation shocks on firm value by increasing the mean
ROA µ in the baseline model by the expected annual depreciation capital expenditure ζI.
47

B. Marginal equity value of liquidity: E ′ (W )

A. Equity value: E(W )
1

7
6

0.8

5
0.6

4

0.4

3
2

0.2
0
−0.2

1
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0
−0.2

0.8

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

D. Marginal enterprise value of liquidity: Q′ (W )

C. Enterprise value: Q(W )
1.8

14
12

1.6
10
1.4

8
6

1.2
4
1

2
0

0.8
−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

−0.2

Liquidity: W

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Liquidity: W

Figure 14: Stochastic depreciation shocks. This figure plots the equity value E(W ),
the enterprise value Q(W ), and their derivatives for the model with depreciation shocks.
The remaining parameters take the baseline parameter values in Table 1.
The model solution is plotted in Figure 14. The main qualitative change induced
by the depreciation shock is the appearance of local convexity of the equity value E(W )
around W ∗ = 0.15. As Panel B shows, E 0 (W ) is increasing to the left and decreasing to
the right of W ∗ . This local convexity of E(W ) is due to the fact that the firm will be
forced to liquidate and the equity value will drop to zero whenever the depreciation shock
hits on the left side of W ∗ . Intuitively, it reflects the well-known benefit of gambling for
resurrection for equity holders when W is close to W ∗ . If W is sufficiently far away from
W ∗ , the precautionary motive for holding cash dominates again, either because the firm
has no hope of surviving a large depreciation shock or because it is not concerned about
surviving the shock, which makes E(W ) concave as in the baseline model.

48

Another model that generates a similar local convexity pattern is the model of a
financially constrained firm with lumpy investment of Hugonnier, Malamud, and Morellec
(2013). Such a non-concave region, of course, has important implications for the firm’s
optimal hedging policy. It is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a detailed analysis
of optimal hedging as in Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011, 2013). However, based on the
insights of that analysis we can infer that the firm will optimally switch from a hedging
policy seeking to reduce cash-flow volatility when W is close to −C and when W is
sufficiently larger than W ∗ , to a policy seeking to load up on cash-flow volatility when W
is in a neighborhood of W ∗ .
Table 6 reports how the firm’s financing policy is affected by the presence of depreciation
shocks and depreciation tax allowances. The implications of the presence of depreciation
tax shields for the static tradeoff theory have been explored by DeAngelo and Masulis
(1980). Their main conclusion is that depreciation tax shields are a substitute for debt tax
shields and that higher depreciation tax allowances should induce firms to issue less debt.
The reason is that the tax shield benefits of debt are less fully realized when depreciation
tax allowances increase, and since debt is tax disadvantaged at the personal level the
firm optimally responds by reducing debt. This substitutability of debt and depreciation
tax shields is also true in our dynamic model under the Miller benchmark for financially
unconstrained firms.
However, as can be seen in Table 6, for a financially constrained firm, depreciation
tax shields can become a complement to debt tax shields. By comparing the optimal
coupon b when there is no depreciation tax allowance in the third row (b = 0.071) to the
optimal coupon when there is depreciation tax allowance in the second row (b = 0.087), one
immediately observes that the firm increases debt (and reduces outside equity) when it can
take advantage of a depreciation tax allowance. This surprising result is again explained
by the effects of the depreciation tax allowance on liquidity and the servicing costs of debt.
Thanks to the depreciation tax allowance, the firm can retain a higher fraction of after-tax
earnings and therefore can afford to pay higher coupon without increasing the risk of
liquidation. This in turn induces the firm to issue more debt (and less outside equity).

49

Table 6: Capital depreciation shocks. This table reports the results from adding
capital depreciation shocks.

no shock
with allowance
no allowance

credit
line

coupon
rate

outside
equity

payout
bound

initial
cash

project
value

debt
value

interest
coverage

market
leverage

C

b

a

W

W0

J0

D0

µ/b

L0

0.100
0.100
0.102

0.080
0.087
0.071

0
0.129
0.469

0.326
0.711
0.671

0.303
0.462
0.397

0.763
0.662
0.345

1.326
1.393
1.132

1.497
1.377
1.689

0.635
0.647
0.635

Table 6 also shows how large liquidity shocks (in the form of real depreciation shocks)
affect the firm’s financial policy. Comparing rows one and two we observe that the firm
responds to the threat of large liquidity shocks by: i) raising more initial funds (W0
increases from 0.303 to 0.462); ii) holding more cash (W increases from 0.362 to 0.711),
and iii) relying more on outside equity (a increases from 0 to 0.129). Interestingly, the
firm’s market leverage and book leverage (as measured by the interest coverage) actually
increase in the presence of large liquidity shocks (L0 increases from 0.635 to 0.647 and
interest coverage drops from 1.497 to 1.377). The reason again is to be found in the
adjustment in the firm’s cash policy, which both reduces the servicing costs of debt and
increases the market value of debt, so that the firm is induced to issue more term debt.

9

Recurrent External Equity Financing

When the project’s expected productivity µ is high and the fixed cost of external financing
Φ is low, the firm will want to raise fresh external funds rather than force the project
into early liquidation when it runs out of cash. We now analyze this situation by giving
the firm the option to raise new funds via a subscription rights offering whenever it runs
out of cash. Under the rights offering new equity is allocated to existing shareholders in
proportion to their ownership, so that the entrepreneur’s initial ownership stake (1 − a)

50

remains unchanged.14
Let M > 0 denote the total amount of liquidity after the new equity issuance. We
shall refer to M as the liquidity return point after equity issuance. This amount is chosen
to maximize the total value of equity E(W ). Given that equity value is continuous before
and after the rights offering, the following boundary condition for E(W ) must hold at at
the boundary W = −C:
E(−C) = E(M ) − Φ −

M +C
.
1 − γE

(44)

Note that an equity issuance only occurs when the firm exhausts its credit line, since the
firm has to pay a commitment fee on any unused credit line, and there is no benefit of
replenishing the liquidity reserve early. As M represents the post-issue amount of liquidity,
the total (net) amount issued is M + C. The right-hand side of (44) represents the post
rights-issue equity value minus both the fixed and the proportional costs of equity issuance.
Second, since the return point M is optimally chosen, the marginal value of the last dollar
raised must be equal to the marginal cost of funds 1/(1 − γE ). This gives the following
smooth-pasting boundary condition at M :
E 0 (M ) =

1
.
1 − γE

(45)

The firm’s equityholders will only choose the refinancing option if
E(−C) = E(M ∗ ) − Φ −

M∗ + C
≥ 0,
1 − γE

(46)

where M ∗ satisfies the optimality condition given in (45). Given that E(M ∗ ) is a decreasing
function of the coupon payment b, condition (46) puts an upper bound on how much term
debt the firm can issue at time 0 while credibly committing to permanently servicing this
debt. Any coupon below this upper bound will always be serviced, as the firm will always
prefer to raise new equity when it runs out of cash. Thus, any such term debt will be safe
14
This assumption is mainly for tractability, as it does not cause future equity dilution. Allowing for
equity issuance towards new investors will generate qualitatively the same results.

51

Table 7: Comparative statics: Refinancing case. This table reports the results from
comparative statics on the financing cost parameters in the refinancing case.

baseline
λ = 2%
Φ = 5%
σ = 20%
γD = 6%

credit
line

coupon
rate

payout
bound

return
point

initial
cash

project
value

debt
value

interest
coverage

market
leverage

C

b

W

M

W0

J0

D0

µ/b

L0

0.101
0.243
0.099
0.088
0.150

0.107
0.098
0.103
0.103
0.077

0.271
0.069
0.324
0.620
0.131

0.000
-0.146
0.079
0.062
-0.078

0.762
0.602
0.652
0.692
0.190

0.803
0.788
0.757
0.754
0.733

1.790
1.629
1.720
1.719
1.277

1.117
1.228
1.163
1.163
1.566

0.690
0.674
0.694
0.695
0.635

and will be valued at D = b/r.
Table 7 describes the firm’s optimal financial policy and market value under five different
parameterizations. The first row is the baseline case for which we have in particular:
λ = 0.5%, Φ = 1%, σ = 10% and γD = 1%. In the other four parameterizations we
change one parameter value at a time: in the second row we increase the cash carry cost
to λ = 2%; in the third row we increase the fixed issuance cost to Φ = 5%; in the fourth
row we increase volatility to σ = 20%, and in the fifth row we increase the marginal debt
issuance cost to γD = 6%.
Under the first four parameterizations the firm chooses the maximum feasible coupon
b that satisfies the constraint (46). That is, the firm prefers to issue only safe debt that it
can credibly service forever. The debt is low enough that the firm’s equityholders (weakly)
prefer to raise new funds through an equity issue rather than liquidate the firm whenever
the firm runs out of cash. Thus, issuance of only safe debt is a possible prediction of the
dynamic tradeoff theory when the firm faces external financing costs.
When marginal debt issuance costs are high (e.g, when γD = 6% in our final parametrization), it becomes optimal for the firm not to exhaust even its safe debt capacity. In this
case, the firm’s optimal coupon b is such that the constraint (46) is slack. A major critique
of the tradeoff theory has been that it must be false since: “If the theory is right, a
value-maximizing firm should never pass up interest tax shields when the probability of
financial distress is remotely low.” (Myers (2001)). But our analysis illustrates that this
52

critique only applies to financially unconstrained firms. When firms face external financing
costs, the optimal tradeoff between tax shield benefits of debt and servicing costs may
well be obtained with safe debt.
In the second row of Table 7, we examine the case when cash-carrying costs are
significantly higher than under the baseline parametrization (λ = 2%). Other things equal,
an increase in λ results in a lower equity value so that the firm’s riskfree debt capacity
as implied by constraint (46) drops. But the main effect of an increase in λ is an overall
reduction in cash holdings as illustrated by: i) the sharp reduction in W ; ii) the increase
in the credit line limit C, and iii) the reduction in the amount of funds raised M when
the firm runs out of cash.
The third row of Table 7 considers the effects of an increase in the fixed cost of external
funding to Φ = 5%. The main effect of this change is to push the firm to avoid reliance on
external funding even more by: i) raising more funds when it is forced to return to capital
markets (a higher M ), and; ii) holding on to cash for longer (a higher W ). Finally, an
increase in cash-flow volatility to σ = 20% has similar effects, as reported in the fourth
row of Table 7.
In sum, when the firm is sufficiently profitable that raising new funds (when it runs out
of cash) is preferable to liquidation for the founders of the firm at time 0, then the firm
optimally chooses to issue only safe debt at time 0 and restricts its debt obligations so as
to avoid a debt overhang situation that could induce equityholders to prefer liquidation ex
post.

10

Conclusion

Although the tax-advantage of debt has long been recognized as an important consideration
for corporate financial policy, the tradeoff theory has had an uncertain standing, with many
empirical studies concluding that it is flat-out rejected by the data. We have shown that
one reason why the tradeoff theory performs poorly empirically is that it only applies to
financially unconstrained firms. In the presence of external financing costs, firms’ financial
53

policy is more complex and involves both a liability and asset management dimension.
Thus, when there is a change in tax policy, for example, financially constrained firms
generally have two margins along which they can respond: they can either adjust their
debt policy or their cash policy (or both).
As we have shown, the cash management dimension of corporate financial policy
radically modifies the classical tradeoff theory. So much so that the theory for unconstrained
firms provides very misleading predictions for corporate financial policies of constrained
firms. For example, an important new cost of debt financing for financially constrained
firms is the debt servicing cost: interest payments drain the firm’s valuable precautionary
cash holdings and thus impose higher expected external financing costs on the firm. Interest
payments may help shield earnings from corporate taxation, but they potentially induce
inefficient liquidation or costly external financing. Because liquidity/cash is valuable for a
financially constrained firm, the firm thus has an optimal portfolio choice among external
equity, debt, and liquidity, which includes both cash and a credit line. We have shown
that cash is not negative debt and offered a novel explanation for the “debt conservatism
puzzle” highlighted in the empirical literature testing the static tradeoff theory by showing
that financially constrained firms choose to limit their debt and interest expenses in order
to preserve their cash holdings and to avoid a debt overhang situation which would reduce
equityholders’ incentives to raise new funds ex post.
Another important change introduced by external financing costs is that realized
earnings are generally separated in time from payouts to shareholders, implying that the
classical Miller-formula for the net tax benefits of debt no longer holds. We show that the
standard Miller effective tax rate calculation only applies at the payout boundary. In the
interior region the tax calculation is very different given that the firm defers its payment
to shareholders, so that the standard Miller formula does not apply. We further show that
the firm may not even exhaust its risk-free debt capacity because servicing debt can be
expensive. Finally, our model is a valuation model for debt and equity in the presence
of taxes and external financing costs. It shows how the classical adjusted present value
methodology breaks down for financially constrained firms, as it does not account for the

54

value of cash for both debt and equity.
Finally, our analysis of the tax implications for corporate financial policies of financially
constrained firms is also relevant to the fiscal policy debate on changing the corporate tax
rate. We have shown that the main effect of a reduction of the corporate income tax rate
from 35% to 25% is to substantially increase corporate savings and the value of equity,
but to leave corporate debt policies almost unchanged. Our analysis suggests that the
lower corporate tax rate would not only lower corporate tax revenues but also potentially
personal tax revenues from investment income in light of the stronger incentives to save
inside the firm.
Two major simplifications of our baseline analysis are that: i) the firm only faces i.i.d.
cash-flow shocks; and ii) there is only one fixed productive asset. These assumptions
mainly help make the analysis very transparent. These can be relaxed, as the analysis
in Section 8 introducing a jump liquidity risk in the form of a real depreciation shock
à la Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) illustrates. In future research, we plan to extend our
framework further to incorporate both persistent and potentially permanent productivity
shocks and also ongoing corporate investment.

55

References
Acharya, V., S. A. Davydenko, and I. A. Strebulaev, 2012, “Cash Holdings and Credit
Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 3572–3609.
Acharya, V. V., H. Almeida, and M. Campello, 2007, “Is cash negative debt? A hedging
perspective on corporate financial policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16,
515–554.
Acharya, V. V., H. Almeida, and M. Campello, 2013, “Aggregate Risk and the Choice
between Cash and Lines of Credit,” The Journal of Finance, 68, 2059–2116.
Altinkilic, O., and R. S. Hansen, 2000, “Are There Economies of Scale in Underwriting
Fees? Evidence of Rising External Financing Costs,” Review of Financial Studies, 13,
191–218.
Bates, T. W., K. M. Kahle, and R. M. Stulz, 2009, “Why Do U.S. Firms Hold So Much
More Cash than They Used To?,” Journal of Finance, 64, 1985–2021.
Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang, 2011, “A Unified Theory of Tobin’s q, Corporate
Investment, Financing, and Risk Management,” Journal of Finance, 66, 1545–1578.
Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang, 2013, “Market Timing, Investment, and Risk Management,” Journal of Financial Economics, 109, 40–62.
Bolton, P., and D. S. Scharfstein, 1990, “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems
in Financial Contracting,” American Economic Review, 80, 93–106.
Collins, J. H., and D. Kemsley, 2000, “Capital Gains and Dividend Taxes in Firm Valuation:
Evidence of Triple Taxation,” The Accounting Review, 75, 405–427.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and T. Whited, 2011, “Capital Structure Dynamics and
Transitory Debt,” Journal of Financial Economic, 99, 235–261.
DeAngelo, H., and R. W. Masulis, 1980, “Optimal capital structure under corporate and
personal taxation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 3–29.
56

Decamps, J., T. Mariotti, J. Rochet, and S. Villeneuve, 2011, “Free Cash Flow, Issuance
Costs, and Stock Prices,” Journal of Finance, 66, 1501–1544.
DeMarzo, P. M., and M. J. Fishman, 2007, “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contracting,”
Review of Financial Studies, 20, 2079–2128.
DeMarzo, P. M., and Y. Sannikov, 2006, “Optimal Security Design and Dynamic Capital
Structure in a Continuous-Time Agency Model,” Journal of Finance, 61, 2681–2724.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 2012, “Capital Structure Choices,” Critical Finance Review,
1, 59–101.
Fischer, E. O., R. Heinkel, and J. Zechner, 1989, “Dynamic Capital Structure Choice:
Theory and Tests,” Journal of Finance, 44, 19–40.
Frank, M. Z., R. Singh, and T. Y. Wang, 2010, “Personal Income Taxes and Corporate
Investment,” Working Paper, University of Minnesota.
Gamba, A., and A. Triantis, 2008, “The Value of Financial Flexibility,” Journal of Finance,
63, 2263–2296.
Goldstein, R., N. Ju, and H. Leland, 2001, “An EBIT-Based Model of Dynamic Capital
Structure,” Journal of Business, 74, 483–512.
Graham, J. R., 1996, “Debt and the marginal tax rate,” Journal of Financial Economics,
41, 41–73.
Graham, J. R., 2000, “How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt?,” Journal of Finance, 55,
1901–1941.
Graham, J. R., 2003, “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review,” Review of Financial
Studies, 16, 1075–1129.
Harris, T.-S., and D. Kemsley, 1999, “Dividend Taxation in Firm Valuation : New
Evidence,” Journal of Accounting Research, 37, 275–291.

57

Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1994, “A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human
capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 841–879.
Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1998, “Default And Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model Of Debt,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1–41.
Hennessy, C. A., and T. M. Whited, 2005, “Debt Dynamics,” Journal of Finance, 60,
1129–1165.
Hennessy, C. A., and T. M. Whited, 2007, “How Costly Is External Financing? Evidence
from a Structural Estimation,” Journal of Finance, 62, 1705–1745.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the
Real Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663–91.
Hugonnier, J., S. Malamud, and E. Morellec, 2013, “Capital Supply Uncertainty, Cash
Holdings, and Investment,” Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.
Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–360.
Karatzas, I., and S. E. Shreve, 1991, Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus, SpringerVerlag, New York, 2nd edn.
Kim, C.-S., D. C. Mauer, and A. E. Sherman, 1998, “The Determinants of Corporate
Liquidity: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 33,
335–359.
Kimball, M., and N. Mankiw, 1989, “Precautionary saving and the timing of taxes,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97, 863–879.
Leary, M. T., and M. R. Roberts, 2005, “Do Firms Rebalance Their Capital Structures?,”
Journal of Finance, 60, 2575–2619.
Leland, H., 1994, “Corporate Debt Value, bond covenants, and Optimal Capital Structure,”
Journal of Finance, 49, 1213–1252.
58

Leland, H., 1998, “Agency Costs, Risk Management, and Capital Structure,” Journal of
Finance, 53, 1213–1243.
Lemmon, M. L., M. R. Roberts, and J. F. Zender, 2008, “Back to the Beginning: Persistence
and the Cross-Section of Corporate Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance, 63, 1575–
1608.
Merton, R. C., 1974, “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
Rates,” Journal of Finance, 29, 449–470.
Miller, M. H., 1977, “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance, 32, 261–275.
Miller, M. H., and M. S. Scholes, 1978, “Dividends and taxes,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 6, 333–364.
Myers, S. C., 1974, “Interactions of Corporate Financing and Investment DecisionsImplications for Capital Budgeting,” Journal of Finance, 29, 1–25.
Myers, S. C., 1984, “The Capital Structure Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 39, 574–592.
Myers, S. C., 2001, “Capital Structure,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 81–102.
Rauh, J. D., 2009, “Risk Shifting versus Risk Management: Investment Policy in Corporate
Pension Plans,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2487–2533.
Riddick, L. A., and T. M. Whited, 2009, “The Corporate Propensity to Save,” Journal of
Finance, 64, 1729–1766.
Ross, S. A., 2005, “Capital Structure and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of Applied Finance,
15, 5–23.
Strebulaev, I. A., 2007, “Do Tests of Capital Structure Theory Mean What They Say?,”
Journal of Finance, 62, 1747–1787.
Sufi, A., 2009, “Bank Lines of Credit in Corporate Finance: An Empirical Analysis,”
Review of Financial Studies, 22, 1057–1088.

59

