                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS, THE POOL OF KNOWLEDGE, AND INNOVATION

                                           Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                        Working Paper 20014
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20014


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness to my co-authors with whom I have explored the economics
of innovation, Partha Dasgupta, Giovanni Dosi and Bruce Greenwald, and to my research assistants
Laurence Wilse-Samson and Feiran Zhang. Financial assistance from Columbia University and the
Institute for New Economic Thinking is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Intellectual Property Rights, the Pool of Knowledge, and Innovation
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 20014
March 2014
JEL No. E61,H41,O3,O31,O32,O33,O34,O38

                                              ABSTRACT

The pace of innovation is related both to the level of investment in innovation and the pool of knowledge
from which innovators can draw. Both of these are endogenous: Investments in innovations are affected
by the pool of knowledge and the ability of firms to appropriate the returns to their innovative activity,
itself affected by the intellectual property rights (IPR) regime. But as each firm engages in research,
it both contributes to the pool, and takes out from it. The strength and design of IPR affects the extent
to which any innovation adds to or subtracts from the pool of ideas that are available to be commercially
exploited, i.e. to the technological opportunities. We construct the simplest possible general model
to explore the resulting dynamics, showing that, under plausible conditions, stronger intellectual property
rights may lead to a lower pace of innovation, and more generally, that long run effects may be the
opposite of the short run effects.


Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
                    Intellectual Property Rights, the Pool of Knowledge, and Innovation

Advocates of stronger intellectual property rights argue that stronger intellectual property rights, ceteris
paribus, lead to higher levels of investment in R & D, and therefore more innovation. But empirical
research provides at best ambiguous support for a simple relationship between the strength of
intellectual property rights and the level of innovation—or even higher levels of investment in R & D or
learning.2 The reason is that much is hidden in the assumption of ceteris paribus (all other things being
equal). There are many other ways of appropriating returns from research, and thus the incremental
benefit from stronger IPR, at least in many industries, is less than it otherwise would be.3

What seem to be more important are the “opportunities,” the potential for discoveries, related to the
pool of knowledge to be exploited, i.e. the pool of ideas that awaits translation into processes and
products that are valued in the market.4 But the size of that pool is endogenous. As each individual or
firm engages in research and learning, it both contributes to the pool, and takes out from it. The
“enclosure of the intangible commons of the mind”5 that is associated with patenting, i.e. with the
exercise of intellectual property rights, diminishes the size of the pool available to others. At the same
time, each innovation that is not patented may contribute to the pool of ideas that others can build on.

2
  See for example Bessen and Meurer (2008). That said, it should not be surprising that there have been a large
number of attempts at finding correlations between some measure of the strength of a country’s intellectual
property regime and economic growth, or some variable purportedly related to economic growth, such as inward
bound foreign direct investment. As most scholars engaged in this research have recognized, these studies are
bedeviled by a large number of econometric problems, e.g. of identification. With global harmonization, there is a
dearth of natural experiments; and even when such experiments exist, long lags and the influence of a multiplicity
of other factors affecting innovation and growth make it difficult to establish definitive, or even convincing, results.
          Historical studies are suggestive of the multiplicity of influences on the level of innovation: several
European countries with weak intellectual property rights had flourishing innovative sectors—more flourishing
than others with stronger intellectual property rights. (Chang 2001, 2002). See also David (1993, 2002).
          More recent critiques of IPR regimes have focused on “flaws” in the IPR regime, arising from the patent
thicket, the bias for excessive patenting (as opposed to the incentives for fighting patents), hold-ups, incentives for
evergreening, etc. Whether it is possible to adequately “correct” these flaws, so that the net effect on the pace of
innovation (as opposed to the level of investment in R & D, taking into account the distortions associated with
these flaws) of the IPR regime is positive remains contentious. It is clear, however, that the relationship between
IPR and innovation depends on fundamental rules of the IPR regime, governing what can be patented, the breadth
and standards of patenting, how patents are enforced, and so forth.
          More narrowly focused studies have identified areas where particular patents have had adverse effects
on follow-on research. In particular, evidence presented in the Myriad BRAC gene patent litigation detailed
adverse effects both on the development of tests and further research. (See Association for Molecular Pathology
v. Myriad Genetics, 569 U.S. 12-398 [2013], Huang and Murray, 2008; Williams, 2013).
          The discussion of this paper abstracts from the details of the patent system, which are discussed at length
extensively in the large literature on intellectual property. So too, we ignore the details of the patent system that
affects the welfare impacts, e.g. the consequences of IPR regimes for access to life-saving medicines.
          The state of the current debate around IPRs is surveyed by the contributions to the Winter 2013 Journal
of Economic Perspectives symposium (Boldrin and K. Levine; Moser; Hagiu and Yoffie; and Graham and
Vishnubhakat.)
3
  Dasgupta and David (1994) also argue for the importance of other non-pecuniary motivations for research. See
also David (2004a, 2004b).
4
  See Dosi and Stiglitz (2013) and the references cited there.
5
  To use Boyle’s evocative phrase. See Boyle (2003). See also Heller (1998) and Heller and Eisenberg (1998).

2
The strength and design of IPR thus affects the extent to which any innovation adds to or subtracts from
the pool of ideas that are available, i.e. to the technological opportunities.6

In this paper, we construct the simplest possible general model to explore the resulting dynamics. We
show that, in this quite general model, stronger intellectual property rights may well lead to a lower
pace of innovation. This is in spite of the fact that at any level of opportunities it leads to more
investments in R & D. The reason is that stronger IPR, by tilting the balance between additions to and
subtractions from the pool of opportunities, at any level of investment in R & D or learning, leads to a
diminution in the size of the knowledge pool. The effect on investments in R & D over the long run is
ambiguous; that is, once the adverse effect on the size of the technological pool is taken into account,
stronger IPR may in the long run actually lead to less investment. But with a small knowledge pool, even
a given investment in R & D leads to less innovation. Thus, even if stronger IPR leads to more
investment in R & D, taking account of the adverse effects on the knowledge pool, the adverse effect on
innovation is so strong that the level of innovation may be reduced. Obviously, the magnitude of the
adverse effects depends critically on the impact of stronger IPR on knowledge externalities (the positive
externalities arising from additions to the knowledge pool, and the negative externalities associated
with subtractions from the knowledge pool) as well as the availability of alternative mechanisms for
appropriating returns to innovation.

Thus, the purpose of this paper is not to parse out the empirical literature of the effects of IPR in
general, or specifically, of particular IPR provisions, on the level of investments in R & D or on outcomes,
on the pace of innovation, but rather to provide insights into why, there may be an ambiguous
relationship between the strength of intellectual property rights and innovation, and even why, under
plausible circumstances, in the long run, “tighter” IPR regimes may be associated with a reduced level of
innovation. An understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which such seemingly perverse results
may arise provides some guidance into how one might construct innovation systems (which include, as a
component, an IPR regime), which do lead to higher levels of innovation.

Beyond this introduction, this paper is divided into four sections. We begin by examining an analogous
problem, fishing from a renewable common resource pool, showing that changes in the legal or
institutional environment which lead to more investment at any given size of fishing stocks can lead to
steady states with a lower flow of fish catches. A distinctive aspect of the “commons” problem is that in
the long run, the general equilibrium effect of a policy change can be of opposite sign to the short-run,


6
  We should emphasize the importance of the word "design": There are many details to the IPR system, such as
the breadth of the patent, which affect the extent to which knowledge is added to or “subtracted” from the pool.
Knowledge that is not available for others to use is, in effect, “subtracted” from the pool. Broad patents “subtract”
more from the available knowledge pool than more narrowly defined patents. Matters are, of course, far more
complicated than this simple arithmetic analogy would suggest: knowledge that can be used, but at a price, is in a
sense “partially” available; and even knowledge that cannot be used directly can trigger research. By the same
token, some, perhaps much, of the investment in R & D in a poorly designed IPR regime is devoted to inventing
around a patent or to increasing the rents that can be extracted out of a patent (e.g. by evergreening); in such
circumstances, even if tighter IPR leads to more investment in R & D, it may not lead to faster real innovations, i.e.
an increased pace of increases in standards of living.

3
partial equilibrium effect (in contrast to many other areas in economics, where, in a stable equilibrium,
general equilibrium effects alter the magnitude but not the sign of the partial equilibrium effects).

The following section shows that analogous results hold in the context of a knowledge pool. Stronger
intellectual property rights may lead to a lower level of innovation. The third section shows that entry
(an increase in the number of firms) can lead to lower innovation, and, analogous to the fishing model,
the marginal entrant in a world with free entry is likely to have a negative marginal effect on innovation.
The final, concluding section argues that there are reforms in the design of intellectual property regimes
which may result in a higher flow of innovations.

                                       I. The common resources problem

The problem of a large number of private firms drawing upon a common resource has been well studied
in the environmental economics literature (For an early treatment, see Dasgupta and Heal (1974)). In
reduced form, there is, say, a population of fish, P, which reproduces at the rate H(P) which depends on
the size of the population, as depicted in figure 1. Below Pmin, the population is not self-regenerating,
i.e. dP/dt < 0 and the species becomes extinct. In the absence of fishing, the population reaches a self-
sustaining asymptote of . 7 There is a maximum reproduction rate, ̇ , achieved at ̂ .

A fishing fleet consists of n symmetric firms, each of which invests i, a function of P and n, with the
amount of fish caught being Q(i(P,n),n,P)= Q (P,n), which we refer to as the fishing function.

It is easy to derive Q(i(P,n),n). Each firm takes the level of investment of the n- 1 others as given and
ignores the effects of its fishing on the size of the fishing stock P8, as it maximizes its profits

    (1) Max pQj [i, i-j, P] – c(i)
        {i}

 where p is the price of fish, c(i) is the cost of an investment of i, and Qj [i, i-j, P] is the level of fish caught
by the jth firm when the other n-1 firms invest i-j.9 The symmetric Nash equilibrium gives rise to the
investment function described earlier, i(P,n), and that in turn gives rise to the fishing function, Q (P,n),
depicted in figure 2 for a fixed n.

The long equilibrium size of the stock of fish is given by the solution(s) to

    (2) dP/dt = H(P) - Q (P,n) = 0,

that is, the values of P for which

7
  Pmin is defined by the lowest value of P for which H(P) = 0.
8
  This would obviously not be the case if the number of firms is very small (say n=1 or 2). In this simple
formulation, the price of fish, p, is given exogenously.
9
  It is easy to generalize (1) to include situations where there is imperfect competition among the firms (i.e. we
generalize pQ to a more general revenue function R). The model is consistent with alternative interpretations of
how additional investments in fishing fleets affect the marginal catch. For our purposes, these details are
irrelevant.

4
     (3) H(P) = Q (P,n).

This can be seen diagramatically by superimposing Figures (1) and (2). We see in figure 3 that, for fixed
n, there are three equilibria (i.e. three solutions to equation (3)): P = 0; P = P1, P= P2, with the first and
third stable. The equilibrium fish-catch is given by H(P*).

Assume now that there is a change in the economic (legal or institutional) environment that leads firms,
at any level of P, to invest more. The business community would celebrate the improved business
environment, and the increased income derived from fishing. But soon, the fishing stocks would start to
deplete, and the new stable equilibrium would shift from P2 to P2’ < P2, so that the flow of fish would
actually be lower in the new equilibrium than in the old (see figure 4). This would be true whether or not
investment is lower in the new equilibrium. That is, in the obvious notation, letting θ and θ’ represent
the two states of nature (the two different “business environments”), i(P2, n, θ) may be > or < than i(P2’,
n, θ’).

There is an exception. It is possible that with an excessively large fishing population, crowding actually
interferes with reproduction, i.e. as we noted earlier, H’ < 0 for P > ̂ . If P2 > ̂ , then the upward shift in
the fishing curve leads to a lower level of P, but a higher sustainable flow of fish. (Figure 5)

Similar results hold for the effect of new entry. New entry leads to more competition and more
fishing—normally thought of as positive for welfare. But here, if the initial equilibrium entails P2 < ̂ , the
upward shift in the Q curve leads to a lower level of equilibrium fish caught (and lower profits). While
normally, we would expect that each individual enterprise will reduce its level of investment (i(P,n’) <
i(P, n) for n’ > n), we might have hoped that the effect of more firms outweighed the diminution of
investment of each firm. But it is well known that there can be overfishing. Increased entry may reduce
the size of the catch whether or not aggregate investment has increased or decreased (i.e. whether or
not n’i(P,n’) < or > ni(P,n) or indeed, whether or not n’i(P2’,n’) < or > ni(P2, n)). (Figure 6)

On the other hand, if the equilibrium initially entails excessively large fish stocks—in the sense that the
equilibrium value of P is greater than ̂ , then the new equilibrium that emerges entails a higher annual
catch.

It is well known that in the case of common pools, the entry decision will not be efficient: firms enter so
long as profits are positive, not taking into account the (adverse) effects that their entry has on the size
of the catch of other firms. This has led to the presumption that there is excessive entry. But the
entrants also fail to take into account the effect that their entry has on the size of the fishing stock, both
directly (which is negative), and indirectly (because their entry discourages investment on the part of
other firms.) It is clear that if, at the free entry equilibrium, P < (>) ̂ , the flow of fish would be increased
if entry were taxed (subsidized).10



10
  The full welfare calculation is more complicated, because of the effects of externalities, even if markets are
competitive. Ignoring the effect on P and the cross firm externality associated with the increase in fishing costs for

5
It may be possible, however, to change the regulatory environment in ways which allow a higher
sustained catch, and possibly with a lower level of expenditure on fishing. Let us denote the set of
fishing regulations by ζ. There are some regulations which allow fish to be caught without as large an
adverse effect on the growth of the fishing stock, e.g. regulations that ensure that small fish are not
caught. We now write

    (4) dP/dt = H(P) – Q (P,n, ζ)M(ζ)

with M’ < 0. In other words, tighter regulations mean that the adverse effect of a given level of fishing is
reduced, but Q 3 < 0, tighter regulations increase costs, and hence, at fixed P and n, lead to less fishing
and a smaller catch. It follows that with tighter regulation, the equilibrium level of P, denoted P2”, is
increased. But that means that the flow of fish, H, has increased: tighter fishing regulations (in the
sense defined) leads to an increased flow of fish, and this is true whether there is more or less
investment in the fishing fleet. (That is, other things being equal, the increase in P results in a larger
fishing fleet; but the increase in regulations leads to reduced investments, so the net effect is
ambiguous.)(Figure 7)

What is striking about these results, as we have noted, is that they reverse normal presumptions.
Usually, general equilibrium responses diminish the magnitude of partial equilibrium responses, but do
not reverse the sign. Here (and in the analysis of the knowledge pool below) they do.

In the next section, we show that the same logic holds for innovation. Changes in the environment
which lead to more investment given a level of P, the size of the “knowledge pool,” may so diminish the
equilibrium pool of knowledge (the set of technological opportunities) that the flow of innovations is
reduced. This is true whether or not at the new equilibrium level of P, there is more or less investment
in R & D.

                                                   II. Knowledge Pools

In this section, we denote the set of technological opportunities, the knowledge pool, which can be
drawn upon by innovators, by P. Each innovation both adds to the knowledge pool, and, especially in
the presence of strong IPR, subtracts from P, the set of ideas that can be drawn upon for subsequent
innovations. (In the absence of IPR, in a technological sense, an innovation would not reduce the pool of
technological opportunities. In another sense—in terms of the set of profitable opportunities that are
available, given the technological opportunities—it does, given the first-mover and other advantages
discussed elsewhere in the literature.11 The analysis below is unaffected by which interpretation we
give to the diminution in P.)




each firm, the marginal value of resources used by each firm are then equal to the marginal costs, and the value of
the benefits of the marginal firm equals its marginal costs. The fact that the cross-firm externality effect (at fixed
P) is negative implies that if the pool effect is small (P is only slightly greater than ̂ ) it is still desirable to tax entry.
11
   Matters are, of course, more complicated than this discussion might suggest: In the long term, the innovation
may be "enabling," even if it takes away economic opportunities in the short term, because it provides the

6
At the same time, government and university-funded basic research adds to the pool of knowledge that
can be drawn upon. We denote the level of public investment in basic research by K. We assume that
the additions to knowledge, H, that flow from K depend upon the pool of knowledge that is in the public
domain, P, i.e. we assume that H(K,P), with

HK > 0, HP > 0,

An increase in investment in basic R & D leads to an increase in the flow of contributions to the
knowledge pool, and the larger the knowledge pool, the larger the flow of contributions resulting from
any level of investment in basic research.12 (Figure 8 depicts H(K,P) as a function of P. It looks much as
Figure 1, except we assume that the larger the pool of knowledge, the greater the increment in
knowledge from any investment K. Figure 8 is drawn under the assumption that H approaches a
constant. That is, at any moment of time there is an upper bound to the pace of knowledge creation
resulting from any given level of investment in basic research, K.13 We also assume that there is a non-
convexity in the production process—at least for small P, the marginal return to an increase in P is
increasing.14)

Thus, we can write

      5) dP/dt= H - [α(ξ) – β(ξ)]I(i, P; n)

where I is the level of innovation15, α(ξ)I is the diminution in the available set of technological
opportunities as a result of an innovation level of I, when the “tightness” of the IPR regime is ξ, β(ξ)I is
the addition to the available set of technological opportunities as a result of an innovation level of I,
when the “tightness” of the IPR regime is ξ, and where I(i, P; n) is the level of innovation, an increasing
function of i, the level of investment in R & D (learning) of each of the fixed n firms (we focus on
symmetric equilibria in which all firms engage in the same level of R & D), and P, the size of the
technological pool:

    (6a) Ii > 0, IP > 0.




knowledge base on which further innovations can eventually be built. See for example the various contributions to
the Winter 2013 symposium on patents in the Journal of Economic Perspectives.
12
   Notice that this formulation explicitly rejects the view that there is a fixed stock of knowledge to be discovered.
If that were the case, then it is possible that a large value of “discovered” knowledge would diminish the set of
knowledge to be discovered, and it is possible that H P < 0, or even more, that HPK < 0, i.e. the marginal return to
research investments diminish as the size of the knowledge pool increases.
13
   All that the analysis below requires is that d H/dP not increase too much, for then there may not be a stable
equilibrium pool of knowledge. If there were a fixed stock of ideas to be discovered, a larger P might mean that
there were fewer ideas to be discovered, so that dH/dP could be negative beyond some point, resulting in a figure
looking more like that depicted earlier for fishing stocks.
14
   This is consistent with general results showing a fundamental non-convexity in the value of information. See
Radner and Stiglitz (1982).
15
   We can think of I as the pace of, say, labor augmenting technological change. For purposes of this paper,
however, we do not have to specific about how we parameterize the level of innovation.

7
 A tighter (“stronger”) IPR regime means that, for others, access to the knowledge created by an
innovation for others is smaller, and that every innovation represents more of an enclosure of the
knowledge commons16, so that

     (6b) α’(ξ) > 0, β’(ξ) < 0.

For simplicity, we define γ(ξ) = α(ξ) – β(ξ), with γ’ > 0.



The steady state: knowledge inflows and outflows



In steady state, dP/dt= 0, or

         (7) H(K,P) = γ(ξ)I(i, P; n)

We can solve (7) for P as a function of K and i17, for any given ξ and n:

         (8) P = φ (i, K; ξ, n),

with18

      (9a) ∂P/∂i = - γIi /(γIP – Hp)

      (9b) ∂P/∂t = -γ’I/ (γIP – Hp)

φ is the steady-state locus, giving the equilibrium level of P as a function of the level of investment in
innovation of the representative firm, i, for a fixed level of {K, ξ, n}. P, as we have discussed, is the pool
of technological opportunities available for commercial exploitation, which is why we expect that the
flow of innovations to be more sensitive to P than is the contribution of publicly funded basic research,
In other words, we assume

Assumption A: γIP > Hp.

In that case, it follows that (using (6a) and (6b))

      (10a) ∂P/∂i < 0

      (10b) ∂P/∂ξ < 0.

Thus, we have established


16
   See, e.g. Boyle [2003].
17
   Throughout this section, we hold n constant.
18
   Implicitly differentiating (3) .


8
Lemma 1. Under Assumption A, an increase in the strength of the IPR regime leads (in steady state, with
a fixed level of investment in R & D, public and private) to a smaller pool of technological opportunities;
and an increase in the steady-state level of investment leads to a smaller steady-state pool of
technological opportunities.

Profit-maximizing R & D investments

To determine the level of investment in R&D in the representative industry, we assume that there is a
single firm in each industry19 (so that we do not have to worry about interactions among the firms
except through the knowledge pool P20). Each firm maximizes profit by choosing the level of investment
in R&D, i, taking the set of technological opportunities as given. Let R(I (i,P), ξ) be the flow of revenues
for the representative firm associated with an innovation level of I, under an IPR regime of tightness ξ;
then the flow of profits is

     R(I(i,P), ξ) – i,

Profit is maximized at21

            (11) RI Ii(i,P) = 1.

(11) can be solved for i as a function of P and ξ:


            (12) i = Ψ (P, ξ)

with

            (13) ∂i/∂P =-[ RII Ip Ii(i,P) + RI IiP(i,P)]/D.

where
            D ≡ RII (Ii(i,P))2 + RI Iii(i,P)

D is unambiguously negative, by the second-order condition. The sign of the numerator is ambiguous: a
larger pool increases the marginal return to investment, and normally, we would expect this effect to
dominate, so that a larger P leads to more investment. But it is possible that there is sufficiently large
decreasing profitability to an increased flow of innovations (i.e. RII is sufficiently negative) , that the
normal presumption is reversed. We will refer to the case where ∂i/∂P > 0 as the normal case.



19
   In the next section, we shall show how these results can easily be generalized.
20
   We are explicitly assuming that knowledge is not industry specific.
21
   This formulation allows us to avoid the more complicated intertemporal maximization problem that would arise
if each firm’s current innovation level depended not only on the current pool of publicly available knowledge, but
on a pool of privately available knowledge. Qualitative results for this more general problem would, however, be
similar to those described here.

9
This will be true if

        (14 ) dln IP/dln i > - d ln RI/dln i,

which will be true if there is not rapidly diminishing marginal profitability to innovations.

Similarly,

        ∂i/∂t = -RIξ Ii / D > 0,

so long as

        Assumption B: RIξ > 0,

In other words, stronger intellectual property rights increases the marginal return to an innovation.
Thus, this model grants to the advocates of stronger IPR the notion that, given the set of technological
opportunities, stronger intellectual property rights does lead to more investment. But to assess the
overall effect, both on investment in R & D and innovation, we have to take into account the
endogeneity of P.

Solving for the steady state

We can solve for the equilibrium (steady-state) value of the knowledge pool by solving simultaneously
(8) and (12), the steady-state equation (SS), giving P as a function of I, and the profit-maximizing
equation (PM), giving the equilibrium value of i as a function of P. The steady-state values of i and P, {i*,
P*} thus solve, for given {n, ξ, K}
         P* = φ (i*, K; ξ, n)
         i* = Ψ (P*, ξ).
Because under assumption A, the SS curve is downward sloping, and in the “normal” case, the PM curve
is upward sloping, there is a unique steady state. (See Figure 9a) (But in the more general case, though,
the PM curve can have an upward-sloping segment, in which case it is possible that multiple steady-
state equilibria exist. See figure 9B. In the ensuing discussion, we will ignore this possibility.)

Once we have solved for the equilibrium value of P, P*, the steady-state flow of innovations can easily
be solved for, using (7):

        (15)I* = H(K, P*)/ γ(ξ).

The effect of tighter IPR




10
Earlier calculations established that a tightening of IPR shifts the steady-state curve down (i.e. under
assumption A, for a fixed value of i, the equilibrium P will be smaller—equation 10b), and that a tighter
intellectual property regime shifts the profit-maximizing locus to the right. In other words, normally a
tightening of intellectual property rights leads to more investment in R & D, at a fixed opportunity set. It
follows that that the steady state level of the knowledge pool will be smaller. P* is diminished as a
result of a tighter intellectual property regime.

Under our assumptions that HP > 0 and γ’(ξ) > 0, it follows directly from (15) that22

Proposition 1. In the normal case, and under assumptions A and B, tighter intellectual property rights
leads to less innovation.

There is an alternative formulation where the analysis is more parallel to that of Section I. By
substituting (12) into (7) we obtain

          (16) H(K,P) = γ(ξ)I(Ψ (P, ξ), P).

We can now calculate the total derivative with respect to t of the size of the innovation pool:

          (17) dP /dξ = γ’(ξ)I + γ(ξ)IiΨt /[ HP (K,P) - γ(ξ)(IiΨP + IP)].

Under assumption A, γIP > Hp . In the normal case, ΨP > 0. The result that

          (18) d*P/dξ < 0

follows directly: stronger intellectual property rights diminishes the size of the opportunities pool. But
it is then easy to show that the flow of innovation is diminished.

Notice that this result holds whether i increases in equilibrium or diminishes. Earlier, we showed that
given the set of technological opportunities, i increases with the strength of IPR. But we also showed
that i diminishes with P, and we have now shown that P diminishes with the strength of IPR. Thus, the
net effect of the strength of IPR on investment in R&D remains ambiguous:

          (19) di/dξ = Ψt (P,ξt) + ΨP (P,ξ) dP/dξ

the sign of which is that of

          - RIξ Ii [HP (K,P) - γ(ξ)(IiΨP + IP)] - [RII Ip Ii(i,P) + RI IiP(i,P)][ γ’(ξ)I+ γ(ξ)Ii φΨξ ].

22
     dln I/dξ = (dln H/dP)dP/dξ - dln γ(ξ)/dξ < 0.



11
If investment in R & D is very sensitive to technological capabilities, especially relative to the sensitivity
to IPR, then investment in R & D is likely to be decreased. For instance, if RIt ≈ 0, then

         di/dξ ≈ (∂i/∂P)│PM γ’(ξ)I /[HP (K,P) - γ(ξ)](IiΨP + IP) < 0,

(where (∂i/∂P)│PM is the change in investment from an increase in P along the profit-maximizing curve),
under our assumption that the contribution of public investments to the knowledge pool is not too
sensitive to the size of the pool itself and our "normal" case that an increase in technological
opportunities leads to an increase in the profit-maximizing level of investment in R & D.23

Diagrammatic exposition

We can reframe the above analysis using the diagrammatic techniques used in the first section to
analyze equilibrium fishing and fishing stocks. H(K,P) is the flow of knowledge into the knowledge pool,
γ(ξ)I(Ψ (P, ξ), P) is the flow out. In equilibrium, the two are equal, as depicted in figure 10A. A tighter
intellectual property regime represents an increase in the net outflow out of the pool at any given P, and
thus results in a lower level of P and a lower flow of innovations. (Figure 10, Panel B).



                                           III. The effect of entry on innovation

We can extend the model slightly to ask what happens if the number of firms, n, increases. The model is
exactly the same, except now we assume the revenue flows to the jth firm in the representative industry
from a given level of innovation for that firm, Ij , are diminishing in n: Rj (Ij, n) with Rj n < 0. The level of
innovation for each firm Ij is a function of the number of other firms, their level of investment in R &D,
and the opportunity set P: Ij = Ij(ij,- i-j, n, P). We assume for simplicity that all firms are identical. The
Nash equilibrium investment in R & D is found by:

         Max Rj (ij, ξ, n,P, i -j) – ij,
          {ij}

This generates the reaction function

         ij = z (i-j, n, ξ, P),24

which leads to the symmetric equilibrium where ij = i-j (in the natural notation)


23
   These results can be seen directly in Figure 9a, where while the effects on P* are unambiguously negative, that
on i* are indeterminate.
24
   Notice that this formulation is consistent with there being many firms in each industry. The profits of any firm
are a function of its own innovations and those of others in the industry.

12
(20) ij = Z (P, ξ, n).

Normally, we expect that an increase in the opportunity set, given the legal and economic environment
and the number of firms, will increase the marginal return to investments in innovation, and hence

(20a) ZP > 0.

 On the other hand, more competition means that there is, say, a smaller probability of winning the
patent race. Average and marginal returns to investment in R & D will be lowered, and so investment
(by each firm) may be lowered (though aggregate investment, nij may be increased.) Hence, we assume

(20b) Zn < 0.

The aggregate flow of innovations I is a function of Z, the level of investment of the representative firm,
and n, the number of firms:

(21) I = I(Z(P, ξ,n), P, n).

The steady state is now described by

(22) H(K,P) = γ(ξ)I(Z (P, ξ, n), P, n).

We can solve (22) for P as a function of t, n and K:

(23)    P = Ω (ξ, n, K)

 and as before, aggregate innovation is simply H/ γ, so we can solve for the pace of innovation as a
function of t, n, and K:

(24) I = H(Ω,K)/ γ(ξ) = Λ (ξ,n,K)

From (22)

(25)      dP/dn = γ(∂I/∂n)|P /[ HP (K,P) - γ(ξ)(IiZP + IP)]

which implies that, in the normal case

     sign dP/dn = - sign (∂I/∂n)|P

and if that is so, it implies (since I = H/ γ) that

          sign dI/dn = - sign (∂I/∂n)|P

13
More precisely,

(26) dI/dn = HP (∂I/∂n)|P /[ HP (K,P) - γ(ξ)(IiZP + IP)]

The results are parallel to those of the previous section, where we showed that improved intellectual
property rights led to more research, at any given size of knowledge pool, but this so drained the
knowledge pool (the set of opportunities), that the full effect was to lower the equilibrium pace of
innovation. The full effect of more competition is just the opposite of the “partial effect”: more firms
may lead, at any P, to more innovation, but this so drains the pool of opportunities that the steady-state
flow of innovation is actually reduced. (Figure 11)

We now take a more careful look at (26), and in particular, at the numerator. Normally, we expect that
at any size of technological pool, more researchers will lead to more innovation:

     (26) ∂I/∂n|P = Ii Zn + In > 0.

More researchers, taking the level of investment of each researcher as given, are likely to lead to more
innovation (at a fixed P), i.e. In > 0; and more investment, by each researcher, will lead to more
innovation, i.e. Ii > 0. But more competition (larger n) is likely to discourage each firm from investing in
R & D25 (Zn < 0).

In our earlier discussion of (26), where we had assumed that more firms lead to more innovation, we
had implicitly assumed

                        In/ Ii > - Zn

But that may not be so, and if - Zn > In/ Ii, then an increase in n leads to a smaller level of overall
innovation, given P, but a larger level of equilibrium innovation, once we take into account the effect on
the opportunity set.26

The literature has emphasized that (essentially at a fixed P) the effects of the number of firms on
innovation are ambiguous, partly because the benefits of having more researchers may be small,

25
   By analogy, in section I, more fishing firms given a stock of fish, will discourage investment by each of the fishing
firms, as the marginal return to investment (at a given level of i and P) is reduced. In the context of innovation,
see Aghion and Howitt, 1993, 1998, Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2014, and Stiglitz, 2013a, 2013b.
26
   But the analysis shows equally that if more competition should lead to lower innovation at a fixed P, then it will
lead to more innovation in equilibrium. And that may well be the case. It is possible that more competition (large
n) so lowers the marginal return to investments in R&D at any given level of research of others (and P), that
investment by each firm is so diminished, that the depletion of the knowledge pool is actually reduced as
competition increases. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2014) for a more extensive discussion of the issues.


14
beyond a small n (and especially so if research strategies are correlated), and the adverse effects on the
investment of each may be large, because of a decrease in the marginal returns to investment (and
especially so if the investment of each firm is highly sensitive to slight changes in marginal returns).27

By the same token, there may be significant externalities associated with the decision to enter: lower
profitability associated with other firms contemporaneously engaged in research, a lower profitability
associated with future firms engaged in research, because of the net drawdown in P, but a higher
profitability associated with future firms engaged in research, because of the effects on other firms' R &
D. In a sense, this is a classic problem of the second best. It should not come as a surprise that in such
situations, the net welfare effects are ambiguous.

Our analysis has noted that these partial equilibrium results (given P) may be reversed, once account is
taken of the long-run effects on P.28 More generally, the effect of an increase in n on innovation here is
different from that in much of the conventional literature, which has emphasized the role that
competition has in spurring innovation. Here, we have observed that even if that is the case, so that at a
fixed opportunity set an increase in n increases innovation, under not implausible conditions related to
the intellectual property regime, the long-run general equilibrium effects may be the opposite of the
short-run partial equilibrium effects.

                   IV. Concluding Remarks: Pro-innovation intellectual property regimes

There are reforms in the IPR regime that might lead to a greater pool of knowledge upon which
innovators could draw and yet still incentivize research.29 Provisions of the patent system that make it
easier to “enclose the knowledge commons,” i.e. take out from the pool more than one contributes are


27
   There is a huge literature on the subject, some of which suggests an inverted U shaped relationship (see Aghion,
Bloom, Blundell, Griffith and Howitt(2005)), some of which suggests that innovation may decline monotonically
with n. The empirical literature is bedeviled with the problems noted in earlier footnotes, and even the theoretical
literature does not always separate clearly the effects of entry given a particular opportunity set, vs. the effects
with an endogenous opportunity set. The literature in which prior innovation affects returns to current
investments in R & D typically emphasizes the benefits that arise from the increase in the “baseline” knowledge,
from which current research efforts depart, rather than the negative effects of the draw down in the knowledge
pool that has been the focus of this paper. See, e.g. Romer(1990), Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1993, 1998), Aghion,
Akcigit, and Howitt, (2013), Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2014, and Stiglitz, 2013a, 2013b.

28 Thus, an increase in n, especially beyond a certain critical level, may lead to lower I, keeping P fixed, and thus to
a higher level of innovation taking into account the effect of entry on the size of the opportunity set (P).
29
  There is, by now, a large literature discussing these and other similar reforms to the intellectual property regime.
For a brief review, see Greenwald and Stiglitz (2014), chapter 15. Boldrin and Levine (2013) present a set of eight
policy proposals including: shorter patent durations, reducing the set of what can be patented, strengthening
antitrust policies, reversing the “idea mercantilism” of the TRIPS agreement, adjusting patent protections
according to sector, an “economic test” for patent protection, reversing patent protection for results derived from
federally sponsored research, and the adjustment of non-patent-related policies disincentivizing innovation in
sectors such as pharmaceuticals (Boldrin and Levine, 2013, p.19) .

15
particularly harmful; disclosure requirements, rigorously enforced, can increase innovators contributions
to the knowledge pool, with only limited effects on incentives.

So too, an intellectual property regime that provides less scope for holdups, less scope for impediments
imposed by patent thickets, etc. may lead to a higher equilibrium knowledge pool.

The “liability system,”30 in which anyone can use an idea, upon the payment of an appropriately
designed fee, leaves more knowledge in the pool to be used by others, but, of course, the price is a two-
edged sword: the higher the price the greater the incentives for innovation (at a fixed P), but the lower
the price, the larger the effective P. In an appropriately parameterized model, one could analyze the
optimal price. The patent system can be thought of as associating an infinite price31; the absence of a
patent system a zero price. In analyzing the optimal price, it should be observed that even at a zero
price, firms have an incentive to innovate, because knowledge does not diffuse costlessly and
instantaneously to others. In many sectors, in fact, there is little recourse to the patent system. Thus, it
is possible that in some sectors, the optimal price is zero (i.e. all knowledge should be freely available).
The analysis of this paper, highlighting the adverse effect of patents on innovation, suggests that in
general, we should expect a price lower than the (admittedly temporary) “infinite” price associated with
the current system.

The effect of such changes can be shown diagrammatically in figure 12 as a downward shift in the net
pace of knowledge extraction (more contributions to the knowledge pool, less “enclosure” of the
knowledge commons) at any level of P. The result is a higher steady state level of knowledge production
and a larger equilibrium knowledge pool. The new knowledge extraction locus is shown as a dotted
curve, with γ = γ1.

The central message of this paper is simple: We began by noting that some observers of innovation
have claimed that a more important determinant of the levels of investment in R & D and the pace of
innovation than the intellectual property regime is the “opportunity set,” the knowledge pool from
which applied researchers can draw. Knowledge, it is has long been recognized, is a public good—a
common resource from which all can draw (see, e.g., Stiglitz 1987).32 Intellectual property provides a
way of appropriating the returns to investments in knowledge, but in doing so, effectively privatizes a
public good. But every innovation draws upon prior knowledge, and the boundaries of “new”
knowledge are inherently imprecise. Patents inevitably enclose what would otherwise have been in the
public domain. In doing so, not only do they impede the efficient use of knowledge, but because
knowledge itself is the most important input into the production of further knowledge (innovations),
they may even impede the flow of innovations.

30
   As advocated, for instance, by Lewis and Reichman (2005).
31
   This is not quite correct, since while the holder of the patent has the right and ability to set the price arbitrarily
high—and in some cases (such as in the Myriad patent cited earlier, where Myriad clung to its “right” to prevent
others from building on their patent, even by developing better and cheaper tests) firms do so, in other cases, they
provide a license at a fee.
32
   See, for instance, Stiglitz (1987, 1999).

16
We have provided a simple way of modeling additions to and subtractions from the technological
opportunity set from which innovators can draw. We have shown that tighter intellectual property
regimes, by reducing the newly available set of ideas from which others can draw and by increasing the
extent of the enclosure of the knowledge commons, may lead to lower levels of innovation, and even
lower levels of investment in innovation, as a result of the diminution in the size of the knowledge pool.
Advocates of stronger intellectual property rights, while noting the positive partial equilibrium effects,
have ignored the even more important general equilibrium effects. The real lesson is that considerable
care is needed in designing intellectual property regimes, with particular focus on the extent to which
any particular regime increases or diminishes the technological opportunities upon which others can
draw.




17
Figures

Figure 1. The rate of increase in fishing stocks as a function of fishing population (P). Below a critical
threshold level, the population is not viable. In the absence of fishing, there is a maximum sustainable
population.

Figure 2. Equiibrium fish extraction as a function of fishing population (Symmetric Nash equilibrium of n
profit maximizing firms.)

Figure 3. Equilibrium fishing stocks. Superimposing Figures 1 and 2, we can ascertain values of P such
that the rate of fish extraction equals the rate of reproduction. In the figure, there are three equilibria,
two of which are stable—0 and P2.

Figure 4. Effect of improved investment environment. At each P, there is more fish extraction, so the
equilibrium P (and the equilibrium rate of fishing) is lowered.

Figure 5. An exception. If, beyond a critical level of P, increased P leads to lower rates of growth of the
fishing population, an improved investment environment may lead to a lower P but higher levels of
“catches.”

Figure 6. Increased competition has similar effects to an improved investment environment—leading to
a lower equilibrium P and levels of fish extraction (if P* = P2 is less than ̂ ).

Figure 7. Better regulation can lead to a larger equilibrium fishing stock, and a higher level of fishing
catches (if P* = P2 is less than ̂ ).

Figure 8. Increase in knowledge pool from basic research. As depicted here, as P increases, with fixed K
(investments in basic research), H approaches a constant.

Figure 9. Equilibrium knowledge pool. Equilibrium is given by the intersection of the steady state locus
(SS) and the profit maximizing locus (PM).

Panel A Normally, there is a unique equilibrium. Tighter IPR leads to more investment at any level of P
(a shift to the right in the PM curve) and a lower steady state P at any given level of P (a shift down in
the SS curve). Thus P* shifts down.

Panel B. The PM locus may, however, not be upward sloping, in which case there can exist multiple
steady state equilibria.

Panel 10. In equilibrium, the flow of knowledge (available to others) into the knowledge pool, H,
equals the flow out. There may be multiple equilibria, but in the figure there is a unique steady state, P2
(besides the no-innovation equilibrium P= 0). Panel B. Tighter intellectual property rights shift the level
of knowledge exploitation up (at each P), resulting in a lower level of the equilibrium knowledge pool
and a small flow of innovations.




18
Figure 11. An increase in the number of researchers has an analogous effect in reducing the equilibrium
size of the knowledge pool and the equilibrium flow of innovations

Figure 12. A better-designed intellectual property regime can lead to a larger knowledge pool and a
higher rate of innovation.




19
     𝑃̇



     𝑝




                 ̇




          Pmin                              P
                 ̂          P
                 Figure 1            H(P)




     𝑃̇



     𝑝
                                Q (P,n)




                                            P

                 Figure 2




20
     𝑃̇



     𝑝


                             Q (P,n)




          𝑃1            𝑃2                            P
                                           𝑃
                             Figure 3          H(P)




     𝑃̇



     𝑝


               Q (P,n,ϴ’)
                               Q (P,n,ϴ)




                 𝑃2 ′   𝑃2                            P

                             Figure 4          H(P)




21
     𝑃̇



     𝑝




                                            Q (P,n,ϴ’)
                                                         Q (P,n,ϴ)
      𝑃′̇
      𝑃̇



      𝑝
      𝑝
            𝑃1                     𝑃2′ 𝑃2                                   P

                            Figure 5                                 H(P)

            𝑝                      𝑝 𝑝


     𝑃̇



     𝑝


                 Q (P,n’)
                              Q (P,n)




                                                                            P

                            Figure 6                                 H(P)




22
      𝑃̇



      𝑝

                   Q (P,n, ζ)M(ζ)
                              tighter regulation




               2    𝑃2 ′                                           P

                           Figure 7                         H(P)

           P

     𝑑𝐻
     𝑑𝑃


                                                   H(P,K)




                                                                   P

                           Figure 8




23
         𝑃


                       S
                                                   PM
                 S’
                                                            PM
                                                            ’
                                 𝑃∗




                                𝑃 ∗′               S

                                              S’   P

                                              P
                                                                 ∆𝑖
                                 Figure 9A
                           SS: Eq. 8. PM: Eq. 12




     𝑃       𝑆




                  PM
                                                        𝑆

                                                                  𝑖
                           Figure 9B




24
     𝑑𝐻
     𝑑𝑃
                                          𝛾𝐼(𝛹(𝑃, 𝜉 , 𝑃, 𝑛




          𝑃1                𝑃2                           P
               Figure 10A



     𝑑𝐻
     𝑑𝑃                     𝛾1 𝐼

                                   𝛾𝐼(𝜑(𝑃, 𝜏 , 𝑃, 𝑛

                                            H




                                                         P

               Figure 10B




25
     𝑑𝐻
             𝛾𝐼(𝑃, 𝑛′
     𝑑𝑃
                        𝛾𝐼((𝑃 , 𝑃, 𝑛


                             H




                                       P

          Figure 11




26
          𝑑𝐻
          𝑑𝑃                                                  𝛾𝐼

                                                                   𝛾1 𝐼

                                                                                 H




                                                                                                 P

                                              Figure 12


References

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, 1992 “A model of growth through creative destruction, Econometrica, Vol. 60, No. 2.
         (Mar., 1992), pp. 323-351

——, 1998, Endogenous Growth Theory,Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press

——, U. Akcigit, and P. Howitt, (2013) "What do we learn from Schumpeterian Growth Theory?" NBER Working
       Paper 18824, February

Association for Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics, 569 U.S. 12-398 [2013]

Bessen, James, and Michael J. Meurer. 2008. Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers Put Innovators
         at Risk, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine, 2013, "The Case against Patents," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 3-
         22.

Boyle, J., 2003, “The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain,” Law and
          Contemporary Problems, 66, pp.33-74

Chang, Ha-Joon, 2001. "Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development: Historical lessons and emerging
        issues," Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, 2(2): 287-309.

——, 2002, Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in Historical Perspective London: Anthem Press.

27
Cimoli M., G. Dosi, K. Maskus, R. Okediji, J. Reichman, and J. Stiglitz (eds.), forthcoming, Intellectual Property Rights
        and Development, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.

Dasgupta, P. and P.A. David (1994), “Toward a New Economics of Science,” Research Policy, 23 (5): 487–521.

Dasgupta, Partha S., and Geoffrey M. Heal. 1974, “The Optimal Depletion of Exhaustible Resources,” Review of
        Economic Studies, Symposium on the Economics of Exhaustible Resources. Edinburgh, Scotland, Longman
        Group Ltd.

 David, P.A. (1993), “Intellectual Property Institutions and the Panda’ Thumb: Patents, Copyrights, and Trade

     Secrets in Economic Theory and History,” in M.B. Wallerstein, M.E. Mogee and R.A. Schoen, eds, Global

     Dimensions of Intellectual Property Rights in Science. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

 —— (2002), “Does the New Economy Need All the Old IPR Institutions? Digital Information Goods and Access to

     Knowledge for Economic Development,” Presented at Wider Conference on the New Economy in

     Development, Helsinki, 2002.

 —— (2004a), “From Keeping Nature’s Secrets to the Institutionalization of Open Science,” in R.A. Ghosh, ed.,

     Collaborative Ownership and the Digital Economy (CODE). Cambridge MA, MIT Press.

 —— (2004b), “Understanding the Emergence of ‘Open Science’ Institutions: Functionalist Economics in Historical

     Context,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 13: 571–89.

Dosi, G., C. Freeman, et al., 1988, Technical Change and Economic Theory, London: Pinter Publishers.

——, L. Marengo, and C. Pasquali (2006), “How much should society fuel the greed of innovators? On the Relations
       Between Appropriability, Opportunities and Rates of Innovation”, Research Policy, 35:8, pp. 1110-1121.

—— and J. E. Stiglitz, forthcoming in 2014, “The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in the Development Process,
      with Some Lessons from Developed Countries: An Introduction,” in M. Cimoli,G. Dosi, K. Maskus, R.
      Okediji, J. Reichman, and J. Stiglitz (eds.), Intellectual Property Rights and Development, Oxford/New York:
      Oxford University Press

Graham, Stuart, and Saurabh Vishnubhakat. 2013. "Of Smart Phone Wars and Software Patents."Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 67-86.

Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz, 2014, Creating a Learning Economy, New York: Columbia University Press.

Hagiu, Andrei, and David B. Yoffie. 2013. "The New Patent Intermediaries: Platforms, Defensive Aggregators, and
        Super-Aggregators." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 45-66.

Heller M. (1998): “The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in Transition from Marx to Markets,” Harvard Law
        Review, 111: 698–701.




28
—— and R. Eisenberg (1998): “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anti-commons in Biomedical Research,” Science,
      280: 698–701.

Huang, Kenneth G. & Fiona E. Murray, 2008 “Does patent strategy shape the long-run supply of public knowledge?
        Evidence from human genetics,” Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 52, No. 6, pp. 1193-
        1221(September 1, 2008), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1249522.

Lewis, T. and Reichman, J. (2005) ‘Using Liability Rules to Stimulate Local Innovation in Developing Countries:
          Application to Traditional Knowledge’, in K. Maskus and J. Reichman (eds), International Public Goods and
          Transfer of Technology under a Globalized Intellectual Property Regime, Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press, pp. 337–366.

Moser, Petra. 2013. "Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
        27(1): 23-44.

Radner, R. and J. E. Stiglitz, “A Nonconcavity in the Value of Information,” in Bayesian Models in Economic Theory,
        Marcel Boyer and Richard Khilstrom (eds.), Elsevier Science Publications, 1984, pp. 33-52.

Stiglitz, J. E. 1987. “On the Microeconomics of Technical Progress.” In Technology Generation in Latin American
            Manufacturing Industries, ed. Jorge M. Katz, 56–77. New York: St. Martin’s Press. (Originally presented to
            IDB-CEPAL Meetings, Buenos Aires, November 1978.)

——, 1999 “Knowledge As a Global Public Good.” In Global Public Goods: International Cooperation in the 21st
       Century, ed. Inge Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg, and Marc A. Stern, United Nations Development Programme,
       308–325, New York: Oxford University Press.

——, 2013a “Creative Destruction,” Columbia University Working paper

——, 2013b, “Competition and Innovation,” Columbia University Working paper

Williams, Heidi L. 2013, “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human Genome,” Journal
         of Political Economy, 121(1): 1-27




29
