NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF EMERGING CLIMATE RISKS ON URBAN REAL ESTATE PRICE
DYNAMICS
Devin Bunten
Matthew E. Kahn
Working Paper 20018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20018
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We thank the Ziman Center for Real Estate at UCLA for generous funding. We would like to thank
Nicolai Kuminoff and Jaren Pope for helpful comments. This research was supported by Award Number
T32AG033533 from the National Institute on Aging. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute on Aging or the
National Institutes of Health The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Devin Bunten and Matthew E. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Impact of Emerging Climate Risks on Urban Real Estate Price Dynamics
Devin Bunten and Matthew E. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 20018
March 2014
JEL No. Q54,R3
ABSTRACT
In the typical asset market, an asset featuring uninsurable idiosyncratic risk must offer a higher rate
of return to compensate risk-averse investors. A home offers a standard asset's risk and return
opportunities, but it also bundles access to its city's amenities|and to its climate risks. As climate
change research reveals the true nature of these risks, how does the equilibrium real estate pricing
gradient change when households can sort into different cities? When the population is homogeneous,
the real estate pricing gradient instantly reflects the "new news". With population heterogeneity, an
event study research design will underestimate the valuation of climate risk for households in lowrisk cities while overestimating the valuation of households in high-risk areas.
Devin Bunten
University of California at Los Angeles
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
devinbunten@gmail.com
Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Anderson School of Management
UCLA Law School, Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

In the absence of a global agreement on reducing world greenhouse gas emissions,
climate change risk continues to be exacerbated by ongoing population and percapita income growth. Rising greenhouse gas production increases atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide and this increases the probability of extreme
climate events. Researchers working at the intersection of macro and environmental economics have evaluated the ex-ante social costs of “fat tail” disaster
events (Barro, 2013; Costello et al., 2010; Pindyck, 2013; Pindyck and Wang,
2013; Weitzman, 2009, 2011). Macro models of climate changes consequences
have often implicitly assumed away any spatial adaptation possibilities.1
Recent research on climate change adaptation has studied how changing climate
conditions affects regional comparative advantage (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg,
2013; Costinot et al., 2012). The former present a general equilibrium model
featuring free trade across regions and study the welfare consequences of climate
change when the location of both production and households can shift as climate
conditions shifts while the latter analyze the likely macro effects of micro-scale
reallocations of cropland in the face of a changing climate.
Empirical studies have estimated cross-city real estate hedonic pricing regressions to predict how climate change is likely to impact the value of real estate
in different locations (Albouy et al., 2013; Kahn, 2009). Intuitively, in the year
2050 will the current real estate price differential between San Francisco and Detroit narrow if Detroit’s climate is predicted to improve (i.e. warmer winters)
relative to San Francisco?
In this paper, we analyze the spatial implications of emerging climate risk within
a system of cities, each of which may face different risks. Within a nation such as
the United States or a trading bloc such as the European Union, both labor and
capital can move to any location. This potential for spatial arbitrage imposes
cross-restrictions across real estate prices and local wages across space. In spatial
equilibrium, both heterogeneous households and firms cannot raise their utility
and profits by moving to another location. Cross-city real estate prices and
wages adjust to support such that the local land market and the local labor
market clear (Rosen, 2002).
We introduce a system of cities model to consider the economic incidence of an
emerging new catastrophic risk (i.e., climate change). Throughout this paper,
we assume that a known subset of cities face the most severe risk due to their
1 Early work introducing a multi-region economy such as the Nordhaus and Yang (1996)
RICE model did not allow for migration of labor across borders. In their model, regions differ
with respect to their sectoral shares (i.e some regions have an agricultural focus while others
specialize in manufacturing). They assume that the damage function from climate change is
identical for each industry across different regions, and then conduct a shift-share calculation
to determine how a region is affected by climate change. For example, if a region’s economy
specializes in agriculture and if climate change impacts agriculture then this region will be
sharply impacted by climate change.

2

coastal geography. As climate scientists make progress and reveal the “new
news” that cities such as Miami, New Orleans and New York City face increased
risk of large-scale disasters, we seek to understand how equilibrium real estate
prices across cities evolve. We embed the future risk of climate change into a
classic Rosen/Roback (Rosen, 1979; Roback, 1982; Rosen, 2002) compensating
differentials model. Climate change risk is a tied local public bad that (in
expected value) poses future costs.
We contrast two main cases. In the first case, the population has homogenous
preferences over coastal amenity attributes, climate, and avoiding low probability risks. The hedonic pricing gradient for homes immediately reflects the
“new news” of the increased risk that cities such as Miami face due to rising
greenhouse gas emissions.
In the second case, we introduce population heterogeneity along several dimensions. The population can differ with respect to income, tastes for amenities,
the ability to engage in self protection against emerging risks (see Ehrlich and
Becker, 1972), and location-specific networks and knowledge. Together these
factors create a wedge between the willingness to pay among coastal incumbent
home owners to remain in risky places versus the willingness to pay of outsiders
considering moving to at risk cities. In this case, home prices in affected cities
may not decline when the “new news” about climate risk becomes common
knowledge. This result can be derived even when everyone agrees about the
serious risk that the coastal cities face. An econometrician conducting an event
study is likely to underestimate the average person’s willingness to pay to avoid
climate risk.
The key intuition here is to recognize that the marginal household, whose willingness to pay to live in the risky city sets the market price, may have a comparative advantage in coping with local risk or may have built up city specific
capital (both social capital and local knowledge) such that this household effectively faces a higher migration cost for leaving the city. As we discuss below, this
endogenous differential valuation of the same city by “insiders” and “outsiders”
has implications for considering the merits of place based disaster insurance
such as government FEMA programs.
In the literature on the fat tails of rare disasters, households within the model
are aware of risks of which the econometrician is ignorant. In our model, the
situation is different: both households and the econometrician are fully aware
of the objective risks facing different cities. In this paper, the econometrician
is unaware of the type and degree of household heterogeneity. This limits the
extent to which prices of real estate—determined by marginal agents—reflect the
willingness to pay of the average household. This limitation, due to residential
sorting based on observed and unobserved attributes of both the city and the
migrant, bears a similarity to the work of Shogren and Crocker (1991) on the
attributes incorporated into hedonic pricing functions. Our findings concerning
the information embedded in the hedonic gradient build on recent work by
Kuminoff and Pope (forthcoming) in studying the economic incidence of changes
3

in local public goods (in this case coastal safety).
Our findings build on past work in local public finance by scholars such as Starrett (1981), who examined the conditions under which local public goods will
be capitalized completely, partially, or not at all. In that context, Lind (1973)
and Kanemoto (1988) provide guidance on the interpretation of capitalization
studies as providing bounds on the heterogeneous population’s willingness to
pay for location specific attributes.
In the last section of the paper, we discuss how essential heterogeneity (see
Heckman et al., 2006) affects inferences from standard hedonic real estate event
studies where the event in question is the realization that specific cities face
severe climate change risk. Our findings have a similar flavor as the Shogren and
Stamland (2002, 2005) analysis of hedonic wage regressions seeking to recover
statistical value of life estimates in the presence of essential heterogeneity.

2

Will Miami Vanish?

The motivating example for this paper is Miami. The Miami metropolitan area
is home to six million people. The city itself is located six feet above sea level.
In summer 2013, Rolling Stone magazine published a long front page article
focusing on the claim that Miami is doomed because of imminent sea level rise
(Goodell, 2013). This salient case study highlights the coming challenge that
the U.S coastal population faces. Rappaport and Sachs (2003) document that a
majority of the nation’s population and income is located in coastal and Great
Lakes areas. In the case of Miami, urban planning documents highlight that
Miami-Dade County is planning for sea level rise (Miami-Dade County, 2010).
The housing crisis notwithstanding, Miami home prices have increased nearly
as rapidly as those of far-inland Denver over the last thirty years, showing no
stark decline as climate research has progressed.2
The apparent non-responsiveness of Miami real estate to changing climate risk
poses a puzzle: why aren’t holders of Miami real estate assets compensated
for this risk with a price discount? This puzzle is almost the inverse of the
equity premium puzzle, where risk-averse investors hold bonds despite the low
returns. The answer of Barro (2006) is that the fat-tails of consumption disasters, unobserved to the econometrician, lead investors to hold safer assets. In
our puzzle, people pay apparently large sums to hold risky assets—Miami real
estate—whose risk profile has increased with the advent of climate change. In
our case, unobserved household heterogeneity means that only the households
most willing or capable of dealing with these risks choose to hold Miami real
estate, limiting the price impacts of emerging climate risks.
2 See Figure 1 in the appendix. Data from Trulia indicates that Miami coastal areas such
as Coral Gables and Miami Beach experienced an even more pronounced recent boom.

4

In considering the Miami case as a leading motivating example, we seek to focus
attention to the damage natural disasters pose to the place-based capital stock
rather than to human longevity. Cross-country research has documented that
natural disasters are killing fewer people over time and that richer nations suffer
fewer deaths from natural disasters (Kahn, 2005). We recognize that extreme
natural disasters such as Hurricane Katrina which is estimated to have killed
roughly 1,850 people in 2005 can be deadly. Valuing each life lost at $6 million
yields a total value of life lost at $11.1 billion. Estimates for the property
damage from Hurricane Katrina are in the range of $100 billion (Knabb et al.,
2005). An alternative way to look at the damage caused by Katrina is to recall
that in the year 2000 that New Orleans had a population of 490,000. This
means that the 1,850 deaths from Katrina represented 0.0038 of the area’s total
population; for comparison there were 210 homicides in New Orleans in the
same year (Van Landingham, 2007).
In the case of Hurricane Sandy in 2012, this storm caused 117 deaths and a
total of $65 billion dollars of damage (Mulvihill, 2013; Newman, 2012). This
example highlights that the damage risk to physical property swamps the total
death risk. We believe that the ratio of total value of lives lost to climate change
disasters divided by the total damage to physical capital will only decline over
time. With the rise of smart phones and emergency warnings, we predict that
the footloose coastal population (facing mandatory evacuations) will become
more responsive to disaster alerts so that fewer people die in disaster events
while buildings and infrastructure are highly immobile and subject to extreme
damage. This discussion motivates some of the modeling assumptions we make
below.

3

3.1

A Model of Rare Disasters with Variable Risk
Across Cities
The Model with Homogeneous Households

Consider a model of household location choice where households maximize lifetime utility. To choose a location j(t) ∈ J requires ownership of an asset hj
(i.e., a home) that provides access to city j’s amenity aj and also its idiosyncratic maintenance shocks. The first maintenance shock is a small but regular
depreciation shock δj and the second is a rare but large catastrophic shock κj .3
Both are i.i.d. across time, and independent across space.4
3 In addition to housing capital, public capital is also at risk, and κ can be interpreted as
j
including the risk that local homeowners will be compelled to rebuild damaged public capital.
We discuss private capital in a later section.
4 The same climatic pressures may create drought in one area and flooding in another, and a
hurricane may impact multiple locales; the i.i.d assumption is a simplification. However, given
that households choose one city at a time and they choose this city prior to the observation

5

Households are free to buy and sell these assets each period, and transactions
occur prior to the realization of any shocks. For a household currently living
in city i who chooses to live in city j, lifetime utility is the discounted sum
of period utilities, given by u(cij , aj ). The houshold faces a period-by-period
budget constraint of the form cij + (pj − δj − κj ) hj = y + pi hi where y is the
household endowment and pi is the equilibrium price in city i. The subscript ij
denotes a household that begins in city i and chooses to live in city j, recognizing
that consumption may be different for two households who both move to j but
who began in different cities.
For each city, there is a fixed supply of homes. This assumption can be interpreted as each city having a fixed quantity of land that must be combined with
housing materials in a fixed proportion in order to produce housing services, and
that the depreciation and catastrophic shocks represent regular maintenance and
disaster-rebuilding, respectively. Alternatively, the assets can be interpreted as
trees that bear two kinds of fruit: a fixed aj and a variable y − δjt − κjt . Seen
in this light, the model is similar to those of Barro (2006, 2013), where we have
allowed for a variety of asset trees from which households must choose just one.
In equilibrium, households will not choose to move; they will have already sorted
into the city that maximizes their utility given relative prices. By assumption,
each period’s location decisions are made before the shocks are observed and
thus relative prices are invariant from period to period and depend only on
expected shocks.
We now consider the following asset pricing exercise to calculate the willingness
to pay for real estate in different cities. If a household residing in city i purchases
a home in city j for price
P∞ pij , they expect to receive utility Uij = E[u(y + (pi −
pij ) − δj − κj , aj )] + t=1 β t E[u(y − δjt − κjt , aj )]. By setting Uij = Ui , where
Ui is the utility the household would receive if they stay, we can solve for the
maximum price pij that the household would pay to move to city j.

E[u(y + (pi − pij ) − δj − κj , aj )] +
(1)
=

∞
X
t=1
∞
X

β t E[u(y − δjt − κjt , aj )]
β t E[u(y − δit − κit , ai )]

t=0

In the initial scenario, the κ and δ processes are stationary, and the equation
can thus be simplified.

(2)

(1 − β)E[u(y + (pi − pij ) − δj − κj , aj )] + βE[u(y − δjt − κjt , aj )]
=E[u(y − δit − κit , ai )]

of shocks, their concern is with the average expected shock in their choice city, rather than
possible correlations across cities.

6

We suppose that at some initial date zero, households were free to choose locations and prices adjusted to make them indifferent. Those households who
initially chose high-amenity and low-risk areas would have bid more initially
and those high prices would persist in the steady state.

3.2

The Model with Heterogeneous Households

A similar equation can be derived in the case of heterogeneous households.
While the potential types of household heterogeneity are limitless, we focus on
three key cases: variable income levels, variable self-protection abilities, and the
formation of local endogeneous social networks.5 The first takes the form of
a different endowment yh , where h indexes households; the second involves a
utility parameter ρh that reduces the effects of the catastrophic shock κ; and
the third is modeled as a fixed moving cost µ. Solving the budget constraint for
c and substituting again gives an equation that can be solved for the willingness
to pay of household h in city i considering a move to city j.
(3)
(1 − β)E[u(yh + (pi − pij ) − δj − (1 − ρh )κj , aj )]+
βE[u(yh − δjt − (1 − ρ)κjt , aj )] − (1 − β)µ = E[u(yh − δit − (1 − ρ)κit , ai )]
We can use this equation to solve for initial distribution of households across
cities. We further assume that the distributions of E[δi ], E[κi ], and ai are
such that a priori, all residents agree on which is the“worst” city, which we
denote city l. Note that in equilibrium, pl = 0. Consider then Equation (3) for
household h in city l considering a move to city j. To solve for the distribution
of households, consider each city j ∈ J and calculate the willingness to pay plj
for each household. Ordering these bids from highest to lowest, and recalling
that each city has a fixed supply of homes, call p̂j the willingness to pay of the
marginal household. Take the city with the highest p̂j , and allocate to that city
those households willing to pay at least p̂j . After allocating these households,
repeat the process for the remaining households and cities until all households
are allocated. This is the initial equilibrium distribution of households. Note
also that the order in which the cities are selected offers an implicit ranking of
the quality of life in these cities.
We use this distribution to solve for the set of prices across all cities. Beginning
with the last two cities allocated. Because the worst city l has pl = 0, the price
of the next-to-worst city is the price that makes the marginal household in city
l just indifferent between choosing the next city. Repeat this process for each
city, moving up the implicit ranking identified previously. The last city priced
5 The third case is reminiscent of Krupka (2009), where each household invests in human
capital that enhances its particular local amenities.

7

will be the first city that households were allocated to: that with the highest
marginal willingness to pay.6
After allocating households and solving for each city’s prices, the resultant equilibrium will initially be stable: the relative values of the various shocks are stable
across cities, and no household will be willing to pay to move a better city nor
interested in paying less for less amenable city. This finding will not, in general,
hold true in the next section after introducing climate change.

4

Climate Change Risk as “New News”

We now introduce climate change. Climate change is a one-time unanticipated
event that alters the future risks of different cities in the economy. There is
no learning per se: agents simply wake up to a new probability distribution of
future outcomes. As an example, they may discover that climate change will
affect Miami in the year 2040, Chicago in 2060, and Denver in 2080. They will
also uncover the magnitude of the effect in each city. In particular, households
learn that the distribution of catastrophic shocks κi,t will worsen in the future
for each city, as a function of the stock of global greenhouse gases. For each
city, we suppose that there is a threshold level of greenhouse gases φi that will
trigger the one-time transition from relatively-low to relatively-high risk, where
the relative changes may vary by city. If greenhouse gases rise predictably, then
this translates to a threshold year which we call τi at which point city i will
increase in risk. We proceed with these assumptions in place.

4.1

Real Estate Pricing Impacts of Climate Change with
Homogenous Households

The economy is in steady-state equilibrium when climate change is discovered.
Once all cities have transitioned from their low- to high-risk state, the economy
will be in a new steady-state equilibrium and a new version of Equation (2)
will hold. We now consider what will happen to these bid functions during the
transition to this new equilibrium. For convenience, we suppose that utility is
quasilinear in the consumption good.7
With homogeneous households and fixed housing supply, prices in each period
will ensure that no household will choose to move in any future period. With
this equilibrium condition, we can write down the bid function for a household
6 Note that the equilibrium price p will in general not be equal to that calculated when
j
allocating households across cities, p̂j . The former is calculated based on the marginal household’s willingness to pay to move from their next-best city while the latter was calculated
based on the willingness to pay to move from the worst city.
7 This simplification departs from Barro (2013), where the strict concavity of utility is
critical in generating a premium for risky assets. Were we to maintain strict concavity, the
null finding of no price change would be an even more surprising result.

8

living in city i considering a move to city j as a one-time choice between the
discounted stream of amenities and shocks in city i and those in city j. The
expected depreciation shock in city i is written δi and the expected catastrophic
H
shock in city i is written κL
i or κi for low- and high-risk periods, respectively.
1
[(δi − δj ) + u(aj ) − u(ai )]
1−β
τj
τi
X
β τi H X t L
β τj H
+
β t κL
+
κ
−
β κj −
κ
i
i
1−β
1−β j
t=0
t=0

pij = pi +
(4)

Willingness to pay to move from city i to city j is increasing with the relative amenity value in j and decreasing with the relative expected losses in j.
Willingness to pay is decreasing in the transition year τi but increasing in the
transition year τj . Note that cross-effects are not important in the homogeneous
case as the price in any other city j 0 will be such that no household would be
strictly better off by moving there.
It is clear from Equation (4) that any future changes in local climate will be
reflected in house prices immediately. To an observer, the only difficulty in
ascertaining whether the relative price has fallen in city j would be if τj were
sufficiently distant that the discounted effects of climate change are negligible.

4.2

Climate Change’s Impact on the Cross-City Spatial
Equilibrium in the Essential Heterogeneity Case

We now investigate how our three types of household heterogeneity affect the
equilibrium housing price dynamics in response to new information about the
severity of climate change. We are especially interested in cases where a neutrality result holds, in which real estate prices of high-amenity but at-risk locales
like Miami remain unchanged despite the discovery of climate changes that adversely affects such cities. As before, the three dimensions of heterogeneity are
captured by household income yh , household self-protection ability ρh , and the
moving cost µ. The self-protection parameter takes a value between zero and
one and measures the portion of a catastrophic shock that affects a particular
household; a high value indicates that a household is not greatly affected.
Proposition 1 Changes in relative climate risk across cities will alter the relative prices of those cities only if the changes in risk alter the willingness to pay
of the marginal resident. If the marginal resident of an at-risk city possesses
perfect self-protection capabilities, costly local endogenous networks, or a high
enough income, then their willingness to pay will be unchanged and prices will
not change despite an inarguable increase in climate risk.
Income heterogeneity will produce ex ante sorting whereby the rich locate in
(and bid up the price of) high-amenity cities. So long as the rich are rich
enough they will choose to remain in high-amenity Miami after the new news
9

of climate change—despite its increased risk of catastrophic shocks.8 Because
the choice set of cities is bounded, there exists a highest-amenity city. Suppose
that utility is separable and strictly concave in consumption, and that for highi ,ai )
i ,ai )
> ∂u(c
for even high-amenity cities.
income households we have that ∂u(c
∂ai
∂ci
In order to enjoy the best amenities in the country, the very wealthiest are willing
to rebuild their houses every year.9
For those at the other end of the income scale, however, climate shocks will
compound their already-high marginal utility of consumption. If the poorest
are unable to bid their way ouf of low-amenity but high-risk locales, then they
will suffer particularly large costs from climate change. Because of the limited
ability to pay of the poor, and the already low amenity value of these locations,
the fall in observed prices in these locales will be smaller than that observed in
the case of homogeneous households—and smaller than the average household’s
willingness to pay to avoid climate change. Another way of saying this is that
the middle class don’t have to place large bids in order to outbid the poor for
houses in safer cities. Income heterogeneity at both the upper and lower ends
will thus serve to underestimate the average costs of climate change.
Returning to the quasi linear utility case, the possibility of heterogeneity means
that the bid function for an individual of type h in city i for a home in city j
must be modified:
(5) pij = pi + u(aj ) − u(ai ) − (E[δj ] − E[δi ]) − (1 − ρh ) (E[κj ] − E[κi ]) − µ
Self-protection against the risk of climate change provides a source for the neutrality result. In the extreme, a Miami resident with the ability to perfectly
self-protect will exhibit no change in their willingness to pay for living in a risky
city so long as its amenities are unaffected. Even in the face of seemingly extreme climate catastrophes, a Miami filled with such households will retain its
initial price. A Denverite with no self-protection abilities will reduce her bid
for Miami real estate one-for-one with the change in expected losses from catastrophic shocks. And indeed, they—like the econometrician—will be surprised to
see that Miami residents with high self-protection show no inclination to leave
nor to pay less to remain in Miami.
Finally, endogenous localized social capital provides a third source for the neutrality result. The presence of the moving cost—our stand-in for the endogenous formation city-specific social capital—induces a wedge between the willingness to pay of the marginal resident of Miami and the marginal non-resident
8 If the rich face meaningful risk of death, they will retreat to less-risky cities and leave the
poor to enjoy the amenities in riskier cities. Avoiding risky cities is a type of input in the
health and safety production function, and in this case the rich will place a greater value on
avoiding risk (Hall and Jones, 2007).
9 Of course, the best amenities might be in a low-risk city. If the unconditional distribution
of disaster risk across cities is the same as its distribution conditional on amenity values, then
rich will choose high-amenity but low-risk areas. It is the correlation of amenities (beaches)
with risks (hurricanes) that leads to an underestimation of willingness to pay to avoid climate
risk.

10

who settles in an alternative locale. Before settling on cities, the two marginal
households—one just within the margin and one just outside—have nearly identical bids for Miami property. The winning bidder values Miami at price pm
and so the household that just misses out values it at pm − ∆. Upon settling
into Miami and its next best alternative, respectively, the marginal Miami resident and non-resident see their bids drift apart: due to the cost of moving, the
non-resident would now bid only pm − ∆ − µ while the resident would rather
pay pm + ∆ than move to their next-best alternative.
The moving cost µ could also be interpreted as the cost of locating in any
except the household’s “preferred” city, where this preference is exogenously
determined. For instance, some residents of Miami prefer it due to its proximity
to other nearby countries, a plausible interpretation of the sizable populations
of Cubans, Colombians, and Venezuelans that live in the area. A similar wedge
would open in this case, and could justify the continued increase in population
that Miami has seen despite the discovery of climate change.
Whether due to endogenous networks or exogenous preference, the moving cost
produces a wedge between the bid functions of the marginal resident and and
the marginal non-resident. This wedge between residents and non-residents
implies that, so long as the increase in the (future, uncertain) costs of climate
catastrophes are smaller than the (immediate, guaranteed) costs of moving and
establishing a new social network, Miami residents may rationally choose to
remain rather than to move.

5

Three Extensions

In this section, we sketch three extensions of the model that merit future research. In our basic model, a fixed supply of land meant that the only observable
outcome variable was relative prices, and an endowment economy meant that
the only actors were households. These extensions relax these strict assumptions
and explore the consequences, while maintaining the core intuition that sorting
by heterogeneous agents might limit the observed responses of real estate prices,
wages, and migration to climate shocks.
First, consider the case of introducing a national government that engages in
coastal maintenance, provides public goods and reimburses homeowners for
some portion of catastrophic losses. To simplify our analysis, we have abstracted
away from introducing governmental social insurance, such as FEMA, to protect
at-risk cities using federal tax revenue.10 At first glance such spatial subsidies
create a spatial moral hazard effect as the federal government is implicitly subsidizing risk taking by those who love coastal locations.11 In our model, there is
10 Popular

Flood Insurance Law Is Target of Both Political Parties
et al. (2006) discuss the interaction between government place based investments
and household locational choice. In their model, multiple equilibria emerge as the government
is more likely to build seawalls if more people are expected to live there and more people will
11 Kousky

11

a subset of the population who inelastically demand to continue to live in at-risk
cities. This willingness to pay is due to idiosyncratic matching of households’
preferences to the attributes of different locations and due to the endogenous
networks built up over time, which the household knows it will lose if it moves
away. In this sense, Miami solves a co-ordination problem: despite the fact
that the city faces new risk its total package of attributes compensates for the
risk and keeps the rational household in place. In such a setting, the benevolent government will recognize that those who remain are more “victims” than
opportunists.
Within the model, the discovery of the catastrophic shock process comes as
truly “new news”: it’s a zero-probability event against which agents cannot have
insured themselves. Once discovered, agents are free to move elsewhere to avoid
future climate change—if they can find a willing trading partner, a possibility
that can only arise with population heterogeneity. For Miami, climate change
will not induce in-migration as the city is now a worse prospect than before; at
the same time infra-marginal residents may not wish to leave and, in any case,
will find few willing partners in a sale. These facts suggest a role for a national
government to invest in place-specific subsidies—whether defensive protections
like sea walls or transfers in the event of a catastrophe—for Miami and, so long
as the subsidy is not too great, there is no concern of moral hazard.
A second modification to the model would be the introduction of endogenous
local housing supply. Our formal model focuses on the housing demand side and
simply fixes an inelastic housing supply, which implies that any change in the
marginal willingness to pay would cause an immediate change in prices. This
price sensitivity gives substance to our neutrality results. However, endogeneity
of housing supply also enables the possibility of net population changes in highrisk and low-risk locations—an additional source of data to the researcher.
Even with endogenous housing supply, the durability of housing capital will
nevertheless yield a kinked housing supply curve as presented in Glaeser and
Gyourko (2005). They argue that in a city such as Detroit the durability of
housing means that there is a fixed supply of existing older homes (built when
Detroit was the car capital of the world) yielding a vertical supply curve up to
the point where the price of housing exceeds the marginal cost to developers of
building new housing. In this endogenous-housing extension to our model, any
Miami resident who prefers to leave following the discovery of the catastrophic
shock process would be able to do so. As in the Detroit of the Glaeser and
Gyourko (2005) model, durable housing capital will remain in place despite
these evacuees: supply is downwardly inelastic as before, and thus as before
prices in Miami are sensitive to any decrease in willingness to pay.
A final extension of the model would be to introduce local labor markets in
which firms hire workers, rent land, and invest in city-specific capital. Firms
might face different self-protection costs than households, and might expect
move to an area where sea walls are expected to be built.

12

different reimbursement from government programs. However, firms would also
sort spatially: service-sector firms with low capital requirements (like households
with effective self-protection) may face a negligible penalty from locating in
Miami. This sectoral sorting would tend to keep wages high in Miami despite
climate risks to Miami’s capital goods. Furthermore, high-amenity but risky
locales may specialize in attracting wealthy retirees who earn capital income
from safer regions. This will create a small but well-compensated labor pool in
high-amenity at-risk areas. In all of these cases, the inclusion of firms generates
additional dimensions along which sorting acts to minimize the observed changes
in at-risk locales. Conversely, capital-intensive firms may follow their workers
to at-risk locales. In this case, the cost of insuring their capital will lower the
wage offers in risky areas.

6

Empirical Implications for Hedonic Research
Measuring Disaster Capitalization

Economists often estimate dynamic hedonic models to test if real estate prices
change in response to changes in local public goods such as air quality improvements (Chay and Greenstone, 2005), Superfund site cleanups (Greenstone and
Gallagher, 2008; Gamper-Rabindran and Timmins, 2011), and improvements in
urban transport infrastructure (Zheng and Kahn, 2013). Our model of emerging
climate risk, where the discovery of this risk is new news to households, lends
itself to an event study framework. We now seek to position our paper’s findings
within this existing literature.
Consider the following hedonic regression, where φi is a continuous variable that
indexes susceptibility to climate risk. In particular, φi is the threshold level of
CO2 that will trigger a transition from the low- to the high-risk state in city i.
For example, suppose that φM iami = 450ppm. When the level of atmospheric
CO2 reaches 450 ppm, the risk and severity of climate disaster will undergo a
one-time increase from their current levels. For simplicity, suppose that all cities
face identical initial climate risk, that φi triggers an identical increase in disaster
risk for all cities, and that the interest rate is constant.12 The only variation
across cities comes from the timing of the transition, which is governed by φi ;
a “risky” city is therefore one that will experience climate change sooner than
later.
Suppose the econometrician observes sales prices for a large sample of homes
with the same physical structure scattered across a range of cities over many
year. The econometrician observes each city’s quality of life attributes and
each city’s susceptibility to climate disaster as indexed by φi . However, the
econometrician does not observe household characteristics of those buying and
12 Within our model, these simplifications amount to a common κ for all cities before climate
change, a new (but still common) κ after, and the previous assumption of quasilinear utility.

13

selling houses.13 Finally, we denote by τ the year of climate change discovery,
and 1τ (t) takes the value 1 only for the year τ . Under these assumptions, we
can write down an event study regression model, where the change in price
upon the discovery of climate change is regressed upon the index of climate risk
suspectibility.
(6)

P riceh,i,t − P riceh,i,t−1 = a × Zi + b × 1τ (t) × φi + Uh,i,t

In this regression, b represents the compensating differential for a higher threshold for climate change. In the context of our model with homogeneous households, the average person in the economy would be willing to pay b to avoid the
extra maintenance costs and the marginal increase in the death risk associated
with a lower threshold of φi —that is, associated with additional time spent under the high-risk climate regime. The regression coefficient b should reflect the
payment that keeps her just indifferent in expected lifetime utility.
Now consider the case in which people differ with respect to their incomes,
their self-protection capabilities, and their localized social capital. Suppose that
there are two types of cities, coastal (e.g., Miami) and inland (Denver) where
the threshold φi is smaller in coastal cities. The price of coastal real estate is
fixed by the willingness to pay of the marginal coastal resident. In the extreme
case of self-protection in which the marginal coastal resident can perfectly offset
climate disasters, the marginal bid for coastal real estate would not change at
all upon the discovery of climate change and the researcher would thus recover
an estimate of zero for b and conclude that markets are not pricing risk. This
is the empirical counterpart to the neutrality result given in Proposition 1.
Conversely, if the marginal Miami resident has no self-protection abilities, then
the price of Miami real estate will fall and the researcher will conclude that
Miami residents are suffering large climate-triggered losses—even if the typical
Miami resident is a self-protector who faces limited utility costs from climate
change. In this case, the unobserved variation in the ability to self protect
against catastrophic risks will create the appearance that coastal households
are exposing themselves to a high degree of risk, relative to the price discount
they receive for this exposure. These results have a similar logic as that of
Shogren and Stamland (2002, 2005) who focused on what can be inferred from
conventional value of a statistical life hedonic wage regressions in the presence
of population essential heterogeneity (Heckman et al., 2006).
Populations may also differ in unobserved location-specific demand. This possibility further complicates the interpretation of the hedonic real estate regression
presented above. Households that build valuable city-specific social networks
may lose access to this social capital if they leave, and even the marginal coastal
household may have a discontinuous willingness to pay for their current city relative to the alternatives. When climate change is discovered, the increased
13 We are assuming that households are buying and selling homes (perhaps because of life
cycle considerations) and this generates the sales data that the econometrician observes.

14

climatic shocks will represent an expected cost to these households and yet the
marginal coastal household may choose to remain if the economic rents exceed
the climatic losses.14 In this case, the dependent variable—the price change of
real estate—does not provide any insight into the underlying demand curve, nor
the changing welfare of the residents of at-risk cities in light of climate change.
A similar case emerges when income heterogeneity leads the extremely wealthy
to sort into Miami due to its high amenity value. After accounting for the
increased costs of climate catastrophes, the very rich nevertheless have a higher
marginal utility from amenities than from consumption. In the high-income
limit, climate change therefore has no effect on their bid functions for Miami
real estate. As in the case of endogenous social networks, the fact that prices do
not change after the advent of climate change does not necessarily imply that
underlying welfare is unchanged.
These examples show that inferences to be drawn from observations of risk
capitalization are limited, but the regressions are not useless: the bid of the
marginal resident places bounds on costs of climate change for both residents
and non-residents. The marginal willingness to pay to avoid the risks of coastal
cities can thus be interpreted as an upper bound for the willingness to pay for
a typical resident, and a lower-bound for the typical non-resident.
Consider again the case with two city types: coastal and inland. The initial
change in prices upon the discovery of climate change will produce upper and
lower bounds for the willingness to pay to avoid risk for coastal and inland
residents, respectively. After discovery, the prices of both cities will decline
over time as the onset of climate change nears due to the dwindling number of
“low-risk” periods; these price changes could tighten the bounds on willingness
to pay. The rates of price change in the two city types may change again after
coastal cities transition to high risk,15 providing additional information, and the
eventual relative prices after all cities have transitioned to high-risk may further
illuminate the scope of these bounds.

7

Conclusion

Climate change is likely to pose different costs on different cities. Coastal cities
and cities located close to rivers will face greater flood risk while other cities such
as Phoenix may face extreme summer heat. Such dynamics in location specific
attributes suggests that forward-looking asset markets such as real estate should
reflect the present discounted value of these relative risks.
14 Due to their status as port cities and the historical (and ongoing) roles as entry points
for immigrants, many coastal cities feature large ethnic enclaves that generate valuable social capital for major population segments. This suggests that coastal cities, differentially
susceptible to climate change, may also have populations with differentially strong social ties.
15 For instance, due to high-income individuals evacuating high-amenity coastal cities only
after they transition to high-risk.

15

In this paper, we have introduced an equilibrium system of cities model in
which households hold common expectations of spatial variation in the risks
that different cities face. We document that a standard event study research
design will yield very different estimates of the risk premium for being exposed
to extra climate change risk depending on the degree of household heterogeneity.
While in standard asset pricing, asset risk contains no idiosyncratic component
and the CAPM style model captures the risk premium, in the case of housing—
one’s home bundles both an asset’s rate of return and one’s access to a specific
city’s attributes and to the social connections one has built in that location.
This idiosyncratic match (either on unobserved tastes or endogenously built up
social capital) creates a wedge between how an insider values remaining in the
area versus how others in the society value the asset (Miami) now that the new
news about climate change is common knowledge. We document that owners
of Miami real estate are now faced with abnormally high risks, but—unlike in
the case of risky equity—they do not appear to receive a large compensation for
bearing this risk.
The model has implications for event study style hedonic real estate research. In
the presence of the three dimensions of heterogeneity that we have presented, an
empirical researcher’s reduced form estimate of risk capitalization will provide
bounds on the willingness to pay for avoiding new risks (Bajari and Benkard,
2005), and further changes in relative prices may narrow these bounds. Our
findings highlight the key role of explicitly modeling the residential sorting process (Kuminoff et al., 2013).

16

References
Albouy, D., Graf, W., Kellogg, R., and Wolff, H. (2013). Climate Amenities, Climate Change, and American Quality of Life. Working Paper 18925, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Bajari, P. and Benkard, C. L. (2005). Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous
Consumers and Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach.
Journal of Political Economy, 113(6):1239–1276.
Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3):823–866.
Barro, R. J. (2013). Environmental Protection, Rare Disasters, and Discount
Rates. Working Paper 19258, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chay, K. Y. and Greenstone, M. (2005). Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence
from the Housing Market. Journal of Political Economy, 113(2):376–424.
Costello, C. J., Neubert, M. G., Polasky, S. A., and Solow, A. R. (2010).
Bounded Uncertainty and Climate Change Economics. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107(18):8108–8110.
Costinot, A., Donaldson, D., and Smith, C. (2012). Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence
from a 9 Million-Field Partition of the Earth. Manuscript.
Desmet, K. and Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2013). On the Spatial Economic Impact of
Global Warming. Manuscript.
Ehrlich, I. and Becker, G. S. (1972). Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and
Self-Protection. The Journal of Political Economy, pages 623–648.
Gamper-Rabindran, S. and Timmins, C. (2011). Hazardous Waste Cleanup,
Neighborhood Gentrification, and Environmental Justice: Evidence from
Restricted Access Census Block Data. The American Economic Review,
101(3):620–624.
Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2005). Urban Decline and Durable Housing.
Journal of Political Economy, 113(2):345–375.
Goodell, J. (2013).
Goodbye, Miami.
http://www.rollingstone.com/
politics/news/why-the-city-of-miami-is-doomed-to-drown-20130620.
[Online; accessed 3/21/2014].
Greenstone, M. and Gallagher, J. (2008). Does Hazardous Waste Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market and the Superfund Program. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123(3):951–1003.
Hall, R. E. and Jones, C. I. (2007). The Value of Life and the Rise in Health
Spending. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):39–72.
17

Heckman, J. J., Urzua, S., and Vytlacil, E. (2006). Understanding Instrumental
Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity. The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 88(3):389–432.
Kahn, M. E. (2005). The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of Income, Geography, and Institutions. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
87(2):pp. 271–284.
Kahn, M. E. (2009). Urban Growth and Climate Change. Annual Review of
Resource Econonomics, 1(1):333–350.
Kanemoto, Y. (1988). Hedonic Prices and the Benefits of Public Projects.
Econometrica, pages 981–989.
Knabb, R. D., Rhome, J. R., and Brown, D. P. (2005). Tropical Cyclone Report. Hurricane Katrina. http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/pdf/TCR-AL122005_
Katrina.pdf. [Online; accessed 3/21/2014].
Kousky, C., Luttmer, E. F., and Zeckhauser, R. J. (2006). Private Investment
and Government Protection. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 33(1-2):73–
100.
Krupka, D. J. (2009). Location-Specific Human Capital, Location Choice, and
Amenity Demand. Journal of Regional Science, 49(5):833–854.
Kuminoff, N. V. and Pope, J. C. (2014). Do ‘Capitalization Effects’ for Public Goods Reveal the Public’s Willingness to Pay? International Economic
Review. Forthcoming.
Kuminoff, N. V., Smith, V. K., and Timmins, C. (2013). The New Economics of
Equilibrium Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using HousingMarkets. Journal
of Economic Literature, 51(4):1007–1062.
Lind, R. C. (1973). Spatial Equilibrium, the Theory of Rents, and the Measurement of Benefits from Public Programs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
87(2):188–207.
Miami-Dade County (2010).
GreenPrint.
http://www.miamidade.gov/
greenprint/pdf/plan.pdf. [Online; accessed 3/21/2014].
Mulvihill, G. (2013). Tallying Hurricane Sandy Deaths and Damage a Complex Task for Officials. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/10/25/
hurricane-sandy-deaths_n_4164333.html. [Online; accessed 3/21/2014].
Newman,
A. (2012).
Hurricane Sandy vs. Hurricane Katrina.
http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/11/27/
hurricane-sandy-vs-hurricane-katrina/?_php=true&_type=blogs&
_r=0. [Online; accessed 3/21/2014].

18

Nordhaus, W. D. and Yang, Z. (1996). A Regional Dynamic GeneralEquilibrium Model of Alternative Climate-Change Strategies. American Economic Review, 86(4):741–765.
Pindyck, R. S. (2013). Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?
Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3):860–872.
Pindyck, R. S. and Wang, N. (2013). The Economic and Policy Consequences of
Catastrophes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4):306–39.
Rappaport, J. and Sachs, J. D. (2003). The United States as a Coastal Nation.
Journal of Economic Growth, 8(1):5–46.
Roback, J. (1982). Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. The Journal of
Political Economy, 90(6):1257–1278.
Rosen, S. (1979). Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life. Current Issues
in Urban Economics, 3.
Rosen, S. (2002). Markets and Diversity. American Economic Review, 92(1):1–
15.
Shogren, J. and Stamland, T. (2002). Skill and the Value of Life. Journal of
Political Economy, 110(5):1168–1173.
Shogren, J. F. and Crocker, T. D. (1991). Risk, Self-Protection, and Ex Ante
Economic Value. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
20(1):1–15.
Shogren, J. F. and Stamland, T. (2005). Self-Protection and Value of Statistical
Life Estimation. Land Economics, 81(1):100–113.
Starrett, D. A. (1981). Land Value Capitalization in Local Public Finance. The
Journal of Political Economy, pages 306–327.
Van Landingham, M. J. (2007). Murder Rates in New Orleans, La, 2004–2006.
American Journal of Public Health, 97(9):1614–1616.
Weitzman, M. L. (2009). On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic Climate Change. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1):1–19.
Weitzman, M. L. (2011). Fat-Tailed Uncertainty in the Economics of Catastrophic Climate Change. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
5(2):275–292.
Zheng, S. and Kahn, M. E. (2013). Does Government Investment in Local Public
Goods Spur Gentrification? Evidence from Beijing. Real Estate Economics,
41(1):1–28.

19

A

Appendix

Figure 1: Home price indices for Miami and Denver.

20

