NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOLDUP BY JUNIOR CLAIMHOLDERS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE MORTGAGE MARKET
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Souphala Chomsisengphet
Yan Zhang
Working Paper 20015
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20015

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014, Revised November 2017

Previously circulated as "Second Liens and the Holdup Problem in Mortgage Renegotiation." The
authors would like to thank Fredrik Andersson, Gadi Barlevy, Ted Durant, Ronel Elul, Karen
Furst, Dennis Glennon, Bruce Krueger, Mark Levonian, Amit Seru, and seminar participants at
the OCC, FIRS, and AREUEA (Chicago) for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and
Yan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Holdup by Junior Claimholders: Evidence from the Mortgage Market
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Yan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 20015
March 2014, Revised November 2017
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
When borrowers are delinquent, senior debtholders prefer liquidation whereas junior debtholders
prefer to maintain their option value by delaying resolution or modifying the loan. In the
mortgage market, a conflict of interest (“holdup”) arises when servicers of securitized senior liens
are also the owners of the junior liens on the same property. We show that holdup servicers are
able to delay action on the first-lien mortgage. When they do act, servicers are more likely to
choose resolutions that maintain their option value, favoring modification and soft foreclosures
over outright foreclosures. Holdup behavior is more likely to result in borrower self-curing.

Sumit Agarwal
McDonough School of Business
Room 427
Georgetown University
3700 O Street NW
Washington, DC 20057
ushakri@yahoo.com
Gene Amromin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
gamromin@frbchi.org
Itzhak Ben-David
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

Souphala Chomsisengphet
Economics Department
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
400 7th Street SW
Washington, DC 20219
souphala.chomsisengphet@occ.treas.gov
Yan Zhang
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
250 E Street, SW
Washington D.C. 20219
Yan.Zhang@occ.treas.gov

1

Introduction
Conflicts between claimholders at times of borrower delinquency are an important problem

in corporate finance. In its simplest form, senior debt holders enjoy the absolute priority rule and
are typically quick to liquidate assets because their upside in renegotiating the debt is limited. By
contrast, junior debt and equity holders are interested in restructuring obligations of a delinquent
borrower because they can benefit from the option value embedded in borrower’s continued
operations (Warner 1977, White 1983, Bolton and Scharfstein 1996, Ivashina, Iverson, and Smith
2016, among others). The recent boom and bust of the housing market, with its wave of
delinquencies, led to similar conflicts in the mortgage market. Many properties in recent years
have been mortgaged by two loans, often held by two different institutions,1 allowing for different
incentives for liquidation and renegotiations for the first- and second-lien holders.
Addressing delinquent mortgages has been the key component in restoring the health of
the U.S. housing market following the Global Financial Crisis. However, the crisis and its
aftermath exposed substantial deficiencies in loss mitigation practices on the institutional,
practical, and policy-making levels. Despite the importance of such conflicts of interest, few
studies have attempted to provide direct empirical evidence of the existence and quantitative
impact of servicer conflicts related to junior-lien ownership. Both policymakers and mortgage
investors, therefore, would benefit from understanding the potential impact of servicer conflicts of
interest on resolutions of delinquent loans. This information could be used in designing near-term
policy initiatives as well as forward-looking servicing market reforms. For private investors,
assessing these conflicts could help refine the contractual covenants that govern servicer
relationships.

1
The second-lien home equity market rose from less than $200 billion at the beginning of 2000 to a peak of well over
$1 trillion in 2008 (Lee, Mayer, and Tracy 2012). Goodman et al. (2010) report that more than 50% of first-lien
mortgages that have been securitized in the private-label market have at least one junior lien attached to them.

2

While in general first-lien holders have absolute priority over the decision whether to
liquidate a delinquent mortgage, holdup problems may arise in the mortgage market in two main
cases. The first situation occurs in some U.S. states that allow the older lien to have priority. In
those states, refinancing the first lien loan makes it a more recent (younger) loan and thereby makes
it dependent on the willingness of the junior lien loan (that becomes the older lien) to go along
with the refinancing. Consequently, the junior lien (older) can hold up the decision of the more
senior (newer lien). The effects of these laws are studied in Bond, Elul, Garyn, and Musto (2017).
The second holdup scenario, which we study here, arises when the first lien is securitized
but the owner of the second-lien loan services the first-lien mortgage on behalf of the investors.
This ownership and servicing structure is prevalent in about half of our universe of securitized
loans (see also evidence in Engel and McCoy 2011). Since mortgage servicer makes decisions for
the first-lien holder, this structure gives substantial power to junior-lien holders (servicers) to
decide how to mitigate losses on the senior loan (a variant of the classic “holdup problem”).2 Mayer
et al. (2009a), Goodman (2011, 2017), Cordell et al. (2011), and Bond et al. (2017) have all raised
questions about this potential conflict of interest. The issue has received considerable media
coverage and has led to several legislative proposals aimed at disallowing servicing of first-lien
mortgages by entities that own second liens secured by the same property, although none have
been passed.3
Our paper tests for the existence and effects of holdup in the loss resolution process. In
broad terms, “holdup” is defined as any action that benefits a junior-lien holder at the expense of
the more senior claimant. We evaluate the claim that servicers who own second-lien mortgages

2

On one hand, the pooling and servicing agreement (PSA) requires the servicer to act for the benefit of the investors
who own the first lien. On the other hand, some actions that are optimal from the first-lien owners’ perspective may
be suboptimal to the servicer when that servicer is the owner of the second-lien loan.
3
See, for example, Gretchen Morgenson, “In This Play, One Role is Enough,” New York Times, August 14, 2010, and
Alex Ulam, “Why Second-lien Loans Remain a Worry,” American Banker, May 2, 2011.

3

while servicing the first lien on behalf of outside investors (“holdup servicers”) have a conflict of
interest and therefore may influence the choice of loss mitigation actions to their advantage. Our
dataset of matched senior and junior-lien claims and their loss mitigation actions in the event of
delinquency allows us to compare these “holdup servicer” mortgages to control groups in which
such a conflict of interest is likely to be less intense.
We identify potential holdups by using a unique dataset from the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (OCC) that matches the first and second liens by the exact property address. The
group of mortgages with potential holdups by the junior claimant contains pairs of first- and
second-lien mortgages in which (1) the first lien is securitized and delinquent and (2) the servicer
of the first-lien is also the owner of the second-lien mortgage. A holdup may arise because loss
resolution decisions on the first-lien mortgage are made by a servicer who is also the owner of the
second-lien mortgage. We compare this set of mortgages to a similar group of mortgages in which
the servicer of the first-lien mortgage and the owner of the second lien are separate entities,
eliminating the incentive for holdup.4
We document strong evidence that holdup servicers delay loss mitigation actions on firstlien mortgages. In the group that has the potential for holdup, the probability of no action increases
by 2 to 4 percentage points (4% to 9% in relative terms) during the first six months following
delinquency. This effect remains as strong for a longer 12-month horizon, and it is robust to several
sample refinements.
Among the mortgages on which servicers took action, we find that holdup is associated
with a lower probability of liquidation and a higher probability of modification—actions that

4

We note that the second-lien holder in the non-holdup group could hold up the modification or refinancing of the
first lien by refusing to resubordinate its claim to the new first-lien loan (see evidence in Bond, Elul, Garyn, and Musto
2017). This holdup problem differs from the one we consider in this paper, which results from having the same servicer
servicing the first- and second-lien loans.

4

benefit junior claimants. For the six-month horizon, we find that holdup reduces the likelihood of
liquidation by 2 to 4 percentage points (3% to 5% in relative terms). This effect remains strong at
the 12-month horizon and is particularly pronounced in a subsample of second liens that remain
current on their payments. We also find somewhat higher modification rates among holdup
servicers when the first-lien loan was securitized by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)
such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Looking within each set of loss mitigation actions, we find that holdup servicers prefer
actions that maintain their option value. In the case of liquidation, they are more likely to choose
“soft foreclosure” actions, such as a short sale or deed-in-lieu transaction, rather than an outright
foreclosure. This choice arguably results in greater recovery values for the junior claims. When
modification is chosen, servicers are more likely to modify the attendant second liens as well,
although the relative leniency of modification terms on the second liens is similar to that offered
by the non-holdup servicers.
An important question is whether actions (or inactions) by holdup servicers have a related
effect on borrowers. To answer it, we evaluate the relationship between the incentive to hold up
and the performance of first- and second-lien loans. First-lien loans securitized by the GSEs and
serviced by holdup servicers are more likely to become current in the absence of any action
compared with those serviced by non-holdup servicers, suggesting that holdup servicers are more
likely to identify borrowers that could self-cure. We also find that in holdup situations, secondlien loans are more likely to remain performing, which is consistent with the idea that holdup
servicers encourage second-lien borrowers to stay current, potentially in exchange for avoiding
liquidation of their first-lien loan.
Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, recent studies have found that
securitization could impede renegotiation of delinquent loans (Piskorski et al. 2010, Agarwal et al.
5

2011a, Zhang 2013): Securitized loans exhibit lower rates of renegotiation and higher rates of
liquidation.5 However, these studies do not identify a specific channel through which the agency
frictions resulting from separation of ownership and control in securitization affect loss mitigation
actions. Through our unique dataset, we are able to shed light on whether the frictions are
exacerbated if the controlling entity (the servicer) also owns an accompanying second-lien note on
the delinquent property.
Second, our work is related to the growing body of work that seeks to explain the recent
financial crisis and drivers of mortgage foreclosures (e.g., Keys et al. 2010, Mian and Sufi 2009,
Campbell et al. 2011, Mayer et al. 2009b, Agarwal et al. 2011b, Agarwal et al. 2011c, Elul 2011).
Our paper adds to the literature by documenting the important role of second liens in mortgage
foreclosures and renegotiation.

2

Institutional Background
The rapid expansion of the securitization market in the early 2000s led several financial

institutions (some of which are banks) to specialize in both mortgage origination and servicing.
Most first-lien mortgages that were originated were securitized either by GSEs, like Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac, or in private label securitizations (PLS) (Lee, Mayer, and Tracy 2012). The
products of securitization, mortgage-backed securities (MBSs), often end up on the balance sheets
of passive investors, such as banks, insurance companies, or pension funds. The actual mortgages
are owned by a trust and serviced by a servicer that collects the interest and principal payments
and communicates with the homeowners. In the case of delinquency, the servicer will also manage
the loss mitigation procedure. Servicers are bound by the Pooling and Servicing Agreement (PSA)

5

Several commentators have argued that securitization does not fully explain the lack of modifications, especially
since the government introduced the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP), which should have made
modifications easier (Agarwal et al. 2017).

6

to represent the best interests of the claimants of the trust, the MBS holders. The market evolved
in a way that first-lien mortgages were often securitized and sold to investors, and second-lien
mortgages were kept on the originators’ balance sheets. In our dataset, the owner of the secondlien claim is also the servicer of the first-lien claim. In this scenario, the junior creditor, in its role
as servicer, makes loss mitigation decisions for the dispersed senior creditors.
Servicers have several tools for addressing homeowner delinquency (see Agarwal et al.
2011a). The most common broad tool is liquidation. Liquidation can come through foreclosure, a
judicial liquidation process that typically takes 12-24 months. Alternatively, servicers can agree
with homeowners on a short sale or a deed-in-lieu. In a short sale, the homeowner puts the property
up for sale and gives most of the proceeds to the lender (which is the mortgage trust) in a prespecified manner. In a deed-in-lieu, the homeowner peacefully transfers the property to the lender
without going through a judicial foreclosure process. Because delinquency is often associated with
a decline in the value of the home, especially during the financial crisis of 2008, liquidation
procedures in most cases involve a significant loss relative to the unpaid balance of loans secured
by the property.
The servicer has several options other than liquidation. The servicer can choose deferral,
abstaining from initiating a foreclosure and implicitly giving the homeowner more time to selfcure. Alternatively, the servicer can engage the borrower and agree on a modification of the
mortgages. These agreements often involve extending the term of the loan, reducing the interest,
and at times balance forbearance.
When more than one creditor is involved, i.e., a senior and a junior creditor, the different
loss mitigation actions can lead to wealth transfers between the different classes of creditors. In
general, senior creditors are the first to be paid in a liquidation. Thus, they favor this route. Junior
creditors, however, recoup little of their owed debt balance in the process of liquidation. The reason
7

is that the leverage of a typical first-lien mortgage is very high (typically 80% loan-to-value
(LTV)). Therefore, the second-lien finances the slice beyond the first-lien leverage (e.g., between
80% and 100% LTV). Any small change in the value of the house reduces the recoverable value
of the second-lien claim. Furthermore, since borrowers often default when they are deep
underwater, they enter the loss-mitigation system when the value of the junior claim is nearly- or
fully-eliminated.
Not surprisingly, junior creditors prefer loss mitigation actions that allow them to realize
the option value, such as deferral or modification. For them, there is little downside and much
upside to giving the borrower more time to find the resources to become current. In contrast, senior
creditors gain little from an action that leads to an increase in the value of the collateral beyond
the face value of their claim. Thus, they prefer to liquidate quickly and let go of the option value.
Holdup servicers’ incentives could affect the likelihood of both liquidation and
modification. In the case of foreclosures, proceeds from auction sales satisfy the claims of seniorlien holders before any residual is turned over to junior claimants. Because this residual is often
small or nonexistent, servicers that own second liens have no incentive to aggressively pursue
foreclosure and extinguish their liens for little in return.6 In the case of non-foreclosure
liquidations—deeds-in-lieu and short sales—the servicer does not automatically have to extinguish
the second lien, but they need to resolve it in some fashion for the transaction to proceed. Typically,
in approving a pre-foreclosure liquidation, the holdup servicer effectively converts its second-lien
loan into an unsecured claim, akin to a credit card balance. By doing so, the second-lien holder
also gives up the value of receiving a payment in return for releasing its lien (Been et al. 2012).

6

Eliminating secured interest in the property (the lien) does not necessarily annul the lender’s claim for repayment
(the promissory note). The ability of a junior-lien lender to pursue collection on the now unsecured debt is governed
by state law. For instance, in California, a junior-lien loan that was used to help finance the purchase of the property
cannot be collected once the lien is eliminated in foreclosure. However, lenders retain the right to attempt collection
on other junior-lien loans.

8

This action also provides relatively little incentive for the second-lien owner/servicer to trigger the
liquidation process (unless the second lien is also seriously delinquent and the owner/servicer has
already recognized it as a loss).
In loan modification cases, second liens present a particularly thorny problem.7 On the one
hand, junior-lien holders have a strong incentive to modify the first lien and attain a stronger
position for their junior claim. Modification of the first lien without any adjustment to the junior
lien would benefit the junior claimants because the borrower’s improved financial position frees
up additional cash flows to the second-lien holders. However, many PSAs that govern the
relationship between loan servicers and investors make it hard to modify the first-lien mortgage
unless the second-lien holder resubordinates its claim on it (see e.g., McCoy 2012, Cordell et al.
2011, Pinedo and Baumgardner 2009).8 The first-lien holders are generally reluctant to agree to a
modification that leaves the junior claim intact, because lien priority dictates that junior claimants
bear the loss first. Similarly, junior debt holders are not willing to simply extinguish their claims
and allow modification to proceed, because there is always a chance that the borrower will become
current on the delinquent loan or that collateral value will rise high enough to yield a positive
return in the event of foreclosure. The resulting stalemate might be all the more pronounced when
the second-lien holder is also the party determining when, whether, and how to proceed with a
specific set of loss mitigation actions. Indeed, servicers are not obligated to modify second liens
at all.9

7

See Bond et al. (2017) for an extensive analysis of the second-lien holdup problem in the context of mortgage
refinancing.
8
Most legal analysis suggests that modifications of first-lien loans is highly unlikely to trigger loss of seniority (Been
at al., 2012). However, because the case law has not been fully settled, first-lien holders generally require second-lien
holders to agree to subordinate their claims prior to approving modification (McCoy 2012).
9
Under the HAMP Second Lien (2MP) program, servicers of second liens are given financial incentives to modify
their claims on a pari passu basis with first-lien modifications: The second lien is modified in exactly the same fashion
as the first-lien loan.

9

Thus, the second-lien claimant has an incentive to “hold up” any resolution (modification
or liquidation) of the mortgage unless it can recover some price above the true value of its claim.
The potential for holdup is especially strong when the first lien is securitized, because the
ownership structure of the first-claim holders would be dispersed, which significantly hampers
negotiations between first- and second-lien holders. Mayer et al. (2009a) discuss this possibility
and propose an optimal loan modification strategy.10

3

Data

3.1

Source and Address Matching for First-Lien Mortgages and Home Equity Loans
Our objective is to compare loss mitigation actions in two groups of mortgage pairs (first-

and second liens on the same property) in which the first lien is delinquent. We construct our
sample using three raw data sources.
The first dataset is OCC Mortgage Metrics (MM), which collects data from 14 large banks
that service about 56 million (64%) first-lien mortgages in the United States (see Figure 1 for the
distribution of delinquent mortgages per servicer). This dataset records various loan attributes as
well as precise loss mitigation and performance outcomes beginning in January 2008. We
condition the MM dataset to include loans that were securitized either by the GSEs or in private
placements. This measure adds to our confidence that we are looking at similar loans (e.g., exposed
to similar informational asymmetries) when testing the influence of holdup servicers on loss
mitigation actions. This data source has several advantages over existing datasets on mortgage
performance, such as McDash, Loan Performance, and BlackBox. First, the existing datasets only

10
Mayer et al. (2009a) propose a solution to the holdup problem: providing a fee to the second-lien holder to relinquish
its control on the modification of the first lien. Beyond the mortgage market, a vast literature has suggested possible
solutions to the holdup problem in more general settings (see Mailath and Postelwaite 1990, Posner 2005, Armour
and Skeel 2007, and Kominers and Weyl 2011).

10

show whether a second lien on the property was issued at the same time as the first lien. By
contrast, the OCC dataset allows us to match the first and second liens even if the second lien was
issued months or years after the first. Second, the OCC dataset allows us to separately identify
whether the same or a different entity is servicing the first and second liens, in addition to
identifying whether the first lien is being held in the servicer’s portfolio or is securitized. Finally,
we can precisely track outcomes such as foreclosures and modifications in the OCC data, but the
other datasets require some of the outcomes to be imputed.
The second dataset is the OCC Home Equity (HE) database, which contains about 23.2
million second-lien home equity credits (representing about 65% of all home equity credits
outstanding). The HE database coverage starts in May 2008. Similar to MM, the HE database
contains data on a broad spectrum of loan/borrower attributes measured at the time of loan
origination, current measures of loan/borrower attributes, delinquency behavior, and loss
mitigation/workout resolutions.
Our third dataset is the OCC Home Equity Crosswalk (HECW). This dataset allows us to
match the MM with the HE dataset and identify pairs of mortgages that are secured by the same
property. For each home equity account in the dataset from December 2009 through April 2012,
the HECW database allows us to link a second-lien home equity loan to a first-lien mortgage by
matching exact addresses for each loan in a given month. Each record in the HECW database
contains a pair of MM and HE loan numbers, the statement month, and the corresponding ID for
each property address (e.g., 1234 Main Street, City X, State Y, and Zip Code 56789). If multiple
MM loans or HE loans are found for a single property, the HECW database shows multiple records
for that address. For example, if a borrower takes out a first-lien mortgage (loan A), a home equity
loan (loan B), and a home equity line of credit (HELOC, loan C) for his/her home, two records
will be shown: loan A matching with loan B, and then loan A matching with loan C under the same
11

property address ID. The match type of both records would be labeled as having one first-lien
mortgage and many home equity credit lines.
We use the earliest snapshot of HECW data available (December 2009) to construct the
crosswalk between first-lien and junior-lien loans going back to May 2008. By doing so, we obtain
a merged MM and HE dataset with a longer history. Through this process, we are able to extract
about 2.95 million loan-pairs from May 2008 through April 2012 that have a first-lien mortgage
matching only one second-lien loan. These properties account for about 80% of the HECW
properties. For these loan-pairs, there are 126 million monthly first-lien loan statements and 94
million second-lien loan statements.
As we are interested in the response of claimholders to borrower distress, we restrict the
sample to loans that became seriously delinquent after they entered the matched database. In
constructing our sample of distressed loans, we require first-lien loans to be either current or at
most 30 days delinquent when the loan-pair first appears in the data. We then define the loan-pair
as being distressed when the first-lien (MM) loan becomes seriously delinquent (defined as 60
days past due). At this point, the loan-pair enters our analysis sample. Using this definition, we
identify about 0.43 million distressed loan-pairs.

3.2

Empirical Design
To measure the effect of servicer holdup on loss mitigation outcomes, we need to isolate a

group of mortgages in which holdup potentially exists and compare it to a group with a similar set
of characteristics for which holdup does not exist. The mortgages with the potential for holdup
have dispersed ownership of the first-lien claim and are serviced by the second-lien claimholder.
This is a very common arrangement in the mortgage market: Originators of first- and second-lien
mortgages often securitize the first-lien claim and continue to service them, while retaining the
12

second-lien claim on their balance sheets. As discussed above, if indeed there is a holdup problem,
we anticipate that the servicer, who is also the holder of second-lien claim, will make loss
resolution decisions that are favorable to the junior creditor over the senior one. As a shorthand,
we call this group “Holdup.”
Our control group (“Non-holdup”) is composed of pairs of mortgages with similar
characteristics in which favoritism pressure does not exist. The debt structure of mortgages in this
group consists of a first-lien claim that is securitized, and a second-lien claim that is held by a
bank. The difference between the groups is that the first-lien claims for mortgages in the control
group are serviced by a third party (as opposed to by the owner of the second-lien claim). In the
control group, the servicer is presumably primarily concerned with maximizing the value of the
first-lien holders and has no financial interest in the second-lien claims.
A key assumption that we make is that the two groups (holdup and non-holdup) are similar
so that comparison in the loss resolution outcomes is credible. While the assignment of the loans
to owners and servicers is not random, arguably it is uncorrelated with the prospects of the
borrower following default. A similar claim was made in Piskorski et al. (2010) and Agarwal et
al. (2011a), who argued that once loans are delinquent, the informational factors that determined
their securitization status are moot. In the next subsection, we further compare the two groups.

3.3

Summary Statistics
To provide additional comfort that the holdup and non-holdup groups are similar, we

present summary statistics in Table 1. Panel A shows the key borrower and loan characteristics in
the groups controlled by holdup and non-holdup servicers at both the 6- and 12-month horizons.
Borrowers in our sample have mean FICO scores below 600, as would be expected having just
gone through a serious delinquency. More importantly for the design of the study, the entire
13

distribution of FICO scores appears broadly alike for the groups controlled by holdup and nonholdup servicers for both GSE- and PLS-securitized loans. Figure 2 demonstrates this similarity
in a continuous setting of kernel density plots. Panel A of Figure 2 indicates virtually no difference
in the distribution of borrower FICO scores across the groups controlled by holdup and non-holdup
servicers, whether at the time of loan origination or six months following the delinquency, which
is associated with a massive deterioration in credit scores. Furthermore, Panel B of Figure 2 shows
similarities in the distributions of loan-to-value ratios on first-lien loans.
As expected, a larger fraction of mortgages securitized via PLS are classified as lowdocumentation loans compared to GSE-backed loans. Interestingly, for both GSE and PLS loans,
the fraction of low-documentation first-lien mortgages is consistently lower in the group of holdup
servicers. Another notable difference between PLS and GSE mortgages is the extent to which the
second-lien loan is supported by the collateral that would remain after paying off the first lien. PLS
loans have much lower equity cushions, on average, than GSE loans. We stress that this measure
likely substantially overstates the amount of collateral that would be available for the second-lien
holder, because it assumes a no-cost liquidation at the appraised value. Among PLS loans, the
group controlled by holdup servicers shows somewhat lower levels of collateral support for the
second lien.11
Previous studies (Goodman et al. 2011, Lee et al. 2012) have found that a substantial share
of second-lien loans remain current for extended periods after the associated first-lien loans

11

In a separate analysis we analyzed the determinants of the discrepancy in house values (for the same property, at
the time of delinquency) between the reports of first- and second-lien holders. For most properties, there is a substantial
discrepancy in reported home values. For example, the median absolute difference in home values is in the order of
13%. We found that the discrepancy in reported home values is significantly smaller for holdup servicers.
Nevertheless, we find that even in the mortgages serviced by holdup servicer group, there is material discrepancy in
valuations. Finally, fixed effects for servicer identity, month of delinquency, origination year, and state as well as
mortgage characteristics can explain up to 20% of the variation in the discrepancy in reported home values by the two
servicers.

14

become delinquent. This recent phenomenon has been attributed to households’ desire to retain
access to a line of credit at times of economic stress. Such credit sources become more important
when the first-lien mortgage obligation cannot be sustained, leading to degraded credit scores and
subsequent difficulty in initiating new credit lines. Figure 3 corroborates the results of these earlier
studies by summarizing the timing of defaults on senior and junior liens backed by the same
property. Only a small fraction of properties in our sample—8.8% of those with GSE-backed firstlien mortgages and 7.0% of those with PLS first-lien mortgages—record second-lien delinquencies
more than three months before the onset of delinquency on the associated first-lien loan. Using a
symmetric two-month window to define contemporaneous first- and second-lien defaults, we find
that 47.3% of loans in the GSE sample and 49.4% of loans in the PLS sample default
simultaneously on both liens. The striking fact, however, is that about an equal share of borrowers
in the GSE (27.5%) and the PLS (25.1%) samples remain current on their second-lien loan for
more than a year following the default of the associated first-lien mortgage. These values mirror
the Lee et al. (2012) estimates of 20–30 percent, which are based on credit bureau data.
An area of concern in comparing the holdup and non-holdup sample is whether they
contain a different mix of second-lien loans. As mentioned by several studies (notably, Lee et al.
2012), borrower characteristics and subsequent performance substantially differ between closedend second-lien (CES) loans and the more traditional home equity lines of credit (HELOCs). CES
loans are much more likely to have been originated alongside first liens—so-called piggyback
loans—and to have performed similarly to subprime mortgages (especially when they were
piggybacked). In contrast, the majority of HELOCs are originated after the first-lien loan, and their
performance generally resembles that of prime mortgages. Our dataset allows us to identify
HELOCs and CES loans, and to determine whether a given second-lien loan was piggybacked to
the first-lien loan at origination. Panel A shows that the share of HELOCs in the PLS sample
15

serviced by holdup servicers is somewhat higher than in the share serviced by non-holdup
servicers, whereas the two corresponding GSE samples contain roughly equal shares of HELOCs.
However, we find a substantial difference in shares of piggyback loans: In both the GSE and PLS
samples, piggyback loans are more likely to be serviced by holdup servicers. This introduces the
possibility of nonrandom selection into the holdup servicer sample on the basis of variables
observable to the lender but not the econometrician. We evaluate this possibility in our empirical
analysis below.
Because previous research shows that loss mitigation actions are influenced by the type of
state law governing foreclosures (Ghent and Kudlyak 2011), we also compare the distribution of
loans in the two samples across judicial and non-judicial foreclosure states. We find virtually no
difference in the fraction of loans in judicial foreclosure states assigned to holdup and non-holdup
servicers for either type of securitization.
Table 1, Panel B, focuses on the outcome variables: the different loss mitigation
resolutions. The panel summarizes the frequency of different loss mitigation actions for the groups
serviced by holdup servicers and by non-holdup servicers for the 6- and 12-month horizons
following delinquency of the first-lien loan. The panel shows that nearly half of all delinquent
first-lien loans (45.7%) receive no action from their servicers in the first six months. Among those
loans that are acted upon by the servicers, the most common outcome is to be placed into a
foreclosure process (about 33.7% of delinquent first-lien loans). Only a small share (6.5%) of loans
get fully liquidated (i.e., run through the entire foreclosure process or have a short sale/deed-inlieu transaction completed) or modified within the first six months. A similar fraction of delinquent
first-lien loans gets modified. Over a longer 12-month horizon,12 the likelihood of inaction is

12

Loan pairs that are self-cured at the end of the six-month period are removed from the 12-month sample.

16

reduced to about 28%, with the difference approximately equally distributed between liquidations
(voluntary and otherwise) and modifications. During the first six months following delinquency
of the first-lien loan, about 36% of second-lien loans remain current, dropping to about 28% for
the 12-month horizon.
Across groups, we see that those in the holdup group have a somewhat lower incidence of
inaction than those in the non-holdup group. For privately securitized loans, the holdup group has
higher unconditional means for delinquent first-lien mortgages being placed into the foreclosure
process and a lower incidence of modification. The opposite is true for loans securitized by the
GSEs. We also note that second-lien loans in the holdup group are less likely to continue
performing at both time horizons.

4

Empirical Results
Our main empirical tests compare loss mitigation resolutions for loan-pairs in the holdup

and non-holdup samples. First, we test whether holdup servicers are less likely to take a loss
mitigation action. Second, conditional on servicers taking an action, we examine the effects of
holdup on the likelihood of pursuing loan modifications or liquidations (forced and voluntary).
Third, we evaluate various pathways within each of those choices. For liquidated loans, we assess
whether holdup servicers were more likely to engage in voluntary liquidations (short sales and
deeds-in-lieu) that maximized the value of their claims. For modified first-lien loans, we evaluate
actions on their second-lien counterparts, both along the extensive and the intensive margins.
Finally, we look for evidence that servicers’ behavior affected the long-term performance of first
and second loans.

17

4.1

Holdup and No Action
During the recent financial crisis, a surprisingly high fraction of loans had no loss

mitigation action (Agarwal et al. 2011a). In this subsection, we test whether the holdup problem
exacerbates this lack of action. From the perspective of second-lien holders, delaying an action on
the first lien allows the second-lien holder to benefit from the borrower’s potential recovery. Given
that most delinquent borrowers are underwater, an immediate resolution of the first lien has a high
likelihood of wiping out the value of the second lien altogether.13 We therefore predict that the
likelihood of no action will be higher when holdup is possible.
To test this hypothesis, we regress an indicator of whether any loss mitigation action was
undertaken with respect to the delinquent first-lien mortgage on a holdup servicer indicator and a
set of controls. “No action” is defined as having no record of loss mitigation action on file; that is,
the first lien did not enter a modification (trial or permanent), start a foreclosure process, or become
liquidated. We include a large battery of controls.14 We cluster standard errors in all regressions
by state.
Table 2 presents evidence supporting the holdup hypothesis. The table contains several
specifications for regression samples consisting of mortgages in both the holdup and the nonholdup servicer groups. The null hypothesis in these regressions is that servicers, even if they are

13

As mentioned in the introduction, resolving a delinquent first-lien loan through liquidation eliminates the second
lien but not necessarily the promissory note. Resolving such loans through modifications need not impair the second
lien altogether, although PSAs often contain clauses that require concurrent action on second-lien loans.
14
Controls include the following measures captured at the time of first-lien delinquency: an indicator as to whether
the second lien has defaulted, indicators for five FICO score buckets, indicators for buckets of the leverage of the firstlien loan, indicators for buckets of the unpaid balance (in dollars) of the first- and second-lien loans, and the fraction
of the second-lien loan that could be covered by the current value of the house. They also include indicators for
categories of the original terms of the first- and second-lien loans, for whether the first- and second-lien loans had low
documentation, for whether the first-lien loan is an ARM, for whether the first- and second-lien loans are interest-only
loans, for whether the second-lien loan is a HELOC, for whether the second-lien loan is fully drawn, for whether the
second-lien loan is a credit line and is frozen, and for whether the second lien loan is a piggyback loan (i.e., originated
within two months of the origination of the first-lien loan). The controls also include a set of dummies for the
delinquency quarter, the state in which the secured property is located, the identity of the first-lien servicer, and
indicators for the origination year of the first-lien loan.

18

the owners of the second lien (“holdup servicers”), act in the best interest of their clients (the firstlien owners). Therefore, the null postulates no difference between servicers who are owners of the
second-lien mortgage and third-party servicers. Furthermore, one could argue that servicers who
act in the best interest of their clients and happen to be the owners of the second liens should
exhibit quicker action on loss mitigation actions, because there are presumably fewer legal hurdles
within the same organization.
The results support the holdup hypothesis. Table 2 shows that when the same institution
handles the first and second liens, the likelihood of no action is significantly higher. Specifically,
we show results for the 6- and 12-month horizons as well as splits between loans securitized by
GSEs and those with PLSs. In all specifications, the likelihood of no action is higher when holdup
is a possibility. The economic magnitude is large. The unconditional probability of no action
among PLS loans is 49.8% and 31.2% for six and 12 months, respectively. For GSE loans, the
probability of no action is 44.1% and 26.5% for six and 12 months, respectively.15 For PLS loans,
the coefficient on the holdup servicer dummy for the six-month horizon is 4.4 percentage points,
translating into a relative increase in the likelihood of inaction of 8.9%. Over the 12-month horizon,
the coefficient of 3.1 percentage points corresponds to about a 10% increase. The estimates of the
holdup effect for the GSEs point to a 4% (1.7/44.1) and 2.9% (0.8/26.5) higher likelihood of no
action.
Overall, these results show the possibility of a holdup reduces the likelihood of any loss
mitigation action by 3% to 10%.

15

These are weighted averages of the statistics of holdup and non-holdup servicers provided in Table 1, Panel B.

19

4.2

Holdup and No Action: Robustness Checks
We classify servicers of particular mortgages as holdup or non-holdup according to the

identities of the lien owners and servicer at the time of delinquency of the first lien. However, the
time period of our sample is characterized by substantial industry consolidation, with stronger
competitors absorbing firms severely weakened by the financial crisis. If Firm A that services a
first-lien mortgage is acquired by Firm B, which owns the second-lien loan, after the first-lien loan
becomes delinquent, then Firm B could theoretically exercise control over both liens. Yet our
approach will fail to categorize this loan-pair as being subject to potential holdup.16
To examine whether such potential misclassification affected our results, we conduct a
simple robustness check of our results by removing from our sample all of the loan-pairs in which
the servicer of either the first- or the second-lien loan was acquired. Acquired servicers account
for about 36% of our observations. In the remaining sample, no ambiguity exists about which
servicing entity is making loss mitigation decisions and thus no ambiguity exists in identifying
holdup cases.
The results of this exercise are shown in Columns (1) to (3) of Table 2, Panel B. Although
sample sizes are smaller (especially among PLS loans), the holdup loan-pairs continue to be
strongly associated with a higher likelihood of inaction. The magnitudes of the coefficient
estimates remain similar to those obtained using the full sample (Table 2, Panel A). We conclude
that misclassification due to mergers does not materially affect our results.

16
We could have identified holdup situations on the basis of a fixed horizon following sample entry or the merger,
but this strategy presents its own problems. Even though the acquiring entity becomes the de jure owner of both liens
on the date of the merger, the de facto integration of servicing systems and decision-making might take some time and
could vary considerably from merger to merger.

20

As mentioned in the previous subsection, cases in which the second-lien loan continued to
be current were less likely to receive any loss mitigation action on the delinquent first-lien
mortgage. One might expect this effect to be magnified for holdup servicers, because they might
be more aware of the payment status of the second lien and more reluctant to upset the status quo.
To evaluate this possibility, we first examine Table 1, Panel B. The panel shows that the fraction
of second-lien loans that perform at the end of six- or 12-month period is actually higher for nonholdup servicers than for holdup servicers, in contrast to the argument. Furthermore, we restrict
the sample to cases in which the second lien remained current. Once again, we find a strongly
positive coefficient on the holdup dummy (Table 2, Panel B, Columns (4) to (6)). However, the
magnitude of this effect is not larger in the restricted sample either in absolute or relative terms.17
These results lead us to conclude that the reason for the no action by holdup servicers is not tied
to better performance of the second liens that they own.
As discussed earlier, another potential issue is the high prevalence of piggyback secondlien loans among holdup servicers. This finding raises the possibility that the holdup sample could
be different for a variety of unobservable reasons. For example, holdup servicers that issue
piggybacks might be fully aware of the combined LTV of their loans and might thus select a
different subset of borrowers than non-holdup servicers of piggyback loans. Put differently, holdup
servicers of piggyback loans likely have better information about their borrowers, which could
explain the difference in their actions following the default. Moreover, because piggyback loans
are more likely to be originated for the purpose of financing the home purchase (or refinancing),
the ability of the second-lien holder to pursue collection is limited relative to loans used to finance

17

In an alternative specification, we interacted holdup with an indicator of only the first lien being delinquent, and we
got similar results.

21

other consumption. Thus, differences in the frequency of piggyback loans could result in a
different set of observed actions undertaken by servicers.
We check whether the high prevalence of piggyback loans drives our results by repeating
our regressions on samples that exclude loan-pairs in which the second lien is a piggyback. The
results are presented in Columns (7) to (9) of Table 2, Panel B. Again, we find a higher likelihood
of inaction by holdup servicers. The magnitude of the estimates of the holdup effect in the nonpiggyback sample is similar to that of the full sample; hence, our results are not driven by
piggyback loans.
4.3

Holdup and Liquidations
The findings in the previous section suggest that holdup servicers are more likely to delay

or avoid taking any action on delinquent loans. When a loss mitigation action is taken, we expect
holdup servicers to sway the decision in favor of actions that maintain the option value of the junior
claimholder. Specifically, to best maintain the option value, a holdup servicer would choose
modification over liquidation (which means an immediate loss recognition).18
In Table 3, we test this prediction by regressing an indicator for whether a loan is liquidated
or is in the foreclosure process within six or 12 months post-delinquency on the holdup indicator
and the same set of controls used in Table 2. We restrict our sample to loans that went through
some loss mitigation action. Among loans with loss-mitigation actions, the three outcome
categories are liquidation, modification, and refinancing/loan repayment. The results in Columns
(1) to (3) of Table 3, Panel A, show that the six-month likelihood of liquidation or foreclosure of
the first-lien loan is significantly lower—by 2.3 to 4.0 percentage points—among loans for which
holdup is a possibility. This effect is present for both PLS and GSE loans, although it appears to

18

Even if the servicer were still able to pursue collection efforts or if the second-lien loan remained current, the loss
of a lien renders the second-lien loan unsecured, subjecting the lender to higher capital charges.

22

be larger and more persistent for the latter subgroup. (Panel B of Table 3 presents results over a
longer 12-month horizon.) Liquidation is a common loss resolution action (51% to 74% of cases);
therefore, in relative terms, the likelihood of liquidation or foreclosure is 3% to 5% lower. This
result is consistent with the idea that first-lien servicers who have a stake in the second-lien loan
use their power to hold up liquidations and foreclosures. Columns (4) to (6) show the results of a
similar exercise in which the sample is further limited to properties with a delinquent first lien but
a still-performing second-lien loan. In cases of performing second liens, the effects of potential
holdup are somewhat stronger, as expected: Holdup servicers are in less of a rush to liquidate
properties while the junior-lien loan they own continues to perform.
There are two types of liquidations: involuntary liquidations, which are forced on the
borrower by the sheriff or court, and voluntary liquidations, which allow borrowers to negotiate in
advance the terms upon which they will surrender the collateral (e.g., short sales and deeds-inlieu). A senior claimholder prefers a quick liquidation, because a quick sale at a discount19 often
covers most or all of the unpaid balance. Conversely, a junior claimholder prefers a softer
liquidation method that takes longer and potentially can yield a higher recovery value.
We next test whether holdup servicers lean toward softer methods. The OCC data allow us
to identify the specific type of liquidation action taken by the servicer. We classify liquidations as
involuntary (foreclosures) or voluntary (short sales and deeds-in-lieu). Involuntary liquidations
result in automatic extinguishment of the junior liens (though not the claims themselves). By
contrast, non-foreclosure liquidations require the junior-lien holder to resolve its claim in some
fashion before the transaction can proceed. Hence, non-foreclosure liquidations create an
opportunity for the junior claimant to receive a payment in return for releasing its lien (Been et al.

19

Properties that are sold in an involuntary liquidation, namely foreclosure, are realized at a discount of over 30%
relative to their market value (Campbell et al. 2011).

23

2012). Consequently, we would expect the holdup servicers to prefer this path if liquidation is
chosen.
Columns (7) to (9) of Table 3, Panel A, present the regression results on the subsample of
delinquent loans chosen for liquidation. We find that among such loans, holdup servicers indeed
prefer the path of voluntarily negotiated liquidations. The economic magnitude of this effect is
substantial: Holdup servicers are 18%–21% more likely to select voluntary liquidations relative to
the unconditional mean.
In summary, our results indicate that while liquidation is a common loss resolution practice,
servicers pursue it less often when they have a vested interest in maintaining the value of the junior
claim on the property. Furthermore, conditional on selecting a liquidation route, holdup servicers
choose softer methods that are more likely to result in greater value for the second-lien
claimholder.

4.4

Holdup and Modifications
Next, we explore servicers’ propensity for loan modification when they are in the position

to hold up the process. Whether holdup servicers favor modifications of first-lien loans is subject
to debate. Legally, the second lien is not automatically extinguished once the first lien is modified.
Therefore, modification of the first-lien loan could be favorable to the owner of the second-lien
loan because it improves the borrower’s overall cash flows, thereby making repayment of the
second lien more likely. In practice, modification of the first lien may lead to a deadlock. In many
cases, the PSAs do not allow the first lien to be modified without the second lien being
extinguished or modified. Second-lien holders, however, may be reluctant to relinquish their claim.
In comparison, when the same servicer has control over both first and second liens, it may be able
to push a modification through.
24

In Table 4, Panel A, we test the proposition that holdup servicers will favor modification
of the first lien (Columns (1) to (3)) or second lien (Columns (4) to (6)). As in Table 3, we restrict
the sample to loan-pairs in which some loss mitigation action was taken. In Columns (1) to (3), we
regress a modification dummy of the first-lien mortgage on the holdup indicator and the usual set
of controls and fixed effects. The results are mixed. We find no evidence of holdup effects for PLS
loans over the six-month horizon following delinquency, but we do find a positive effect for GSE
loans. Over a longer horizon (Table 4, Panel B), the estimated effect for GSE loans remains
positive and sizable, suggesting a 16% relative increase in the modification rate of holdup
servicers. However, the estimate for the PLS loan sample becomes significantly negative though
small in magnitude.
The difference in results for GSE and PLS loans potentially reflects differences in the
institutional arrangements governing loan modifications in cases where multiple liens are present.
Decisions on GSE loans are well coordinated across investors due to the uniformity of GSE
servicing arrangements and their market power. In comparison, in PLS originations, investors are
dispersed and the coordination mechanism is poor. The difference may give holdup servicers
greater latitude in their decisions about modifying PLS loans compared with GSE loans.
We next turn to the question of whether, conditional on modification of the first-lien
mortgage, the holdup servicers are less likely to modify their second liens. Although such behavior
can maximize value for the holdup servicer, their ability to do so is circumscribed by the servicing
arrangements. The empirical results, presented in Table 4, Panel A, Columns (4) to (6), suggest
that such arrangements might be affecting servicer choice. We find that holdup servicers are more
likely to modify junior liens conditional on modifying the senior claims. This result is consistent
with the fact that holdup servicers are more aware of the presence of the second lien (or verifying
that a junior lien exists is cheaper and easier for them) and are thus bound by servicing agreements
25

to take action on second-lien loans. Point estimates in Panel A suggest that this effect is large,
varying between 15% and 30% relative to the unconditional mean. We also note that servicers
appear to be able to avoid taking action on a large share of second-lien loans following
modification of the first lien.
In Panel B of Table 4, we repeat the analysis for the 12-month horizon. The results are very
similar to those in Panel A, except that the magnitude of the effects is slightly smaller.

4.5

Holdup and Modification Terms
As shown in the previous subsection, holdup servicers are more likely to jointly modify

both liens. These actions might still maximize the value of holdup servicers’ claims, especially if
they are able to modify their second-lien loans on relatively favorable terms. We look for evidence
of preferential holdup among second-lien loans owned by holdup servicers.
We measure the generosity of modification terms as the reduction in the modified loan
payment relative to the original amount. This metric is well-defined for first-lien loans that have
preset amortizing payments. However, second-lien loans present a potential problem, because
some only require minimum payments, which are less sensitive to changes in loan terms. To
partially mitigate the resulting imprecision, we aggregate modified loans into three categories:
those whose required payment increased following modification, did not change, and decreased.
Table 5 presents summary statistics from this exercise for GSE and PLS loans, stratified
by whether the servicer making modification decisions was subject to holdup concerns. Among
GSE loans (Panel A), we fail to detect any appreciable difference in the distribution of outcomes
between holdup and non-holdup servicers. Among PLS loans (Panel B), we find a lower incidence
of modifying second-lien loans on preferential terms among holdup servicers, which is
compensated by their higher propensity to modify both liens on similar terms. The pari passu
26

treatment of senior and junior liens in the dataset is not necessarily surprising given the existence
of the 2MP program introduced by the U.S. Treasury in 2010. Under the program, servicers of
second-lien loans receive monetary incentives to match the terms of HAMP modifications
extended to the first-lien loans backed by the same property. Note that modifying second liens on
equal or better terms than the first-lien mortgages runs counter to the principle of seniority and
could thus be regarded as favorable to the second lien. On net, we do not detect any statistically
measurable differences in the propensity of holdup servicers to offer favorable second-lien
modifications.

4.6

The Effects of Holdup on Borrower Welfare
Our earlier results show that holdup servicers are less likely to act on delinquent first-lien

mortgages owned by investors. When they do act, holdup servicers favor modifications over
liquidations, especially when the second lien is still performing. Thus, holdup factors appear to
affect the distribution of cash flows between first- and second-lien holders. An important question
is whether holdup also affects borrowers’ welfare or whether it is simply a wealth transfer between
first- and second-lien holders.
To answer this question, we examine the performance of loans conditional on holdup. If
holdup servicers are better than non-holdup servicers in identifying borrowers with superior
prospects of resuming payments, their delay of loss mitigation and particularly liquidation actions
is beneficial. Similarly, borrowers would benefit if such servicers are better able to identify loans
for which modification is more likely to lead to sustainable loan performance.
We begin with the first lien. In Table 6, we regress an indicator for whether the first lien is
performing in months 7 through 12 following its delinquency on a holdup indicator and the rest of
the controls. We first perform this regression on a subsample of loans whose first lien saw no
27

action over the first six months following delinquency. The results in Columns (1) to (3) suggest
that holdup servicers were indeed better able to identify borrowers that could self-cure in the
absence of servicer action. The economic magnitude of these effects is non-negligible: 1.5% (or
11% in relative terms) for PLS loans and 0.9% (4% in relative terms) for GSE loans.
In Columns (4) to (6), we restrict the sample to loans that were modified within the first
six months. The point estimates suggest that holdup servicers were also more likely to extend
modifications to borrowers with ex post better loan performance. Again, the effects are somewhat
stronger for PLS loans (8% in relative terms) than for GSE loans (3% in relative terms).
We next test the performance of the second lien over the same horizon. This test is
important beyond the welfare question, because holdup servicers might encourage borrowers to
stay current on their second-lien loans in exchange for avoiding liquidation of the first-lien loan.
In Table 7, we examine performance of second-lien loans among those loan-pairs for which only
the first lien was delinquent at the outset. Columns (1) and (2) indicate that in this sample, secondlien loans of holdup servicers perform 2.2% better for PLS loans, but that no material effect arises
for second-lien loans attached to GSE securitizations. We then repeat the exercise but partition the
sample into cases in which the first lien received no action over the first six months and cases in
which the first lien was modified. Among GSE-backed loans (Column (4)), this decomposition
fails to identify any holdup effects. For PLS loan-pairs (Column (3)), we find that second-lien
loans of holdup servicers are more likely to remain current, both when they waited to take any
first-lien action and when they modified the first lien. These findings are consistent with the idea
that holdup servicers convince borrowers to stay current on their second liens in exchange for
avoiding liquidation of the first-lien loan.

28

5

Conclusion
In this paper, we present novel evidence showing that the seniority structure in mortgage

lending affects loss mitigation outcomes. In particular, we find evidence of systematic differences
in loss mitigation actions taken by servicers who own the second-lien loan and who service both
loans. Our findings suggest that such “holdup” servicers are less likely to take actions that
jeopardize the value of their own claims. Specifically, holdup servicers are more likely to delay
any action on delinquent first-lien mortgages, lowering the likelihood of foreclosures. When they
do take action, their loss mitigation approaches are skewed away from liquidations, especially in
instances where the associated second-lien loan continue to perform. When such servicers do
pursue liquidation, they are somewhat more likely than non-holdup servicers to use the short sale
and deeds-in-lieu approaches, which give them greater bargaining power in the foreclosure
process. Our results also suggest that holdup increases the likelihood of modifications for GSEbacked loans and that it increases the likelihood of concurrent modification of second-lien loans.
In the context of corporate finance literature, our results provide further evidence that
junior claimants use their agency power to influence loss resolution decisions when they can.
While it is hard to put a dollar number on the wealth transfer from senior to junior claimholders,
the fact that junior claimants were willing to breach their fiduciary duty to first-lien investors
(which is costly due to legal exposure) speaks of the high potential magnitude of the wealth
transfer.
The welfare implications of our results are far from straightforward. On the one hand, the
actions of holdup servicers appear to maximize the value of their junior claims, possibly at the
expense of the senior-lien holders. On the other hand, the holdup servicers appear to be better at
identifying first-lien loans that self-cure, and their delay in taking loss mitigation actions on such
loans improves the value of the first-lien loans as well. Our results further show that some second29

lien loans owned by holdup servicers are more likely to continue performing, consistent with the
idea that these servicers encourage second-lien holders to remain current on their loans in exchange
for avoiding liquidation.

30

References
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas D.
Evanoff, 2011a, The Role of Securitization in Mortgage Renegotiation, Journal of Financial
Economics 102(3), 559–578.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz
Piskorski, and Amit Seru, 2017, Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from
the Home Affordable Modification Program, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Agarwal Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, and Serdar Dinc, 2011b, Legislation and
Mortgage Foreclosures, Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Agarwal, Sumit, Yan Chang, and Abdullah Yavas, 2011c, Securitization and Adverse Selection in
Mortgage Lending, Journal of Financial Economics 105(5), 640–660.
Armour, John and David Skeel, 2007, Who Writes the Rules for Hostile Takeovers, and Why? The
Particular Divergence of U.S. and U.K. Takeover Regulation, Georgetown Law Journal 95(6),
1727–1794.
Been, Vicki, Howell Jackson, and Mark Willis, 2012, Sticky Seconds – the Problems Second Liens
Pose to the Resolution of Distressed Mortgages, NYU Journal of Law and Business 9:71, 71–
123.
Bolton, Patrick, and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of
Creditors, Journal of Political Economy 104(1), 1-25.
Bond, Philip, Ronel Elul, Sharon Garyn-Tal, and David Musto, 2017, Does Junior Inherit?
Refinancing and the Blocking Power of Second Mortgages, Review of Financial Studies 30
(1), 211–244.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak, 2011, Forced Sales and House Prices,
American Economic Review 101(5), 2108–2131.
Cordell, Larry, Karen Dynan, Andreas Lehnert, Nellie Liang, and Eileen Mauskopf, 2011, The
Incentives of Mortgage Servicers and Designing Loan Modifications to Address the Mortgage
Crisis, in Lessons from the Financial Crisis: Causes, Consequences, and Our Economic
Future, ed. Robert W. Kolb, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Elul, Ronel, 2011, Adverse Selection in Mortgage Markets, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia.
Engel, Kathleen, and Patricia McCoy, 2011, The Subprime Virus: Reckless Credit, Regulatory
Failure, and Next Steps, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ghent, Andra C., and Marianna Kudlyak, 2011, Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default:
Evidence from US States, Review of Financial Studies 24(9), 3139–3186.
Goodman, Laurie S., 2011, National Mortgage Servicing Standards and Conflicts of Interest,
Testimony to the Subcommitee on Housing, Transportation and Community Development of
the Senate Committee of Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, May 11, 2011.
Goodman, Laurie S., 2017, Examining Lien-Position Conflicts, MortgageOrb.com, June 3, 2011.
Goodman, Laurie S., Roger Ashworth, Brian Landy, and Lidan Yang, 2011, Strategic Default and
1st/2nd Lien Payment Priority, Industry Report, Amherst Mortgage Insight.
31

Goodman, Laurie S., Roger Ashworth, Brian Landy, and Ke Yin, 2010, Second Liens: How
Important? Journal of Fixed Income 20(2), 19–30.
Ivashina, Victoria, Benjamin Iverson, and David C. Smith, 2016, The Ownership and Trading of
Debt Claims in Chapter 11 Restructurings, Journal of Financial Economics 119(2), 316335.
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did Securitization Lead
to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
307–362.
Kominers, Scott Duke, and E. Glen Weyl, 2011, Concordance among Holdouts, Working Paper,
University of Chicago.
Lee, Donghoon, Christopher Mayer, and Joseph Tracy, 2012, A New Look at Second Liens,
Working Paper, FRB-NY and Columbia University.
Mayer, Christopher, Edward Morrison, and Tomasz Piskorski, 2009a, Essay: A New Proposal for
Loan Modifications, Yale Journal on Regulation 26(2), 417–429.
Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane M. Sherlund, 2009b, The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 27–50.
Mailath, George J., and Andrew Postelwaite, 1990, Asymmetric Information Bargaining Problems
with Many Agents, Review of Economic Studies 57(3), 351–367.
McCoy, Patricia A., 2012, Barriers to Foreclosure Prevention during the Financial Crisis, Arizona
Law Review 55, 723–773.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009, The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1449–1496.
Pinedo, Anna T., and Amy Moorhus Baumgardner, 2009, Federal Mortgage Modification and
Foreclosure Prevention Efforts, Uniform Commercial Code Law Journal 41(4), 319–345.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Securitization and Distressed Loan
Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis, Journal of Financial Economics
97, 369–397.
Posner, Richard A., 2005, Foreword: A Political Court, Harvard Law Review 119(1), 31–102.
Warner, Jerold B., 1977, Bankruptcy, Absolute Priority, and the Pricing of Risky Claims, Journal
of Financial Economics 4(3), 239–276.
White, Michelle J., 1983, Bankruptcy Costs and the New Bankruptcy Code, Journal of Finance
38(2), 477–488.
Zhang, Yan, 2013, Does Loan Renegotiation Differ by Securitization Status? A Transition
Probability Study, Journal of Financial Intermediation 22(3), 513–527.

32

Table 1. Summary Statistics
The table presents summary statistics for the subsamples used in the paper. Panel A shows summary statistics for the
holdup and non-holdup groups for the 6- and 12-month horizons. Panel B shows statistics about the loss mitigation
actions for the holdup and non-holdup samples, by investor type.

Panel A: Summary Statistics

Horizon:
Servicer:
Current borrower and loan characteristics
FICO group 1 (<300)
FICO group 2 (300-579)
FICO group 3 (580-659)
FICO group 4 (660-719)
FICO group 5 (720-779)
FICO group 6 (>780)
CLTV group 1 (<80)
CLTV group 2 (80-99)
CLTV group 3 (100-119)
CLTV group 4 (>120)
CLTV group 5 (missing)

Private-Label Securitizations (PLS)
6 months
12 months
Holdup Non-holdup Holdup Non-holdup

Government Sponsored Entity
Securitizations (GSE)
6 months
12 months
Holdup Non-holdup Holdup Non-holdup

3%
21%
22%
24%
21%
8%
27%
21%
18%
27%
8%

4%
22%
23%
25%
20%
6%
22%
22%
19%
26%
11%

3%
21%
22%
24%
22%
8%
27%
21%
18%
27%
8%

4%
22%
23%
25%
20%
6%
22%
22%
19%
26%
11%

5%
27%
23%
21%
17%
6%
36%
24%
15%
19%
6%

6%
27%
23%
21%
17%
5%
36%
23%
14%
18%
10%

5%
27%
23%
22%
17%
6%
36%
24%
15%
19%
7%

6%
27%
23%
22%
16%
5%
35%
23%
14%
18%
10%

1st lien unpaid balance group 1 (<$133K)
1st lien unpaid balance group 2 ($133-217K)
1st lien unpaid balance group 3 ($218-341K)
1st lien unpaid balance group 4 (>$341K)
1st lien unpaid balance group 5 (missing)
2nd lien unpaid balance group 1 (<$28K)
2nd lien unpaid balance group 2 ($29-49K)
2nd lien unpaid balance group 3 ($50-83K)
2nd lien unpaid balance group 4 (>$83K)
2nd lien unpaid balance group 5 (missing)

14%
15%
17%
53%
0%
15%
19%
28%
36%
2%

11%
18%
22%
49%
0%
13%
19%
27%
39%
2%

14%
15%
17%
53%
0%
15%
19%
28%
36%
2%

11%
18%
22%
49%
0%
13%
19%
27%
40%
2%

28%
30%
28%
13%
0%
29%
29%
24%
17%
2%

26%
31%
31%
11%
0%
25%
26%
25%
22%
2%

28%
30%
29%
13%
0%
29%
29%
24%
17%
2%

26%
31%
31%
11%
1%
25%
26%
25%
22%
2%

Loan terms at origination
1st lien term group 1 (<= 15 yrs)
1st lien term group 2 (20-30 yrs)
1st lien term group 3 (>30 yrs)
2nd lien term group 1 (<= 10 yrs)
2nd lien term group 2 (10 - 15 yrs)
2nd lien term group 3 (15 - 25 yrs)
2nd lien term group 4 (> 25 yrs)
2nd lien term group 5 (missing)

4%
93%
4%
37%
11%
5%
33%
14%

2%
95%
3%
30%
17%
11%
31%
11%

4%
93%
4%
36%
12%
5%
33%
15%

2%
95%
3%
30%
17%
11%
31%
12%

7%
92%
2%
35%
14%
7%
37%
7%

6%
93%
0%
28%
16%
15%
30%
11%

7%
92%
2%
34%
14%
7%
37%
8%

6%
93%
0%
29%
16%
14%
30%
11%

1st lien is low doc
2nd lien is low doc
1st lien is ARM
1st lien is interest only (IO)
2nd lien is interest only (IO)

62%
77%
56%
42%
56%

73%
80%
57%
43%
51%

63%
77%
56%
42%
56%

73%
81%
57%
44%
51%

43%
70%
20%
17%
46%

56%
71%
18%
17%
45%

43%
71%
21%
18%
45%

57%
72%
19%
18%
45%

Legal characteristics
1st lien is non-recourse
2nd lien is non-recourse
1st lien is judicial state

55%
2%
30%

56%
2%
27%

55%
2%
30%

56%
2%
27%

38%
2%
42%

38%
2%
39%

38%
2%
42%

38%
2%
39%

Second-lien characteristics
2nd lien is HELOC
2nd lien is piggyback (within 2mo of 1st lien)
2nd lien is fully drawn
2nd lien is frozen
2nd lien UPB covered by home equity (avg.)

63%
59%
15%
42%
21%

65%
37%
12%
45%
20%

63%
59%
15%
41%
21%

66%
36%
13%
46%
19%

54%
54%
11%
36%
33%

61%
33%
10%
41%
35%

53%
54%
11%
35%
33%

62%
33%
10%
42%
35%

33

Table 1. Summary Statistics (Cont.)
Panel B: Loss Mitigation Actions in Holdup and Non-holdup Samples

Servicer:
N=
1st lien
Action on No action
1st lien In foreclosure process
within 6 Liquidated
months Modified
Repayment/Prepaid (incl. voluntary liq)
2nd lien performing at the end of horizon
N=
1st lien
Action on No action
1st lien In foreclosure process
within 12 Liquidated
months Modified
Repayment/Prepaid (incl. voluntary liq)
2nd lien performing at the end of horizon

Private-Label
Securitizations (PLS)
Holdup Non-holdup
35,348
50,784

Government Sponsored Entity
Securitizations (GSE)
Holdup
Non-holdup
123,439
96,473

GSE + PLS
Securitizations
All
306,044

46.4%
33.9%
6.4%
5.0%
8.3%
32.3%
33,087

52.2%
30.3%
4.1%
8.8%
4.6%
37.3%
47,856

43.7%
33.2%
7.3%
6.6%
9.2%
34.5%
115,597

44.7%
36.0%
6.8%
5.9%
6.7%
39.0%
89,791

45.7%
33.7%
6.5%
6.5%
7.5%
36.1%
286,331

28.2%
31.8%
18.9%
10.1%
11.0%
24.5%

33.3%
31.7%
13.8%
14.9%
6.4%
26.9%

25.9%
28.7%
19.1%
14.5%
11.7%
27.2%

27.4%
31.4%
18.8%
13.4%
9.0%
30.1%

27.9%
30.4%
18.1%
13.7%
9.9%
27.7%

34

Table 2. Holdup and No Action
The table shows the results of regressions of an indicator of whether the first-lien loan had no action on determinants.
All regressions are ordinary least squares regressions. The sample includes first-lien mortgages serviced by holdup
servicers and by non-holdup servicers. In Panel A, Columns (1) to (3) measure the dependent variable over the sixmonth period from the time the loan was identified as distressed. Columns (4) to (6) measure the dependent variable
over the 12-month period from the time the loan was identified as distressed. The sample covers loans that became
distressed between December 2009 and April 2012. Holdup Servicer indicates whether the mortgage is serviced by a
holdup servicer. Panel B repeats the regressions in Panel A on a number of different subsamples: (a) a subsample
limited to the servicers that do not get acquired during our sample period, which removes ambiguity about which
entity exercised control over loss mitigation decisions; (b) a subsample limited to loan-pairs in which the second lien
remained performing during the first six months following the delinquency of the first lien; and (c) a subsample that
excludes piggyback second-lien loans, which helps to evaluate the possibility that piggyback-issuing holdup servicers
have an informational advantage over non-holdup servicers of piggyback loans. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. Controls include the following measures captured at the time of first-lien delinquency: an indicator of
whether the second lien has defaulted, indicators for five FICO score buckets, indicators for buckets of the leverage
of the first-lien loan, indicators for buckets of the unpaid balance (in dollars) of the first- and second-lien loans, and
the fraction of the second-lien loan that could be covered by the current value of the house. They also include indicators
for categories of the original terms of the first- and second-lien loans, for whether the first- and second-lien loans had
low-documentation, for whether the first-lien loan is an ARM, for whether the first- and second-lien loans are interestonly loans, for whether the second-lien loan is a home equity line of credit, for whether the second-lien loan is fully
drawn, for whether the second-lien loan is a credit line and is frozen, and for whether the second-lien loan is a
piggyback loan (i.e., originated within two months of the origination of the first-lien loan). The controls also include
a set of dummies for the delinquency quarter, the state in which the secured property is located, the identity of the
first-lien servicer, and indicators for the origination year of the first-lien loan.

Panel A: Holdup and No Action on Delinquent Mortgages
Dependent variable:
Horizon:
Sample:

No action on 1st lien within…
PLS
(1)
49.8
4.419***
[5.626]

6 months
GSE
(2)
44.1
1.742***
[6.583]

1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE
Year of origination FE
State FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

GSE Indicator
Observations

Unconditional mean
Holdup Servicer (0/1)

All
(3)
45.7
4.581***
[5.788]
-2.889***
[-3.557]

PLS
(4)
31.2
3.082***
[4.622]

12 months
GSE
(5)
26.5
0.757**
[2.418]

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

86,132

219,912

306,044

80,943

205,388

286,331

0.135

0.152

0.148

0.120

0.128

0.127

× GSE (0/1)

2

Adj R

35

All
(6)
27.8
3.112***
[4.701]
-2.368***
[-3.267]

Table 2. Holdup and No Action (Cont.)
Panel B: Holdup and No Action: Robustness Checks
Dependent variable:
No action on 1st lien within 6 months of default
Sample: Servicers that do not get acquired
2nd lien is current during first 6 months
No piggyback 2nd liens
Investor type:
PLS
GSE
Combined
PLS
GSE
Combined
PLS
GSE
Combined
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Unconditional mean
41.3
43.9
43.3
55.1
55.5
55.4
51.3
45.4
47.0
Holdup Servicer (0/1)
3.428*** 1.522*** 3.502***
3.141***
1.702***
3.141***
4.489*** 2.217*** 4.623***
[5.516]
[6.702]
[5.708]
[4.737]
[3.987]
[4.765]
[5.609]
[7.617]
[5.655]
× GSE (0/1)
-1.987***
-1.438*
-2.436***
[-3.050]
[-1.834]
[-2.842]
1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE
Year of origination FE
State FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

GSE Indicator

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Observations

41,997

152,789

194,786

30,354

80,240

110,594

46,580

122,144

168,724

0.122

0.159

0.152

0.105

0.095

0.097

0.131

0.135

0.135

2

Adj R

36

Table 3. Choice of Loss Mitigation Conditional on Action
The table shows the results of regressions of an indicator of whether the first-lien loan had a liquidation or foreclosure
in process conditional on being acted upon within 6 or 12 months of delinquency (Panels A and B, respectively) on a
set of controls and the holdup servicer indicator. The sample contains the groups of first-lien mortgages that are
serviced by holdup and by non-holdup servicers. The sample covers loans that became distressed between December
2009 and April 2012. Holdup Servicer indicates whether the mortgage is serviced by a holdup servicer. Columns (1)
to (3) present the baseline case for all delinquent first-lien loans that received some loss mitigation action. Columns
(4) to (6) restrict the sample to loan-pairs in which the second lien remained performing during the relevant action
horizon. Columns (7) to (9) show the regressions of an indicator for voluntary liquidation outcomes (short sales or
deeds-in-lieu) conditional on the first-lien loan being liquidated. All regressions are ordinary least squares regressions.
All regressions include the same set of controls as in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. t-statistics
are presented in brackets. *, **, and *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Probability of Liquidation and Foreclosure Process, Six-Month Horizon
Dependent variable:
Horizon:
Sample restriction:
Sample:
Unconditional mean
Holdup Servicer (0/1)
× GSE (0/1)

Liquidation + Foreclosure process
6 months
6 months
Any action taken
Any action on 1st lien; 2nd lien
PLS
GSE
All
PLS
GSE
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
73.4
74.4
74.1
54.7
50.8
51.9
-2.264*** -3.988*** -2.317*** -4.325*** -5.691*** -4.325***
[-4.295] [-15.391] [-4.515]
[-4.102] [-7.268] [-4.130]
-1.654***
-1.367
[-2.835]
[-1.047]

Voluntary liquidation
6 months
Liquidated
PLS
GSE
All
(7)
(8)
(9)
8.9
6.5
7.1
1.851*** 1.172*** 1.851***
[4.444]
[6.595]
[4.501]
-0.680
[-1.518]

1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Year of origination FE
State FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

GSE Indicator

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Observations

43,220

122,870

166,090

13,619

35,722

49,341

31,712

91,357

123,069

0.166

0.229

0.212

0.162

0.202

0.192

0.132

0.083

0.100

2

Adj R

37

Table 3. Choice of Loss Mitigation Conditional on Action (Cont.)
Panel B: Probability of Liquidation and Foreclosure Process, 12-Month Horizon
Dependent variable:
Horizon:
Sample restriction:
Sample:
Unconditional mean
Holdup Servicer (0/1)

Liquidation + Foreclosure process
12 months
12 months
Action taken
Action on 1st lien; 2nd lien current
PLS
GSE
All
PLS
GSE
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
69.2
66.5
67.2
45.3
38.1
40.0
-1.316*** -3.992*** -1.329*** -3.875*** -4.508*** -3.875***
[-3.014] [-12.429] [-3.102]
[-3.456] [-8.295] [-3.480]

× GSE (0/1)

-2.653***
[-4.924]

Voluntary liquidation
12 months
Liquidated
PLS
GSE
All
(7)
(8)
(9)
17.2
11.8
13.3
2.695*** 2.081*** 2.700***
[6.311]
[9.732]
[6.356]

-0.633
[-0.512]

-0.623
[-1.308]

1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Delinquency quarter FE
Year of origination FE
State FE
GSE Indicator

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

55,681

150,858

206,539

12,745

36,515

49,260

38,542

100,373

138,915

0.161

0.213

0.200

0.157

0.190

0.185

0.143

0.111

0.126

Observations
2

Adj R

38

Table 4. Holdup and Modification
The table explores holdup servicers’ propensity to modify the first and second liens relative to non-holdup servicers.
Panel A shows the results of regressions of an indicator for whether the first-lien loan was modified (Columns (1) to
(3)) or the second-lien loan was modified (Columns (4) to (6)) within six months of delinquency. Panel B shows
similar results for a horizon of 12 months. In Columns (4) to (6), the sample is limited to loan-pairs in which the first
lien was modified during the first 6 or 12 months following delinquency. All regressions are ordinary least squares
regressions and include the same set of controls as in Table 2. The sample encompasses the holdup and non-holdup
groups. The sample covers loans that became distressed between December 2009 and April 2012. Holdup Servicer
indicates whether the observation belongs to the holdup group. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. tstatistics are presented in brackets. *, **, and *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

Panel A: Modification of Delinquent First- and Second-Lien Mortgages within Six Months
Dependent variable: Modification of 1st lien within 6 months
Sample restriction:
Action taken
Sample:
PLS
GSE
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
Unconditional mean
14.5
11.2
12.1
Holdup Servicer (0/1)
-0.517
2.167***
-0.492
[-1.036]
[7.290]
[-1.005]
× GSE (0/1)
2.652***
[4.611]

Modification of 2nd lien within 6 months
1st lien modified
PLS
GSE
All
(4)
(5)
(6)
14.1
15.4
15.0
4.142***
3.130***
4.135***
[3.998]
[5.612]
[4.014]
-0.990
[-0.846]

1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Year of origination FE
State FE
GSE Indicator

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

43,220

122,870

166,090

6,194

13,580

19,774

0.182

0.147

0.159

0.116

0.102

0.107

Observations
2

Adj R

39

Table 4. Holdup and Modification (Cont.)
Panel B: Modification of Delinquent First- and Second-Lien Mortgages within 12 Months
Dependent variable: Modification of 1st lien within 12 months
Action taken
Sample restriction:
Sample:
PLS
GSE
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
Unconditional mean
18.8
19.1
19.0
Holdup Servicer (0/1)
-0.918**
2.896***
-0.908**
[-2.603]
[8.539]
[-2.613]
× GSE (0/1)
3.797***

Modification of 2nd lien within 12 months
1st lien modified
PLS
GSE
All
(4)
(5)
(6)
17.8
21.4
20.5
2.673**
3.378***
2.677**
[2.428]
[3.606]
[2.441]
0.708

[7.783]
1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE
Year of origination FE
State FE
GSE Indicator
Observations
2

Adj R

[0.491]

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

55,681

150,858

206,539

9,537

26,448

35,985

0.153

0.143

0.145

0.110

0.087

0.094

40

Table 5. Holdup and Relative Generosity of Second-Lien Modifications
This table presents the distribution of the relative generosity of modifications for first- and second-lien loans. The
sample is limited to loan-pairs in which both liens were modified. Generosity of modifications is defined in terms of
the reduction in required monthly payments relative to the original loan. Modified loans are aggregated into five broad
categories: those whose required payment increased following modification, did not change, decreased by less than
20%, decreased between 20% and 40%, or decreased by more than 40%. Panel A presents the distribution of payment
reductions when mortgages in which the first-lien is backed by the GSE. Panel B presents the distribution of payment
reductions when mortgages in which the first-lien is securitized by through PLS. Two-tailed statistical significance of
the difference in means between holdup and non-holdup servicers is denoted by *, **, and *** for the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

Panel A: Distribution of Payment Reductions When First Lien Is Backed by GSEs

Payment reduction category:
Holdup Servicers
Non-holdup Servicers
Difference:

Payment reduction for second-lien relative to first-lien
Greater
Similar
Smaller
N
35.3%
21.5%
43.2%
2,731
35.6%
21.5%
42.9%
1,310
-0.4%
0.0%
0.3%

Panel B: Distribution of Payment Reductions When First Lien Is Securitized through PLS
Payment reduction for second-lien relative to first-lien
Payment reduction category: Greater
Similar
Smaller
N
Holdup Servicers
36.1%
28.1%
35.9%
563
Non-holdup Servicers
49.2%
18.2%
32.6%
801
Difference:
-13.1%***
9.8%***
3.3%

41

Table 6. Holdup and First-Lien Loan Performance
The table shows the results of regressions of an indicator of whether the first-lien loan performs after 12 months on
determinants. The evaluation period covers months 7 through 12 following delinquency. In cases where no action was
taken on the delinquent first-lien mortgage (Columns (1)–(3)), an indicator value of 1 corresponds to loans self-curing
by the end of the 12-month period. In cases in which the delinquent first loan was modified (Columns (4)–(6)), the
value of 1 corresponds to the modified loan continuing to perform by the end of the 12-month period following the
original delinquency. All regressions are ordinary least squares regressions. The sample contains the groups of secondlien mortgages that are serviced by holdup servicers and by non-holdup creditors. The sample covers loans that became
distressed between December 2009 and April 2012. Holdup Servicer indicates whether the mortgage is serviced by a
holdup servicer. All regressions are ordinary least squares regressions and include the same set of controls as in Table
2. Standard errors are clustered at the zipcode level. t-statistics are presented in brackets. *, **, and *** denote two-tailed
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Dependent variable:
Horizon:
Sample restriction:
Sample:
Unconditional mean
Holdup Servicer (0/1)
× GSE (0/1)

First-lien loan performs after…
12 months
No action taken at month = 6
PLS
GSE
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
13.2
21.4
18.9
1.466**
0.876***
1.470**
[2.074]
[3.080]
[2.166]
-0.596
[-0.822]

12 months
Modified loans at month = 6
PLS
GSE
All
(4)
(5)
(6)
58.3
78.7
72.3
4.473**
2.401***
4.424**
[2.277]
[3.056]
[2.236]
-1.964
[-0.920]

1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE
Year of origination FE
State FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

GSE Indicator

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Observations

39,867

89,100

128,967

6,035

13,319

19,354

0.113

0.125

0.131

0.216

0.169

0.223

2

Adj R

42

Table 7. Holdup and Second-Lien Loan Performance
The table shows the results of regressions of an indicator of whether the second-lien loan continues to perform in
months 7 through 12 following the first-lien delinquency. The sample is limited to loan-pairs for which the second
lien was performing at the time of first-lien mortgage delinquency. Columns (1) and (2) show the results for the sample
that includes all first-lien loans regardless of their loss mitigation disposition. Columns (3) and (4) restrict the sample
to those loan-pairs in which the first lien received no loss mitigation action in the first six months, and Columns (5)
and (6) restrict the sample to pairs in which the first lien was modified during the first six months. All regressions are
ordinary least squares regressions and include the same set of controls as in Table 6. The sample contains the groups
of second-lien mortgages that are serviced by holdup and by non-holdup servicers. The sample covers loans that
became distressed between December 2009 and April 2012. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. tstatistics are presented in brackets. *, **, and *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

Dependent variable:
Horizon:
Sample restriction:
Sample:
Unconditional mean
Holdup Servicer (0/1)

1st lien controls
2nd lien controls
1st lien servicer FE
Delinquency quarter FE
Year of origination FE
State FE
Observations
2

Adj R

12 months
All loans
PLS
GSE
(1)
(2)
66.6
71.4
2.211*** 0.419
[3.190] [0.902]

Second-lien loan still performing after…
12 months
12 months
No action taken at month = 6
Modified loans at month = 6
PLS
GSE
PLS
GSE
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
68.5
73.9
77.3
85.0
1.612**
-0.871*
4.421*
0.188
[2.029]
[-1.775]
[2.000]
[0.141]

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

27,185

71,216

15,298

41,002

3,519

8,528

0.070

0.064

0.076

0.072

0.090

0.078

43

Figure 1. Distribution of Servicer Size in Sample
This figure provides the distribution of servicer size by the number of loan-pairs that are serviced.

44

Figure 2. Distribution of FICO Scores and First-Lien Loan-to-Value Ratios
The top panels of the figure plot estimated kernel densities of FICO scores for the groups serviced by holdup servicers
and non-holdup servicers at two points in time: origination and in six months following loan delinquency. The top left
panel presents the results for GSE-securitized loans, and the top right panel presents the results for PLS loans. The
bottom panels repeat this exercise for first-lien loan-to-value ratios (LTV).

Panel A. FICO Scores Kernel Densities
GSE loans

PLS loans

Panel B. First-Lien LTV Ratio Kernel Densities
GSE loans

PLS loans

45

Figure 3. Timing of Second-Lien Loan Delinquency Relative to Delinquency on the
Associated First-Lien Loan
This figure depicts the distribution of when the second-lien loan becomes delinquent relative to the delinquency on
the associated first-lien loan. The results are presented separately for borrowers whose first-lien loans are securitized
through the GSEs and those whose first-lien loans are securitized through PLSs.

30%

25%

GSE sample
PLS sample
20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
before 1st, before 1st, before 1st, before 1st, same
24+
months months 3- within 2 months
13-24
12
months

46

after 1st, after 1st, after 1st,
within 2 months 3- months
months
12
13-24

after 1st, never DQ
24+
in our
sample

