NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHICH PEERS MATTER? THE RELATIVE IMPACTS OF COLLABORATORS,
COLLEAGUES, AND COMPETITORS
George J. Borjas
Kirk B. Doran
Working Paper 20026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20026
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We are grateful to Patrick Ion, Graeme Fairweather, Norm Richert, and Erol Ozil from the American
Mathematical Society for extensive collaboration and support in preparing the data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by George J. Borjas and Kirk B. Doran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Which Peers Matter? The Relative Impacts of Collaborators, Colleagues, and Competitors
George J. Borjas and Kirk B. Doran
NBER Working Paper No. 20026
March 2014
JEL No. D83,J24,O31
ABSTRACT
Many economists believe knowledge production generates positive spillovers among knowledge producers.
The available evidence, however, is mixed. We argue that spillovers can exist along three dimensions
(idea, geographic, and collaboration space). To isolate the key channel through which knowledge spills
over, we use a unique data set to examine the impact of a large post-1992 exodus of Soviet mathematicians
on the output of the non-émigrés. Although the data reveal strong competitive effects in idea space,
there is evidence of knowledge spillovers in collaboration space, when high-quality researchers directly
engage with other researchers in the joint production of new knowledge.
George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
Kirk B. Doran
438 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
kdoran@nd.edu

	  

2	  
Which Peers Matter? The Relative Impacts of Collaborators,
Colleagues, and Competitors
George J. Borjas and Kirk B. Doran*	  

	  
I. Introduction
Knowledge	  production	  has	  the	  potential	  to	  be	  the	  engine	  of	  economic	  growth.	  A	  key	  
reason	  is	  the	  possibility	  that	  one	  knowledge	  producer	  may	  have	  strong	  positive	  spillovers	  
on	  other	  knowledge	  producers	  (Lucas,	  1998,	  2009).	  These	  potential	  spillovers	  could	  offset	  
the	  traditional	  law	  of	  diminishing	  returns,	  allowing	  for	  a	  cycle	  of	  long-­‐term	  economic	  
growth	  (Romer,	  1986,	  1990).	  One	  crucial	  barrier	  to	  progress	  is	  the	  fact	  that	  economists	  do	  
not	  yet	  have	  a	  good	  empirical	  understanding	  of	  the	  shape	  of	  the	  knowledge	  production	  
function	  and	  of	  the	  channels	  that	  allow	  the	  knowledge	  spillovers	  to	  occur	  (Jones,	  2005).	  	  
A	  number	  of	  recent	  empirical	  studies	  exploit	  supply	  shocks	  generated	  by	  a	  variety	  of	  
natural	  experiments	  to	  document	  the	  existence	  and	  to	  measure	  the	  magnitude	  of	  such	  
spillovers.	  For	  example,	  Waldinger	  (2010)	  examines	  the	  output	  of	  the	  doctoral	  students	  
who	  were	  left	  behind	  when	  superstar	  German	  scientists	  emigrated	  during	  the	  Nazi	  era.	  He	  
finds	  that	  these	  students	  suffered	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  their	  highly	  skilled	  mentors.	  In	  more	  
recent	  work,	  however,	  Waldinger	  (2012)	  reports	  that	  the	  fellow	  professors	  left	  behind	  in	  
the	  affected	  German	  university	  departments	  did	  not	  experience	  a	  loss	  in	  output	  when	  their	  
colleagues	  left.	  In	  contrast,	  Azoulay,	  Zivin,	  and	  Wang	  (2010)	  document	  the	  decreased	  
productivity	  suffered	  by	  the	  coauthors	  of	  superstar	  scientists	  in	  biological	  labs	  after	  the	  
superstars	  die	  unexpectedly.	  Finally,	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (2012)	  examine	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
*	  Borjas:	  Harvard	  Kennedy	  School;	  Doran:	  University	  of	  Notre	  Dame.	  
We	  are	  grateful	  to	  Patrick	  Ion,	  Graeme	  Fairweather,	  Norm	  Richert,	  and	  Erol	  Ozil	  from	  the	  American	  
Mathematical	  Society	  for	  extensive	  collaboration	  and	  support	  in	  preparing	  the	  data.	  	  

	  

3	  

large	  influx	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  into	  the	  United	  States	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  
Union	  and	  find	  that	  the	  output	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  with	  the	  most	  Soviet-­‐like	  
research	  programs	  fell	  dramatically.	  
The	  rapidly	  growing	  literature,	  therefore,	  reports	  mixed	  evidence	  on	  the	  hypothesis	  
that	  human	  capital	  externalities	  play	  an	  important	  role	  in	  the	  knowledge	  production	  
function.	  However,	  there	  are	  three	  conceptually	  distinct	  “spaces”	  in	  which	  knowledge	  
producers	  live	  and	  work:	  the	  space	  of	  ideas,	  geographic	  location,	  and	  the	  collaboration	  
network.	  The	  conflicting	  evidence	  in	  the	  empirical	  literature	  may	  be	  simply	  reflecting	  the	  
possibility	  that	  the	  different	  natural	  experiments	  are	  measuring	  the	  spillovers	  resulting	  
from	  supply	  shocks	  in	  different	  spaces.	  
In	  this	  paper,	  we	  make	  use	  of	  a	  single	  natural	  experiment	  to	  evaluate	  the	  importance	  
of	  these	  conceptually	  distinct	  types	  of	  closeness.	  Specifically,	  the	  study	  examines	  the	  
consequences	  of	  the	  mass	  emigration	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  following	  the	  collapse	  of	  
the	  Soviet	  Union	  on	  the	  output	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  behind.1	  During	  much	  
of	  the	  70-­‐year	  rule	  of	  the	  Communist	  Party	  in	  the	  USSR,	  Soviet	  scientists	  faced	  severe	  
restrictions	  on	  emigration	  and	  on	  communications	  and	  collaborations	  with	  Western	  
scientists.	  After	  the	  political	  process	  that	  led	  to	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  accelerated	  
in	  1990,	  Soviet	  scientists	  embraced	  the	  opportunity	  to	  consider	  job	  opportunities	  provided	  
by	  Western	  institutions	  and	  began	  to	  migrate	  in	  large	  numbers	  to	  Western	  countries.2	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (2012)	  summarize	  the	  history	  of	  mathematics	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  between	  1922	  
and	  1992;	  see	  also	  Abramitzky	  and	  Sin	  (forthcoming)	  and	  Ganguli	  (2012).	  
2	  The	  diaspora	  was	  also	  spurred	  by	  the	  disarray	  in	  the	  funding	  of	  Soviet	  scientific	  research	  that	  
accompanied	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  To	  stem	  the	  exodus,	  George	  Soros	  established	  a	  program	  that	  
provided	  research	  funds	  to	  those	  scientists	  who	  chose	  to	  remain;	  see	  Ganguli	  (forthcoming)	  for	  an	  analysis	  of	  
the	  impact	  of	  this	  program	  on	  career	  choices.	  

	  

4	  

Nearly	  10	  percent	  of	  the	  active	  Soviet	  mathematics	  workforce	  moved	  to	  a	  country	  outside	  
the	  borders	  of	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union	  after	  1992.	  
As	  a	  result	  of	  the	  diaspora,	  some	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  lost	  peers	  who	  were	  close	  
to	  them	  in	  idea	  space	  (i.e.,	  working	  on	  the	  same	  topics);	  other	  mathematicians	  lost	  peers	  
who	  were	  close	  to	  them	  in	  geographic	  space	  (i.e.,	  worked	  in	  the	  same	  university	  
department);	  and	  still	  others	  lost	  peers	  who	  were	  close	  to	  them	  in	  collaboration	  space	  (i.e.,	  
they	  had	  been	  coauthors	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse).	  Our	  theoretical	  model	  suggests	  that	  a	  
supply	  shock	  in	  any	  particular	  space	  will	  typically	  generate	  both	  spillovers	  and	  competition	  
effects.	  The	  law	  of	  diminishing	  returns	  implies	  that	  the	  mass	  emigration	  should	  improve	  
economic	  opportunities	  for	  the	  mathematicians	  left	  behind,	  while	  the	  spillover	  hypothesis	  
implies	  that	  the	  emigration	  would	  reduce	  their	  future	  output.	  The	  observed	  effect	  
represents	  the	  net	  impact	  of	  these	  two	  forces.	  Clearly,	  these	  forces	  could	  vary	  in	  strength	  
depending	  on	  the	  space	  where	  the	  supply	  shock	  occurred.	  
The	  nature	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  experienced	  by	  a	  particular	  Soviet	  mathematician	  in	  
each	  of	  these	  spaces	  obviously	  depends	  on	  how	  many	  of	  the	  mathematician’s	  peers	  in	  the	  
particular	  space	  left	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  In	  turn,	  the	  composition	  of	  the	  émigré	  subsample	  
depends	  on	  which	  peers	  were	  most	  eager	  to	  emigrate.	  
Differences	  in	  the	  incentives	  to	  emigrate	  arose	  partly	  from	  the	  fact	  that	  (because	  of	  
historical	  anti-­‐Semitism	  and	  its	  consequences)	  Jewish	  mathematicians	  had	  a	  stronger	  
motivation	  to	  leave	  the	  collapsing	  Soviet	  Union	  than	  did	  non-­‐Jewish	  mathematicians.	  
Because	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  was	  unanticipated,	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  1980s	  
who	  chose	  locations	  in	  idea	  space,	  geographical	  space,	  or	  collaboration	  space	  with	  many	  
high-­‐quality	  Jewish	  peers	  could	  not	  have	  anticipated	  the	  fact	  that	  many	  of	  those	  peers	  

	  

5	  

would	  suddenly	  migrate	  in	  the	  early	  1990s.	  We	  therefore	  use	  the	  relative	  number	  of	  a	  
mathematician’s	  peers	  who	  have	  a	  Jewish	  identity	  in	  idea	  space,	  in	  their	  institution,	  or	  
among	  their	  coauthors	  as	  instruments	  for	  the	  supply	  shocks	  in	  idea	  space,	  geographical	  
space,	  and	  collaboration	  space,	  respectively.	  
Our	  empirical	  analysis	  suggests	  that	  competition	  effects	  dominate	  in	  the	  space	  of	  
ideas:	  a	  10	  percentage	  point	  increase	  in	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  in	  idea	  space	  increased	  the	  
number	  of	  papers	  that	  a	  Soviet	  non-­‐émigré	  published	  in	  any	  given	  year	  by	  about	  7	  percent.	  
At	  the	  same	  time,	  there	  is	  no	  consistent	  evidence	  of	  a	  link	  between	  a	  mathematician’s	  
productivity	  and	  supply	  shocks	  in	  either	  geographic	  space	  or	  collaboration	  space	  for	  the	  
average	  Soviet	  mathematician.	  However,	  our	  empirical	  analysis	  unveils	  the	  key	  setting	  in	  
which	  spillovers	  strongly	  dominate	  competition	  effects:	  the	  loss	  of	  collaborators	  of	  very	  
high	  quality.	  Ranking	  authors	  by	  the	  quality	  of	  their	  collaborators,	  we	  find	  that	  authors	  in	  
the	  top	  5	  percent	  of	  this	  ranking	  suffer	  an	  8	  percent	  decline	  in	  publications	  for	  every	  10	  
percent	  of	  their	  collaborators	  who	  emigrate.	  
In	  sum,	  our	  study	  synthesizes	  the	  diverse	  set	  of	  results	  found	  in	  the	  literature,	  and	  
advances	  a	  plausible	  explanation:	  the	  relative	  importance	  of	  human	  capital	  spillovers	  
depends	  on	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  space	  where	  the	  supply	  shock	  occurs	  and	  on	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  
individuals	  in	  question.	  Competition	  is	  the	  dominant	  consequence	  of	  interactions	  in	  the	  
space	  of	  ideas,	  and	  is	  important	  enough	  in	  collaboration	  space	  to	  render	  the	  loss	  of	  the	  
average	  collaborator	  innocuous.	  But	  spillovers	  can	  dominate	  in	  the	  special	  case	  where	  a	  
person	  of	  very	  high	  quality	  directly	  interacts	  with	  others	  in	  the	  joint	  creation	  of	  knowledge.	  
	  

	  

6	  

II. Theory
Modern	  theories	  of	  economic	  growth	  emphasize	  how	  human	  capital	  externalities	  
alter	  the	  productivity	  of	  specific	  workers.	  A	  worker	  surrounded	  by	  many	  high-­‐skill	  workers	  
will	  himself	  become	  more	  productive	  by	  being	  exposed	  to	  new	  ideas	  and	  concepts.	  These	  
spillover	  effects,	  however,	  must	  coexist	  with	  the	  traditional	  laws	  of	  scarcity	  and	  
diminishing	  returns	  that	  form	  the	  core	  of	  economic	  analysis.3	  Following	  Jones	  and	  Romer	  
(2010),	  suppose	  that	  the	  production	  function	  for	  “mathematical	  knowledge”	  Y	  in	  the	  Soviet	  
Union	  depends	  on	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  A,	  the	  stock	  of	  resources	  K	  used	  as	  inputs	  (e.g.,	  faculty	  
slots	  and	  computing	  resources),	  and	  the	  stock	  of	  mathematicians	  L.	  The	  generic	  human	  
capital	  spillovers	  model	  assumes	  that	  there	  are	  constant	  returns	  to	  K	  and	  L.	  Suppose	  that	  
the	  aggregate	  production	  function	  can	  be	  written	  as:	  
	  
(1)	  

	  

Y = Aφ ( α K K δ + α L Lδ ) , 	  
1/δ

	  
where	  φ	  gives	  the	  “externalities	  elasticity,”	  the	  percent	  expansion	  in	  mathematical	  
knowledge	  associated	  with	  a	  one	  percent	  increase	  in	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas;	  and	  the	  elasticity	  of	  
substitution	  between	  labor	  and	  capital	  σKL	  =	  1/(1	  -­‐	  δ).	  
	  

It	  is	  typically	  assumed	  that	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  is	  proportional	  to	  the	  number	  of	  

mathematicians	  (or,	  for	  simplicity,	  A	  =	  L).	  A	  mathematician’s	  marginal	  product	  is	  then	  given	  
by:	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (forthcoming)	  use	  a	  simpler	  version	  of	  this	  model	  to	  examine	  the	  determinants	  of	  
mobility	  across	  fields	  in	  mathematics.	  

	  
(2)	  

7	  
	  

(

)

MPL = APL φ + α L Q −δ Lδ , 	  

	  
where	  APL	  =	  Y/L	  and	   Q = [α K K δ + α L Lδ ]1/δ .	  
This	  model	  can	  be	  used	  to	  address	  a	  crucial	  question:	  what	  happens	  to	  the	  marginal	  
product	  of	  mathematicians	  following	  a	  supply	  shock	  that	  simultaneously	  changes	  the	  
number	  of	  ideas	  and	  the	  number	  of	  workers?	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that:	  
	  
(3)	  

	  

⎛ φ + (1− δ)sL ⎞
d log MPL = φ m + sK ⎜
(d log K − m) 	  
⎝ φ + sL ⎟⎠

	  
where	  m	  =	  d	  log	  L;	  sL	  =	  αLLδ/Qδ,	  or	  labor’s	  share	  of	  output;	  and	  sK	  =	  1	  –	  sL.4	  For	  expositional	  
convenience,	  consider	  the	  case	  where	  m	  is	  positive.	  Equation	  (3)	  summarizes	  the	  opposing	  
forces	  on	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  mathematicians	  arising	  from	  the	  supply	  shock.	  On	  the	  
one	  hand,	  the	  expansion	  in	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  makes	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  mathematicians	  more	  
productive.	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  the	  law	  of	  diminishing	  returns	  comes	  into	  play	  and	  reduces	  
productivity	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  increased	  number	  of	  mathematicians.	  
It	  is	  instructive	  to	  illustrate	  the	  implications	  of	  the	  model	  in	  terms	  of	  two	  alternative	  
scenarios:	  the	  short	  run	  and	  the	  long	  run.	  By	  definition,	  resources	  K	  are	  fixed	  in	  the	  short	  
run	  and	  are	  fully	  adjusted	  in	  the	  long	  run.	  If	  the	  academic	  market	  were	  competitive,	  
additional	  resources	  would	  enter	  or	  exit	  the	  market	  until	  the	  rate	  of	  return	  to	  these	  
resources	  is	  again	  equal	  to	  the	  world	  rate.	  In	  a	  competitive	  market,	  the	  proportionate	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4	  Specifically,	  the	  mathematician’s	  wage	  w	  equals	  the	  value	  of	  marginal	  product	  when	  the	  employer	  
ignores	  the	  externality,	  or	   α L Q1−δ Lφ+δ−1 . 	  It	  follows	  directly	  that	  sL	  =	  wL/Y.	  

	  

8	  

change	  in	  the	  capital	  stock	  would	  equal	  the	  proportionate	  change	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
mathematicians	  (or	  m).	  The	  resulting	  change	  in	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  mathematicians	  
would	  then	  be	  given	  by:	  
	  

(4)	  

	  

⎧⎛
δ s L sk
⎪⎜ (φ − sk ) +
φ + sL
⎪⎪⎝
d log MPL = ⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩φ m,

⎞
⎟⎠ m,

if d log K = 0
	  

if d log K = m.

	  
	  

Suppose	  Q	  is	  Cobb-­‐Douglas,	  so	  that	  δ	  is	  zero.	  Equation	  (4)	  then	  collapses	  to	  (φ	  -­‐	  sK)	  m	  

in	  the	  short	  run.	  Resources	  are	  fixed	  and	  there	  is	  a	  race	  between	  the	  externalities	  elasticity	  
and	  the	  law	  of	  diminishing	  returns.	  If	  spillovers	  were	  non-­‐existent	  or	  small,	  the	  supply	  
shock	  would	  have	  the	  usual	  effect	  of	  reducing	  the	  productivity	  of	  mathematicians.	  If	  the	  
elasticity	  φ	  is	  sufficiently	  large,	  the	  direction	  of	  the	  effects	  would	  reverse:	  the	  marginal	  
product	  of	  mathematicians	  rises	  because	  of	  the	  expansion	  in	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas.5	  
	  

Over	  time,	  the	  capital	  stock	  adjusts	  to	  the	  supply	  shock.	  In	  other	  words,	  there	  is	  a	  

change	  in	  the	  number	  of	  faculty	  slots	  allocated	  to	  existing	  mathematics	  departments	  and	  
journals	  change	  the	  number	  of	  pages	  published.	  If	  the	  institutions	  hiring	  mathematicians	  
act	  as	  if	  they	  were	  competitive	  firms,	  the	  long-­‐run	  adjustment	  in	  the	  capital	  stock	  would	  be	  
given	  by	  d	  log	  K	  =	  m.	  Equation	  (4)	  shows	  that	  the	  long-­‐run	  productivity	  impact	  of	  a	  supply	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5	  It	  is	  difficult	  to	  imagine	  that	  “capital”	  and	  mathematicians	  are	  easily	  substitutable	  in	  the	  production	  
of	  new	  theorems.	  Equation	  (4)	  implies	  that	  if	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  labor	  and	  capital	  is	  less	  
than	  one,	  the	  negative	  impact	  introduced	  by	  nonrival	  labor	  and	  resources	  gets	  larger,	  making	  it	  even	  more	  
likely	  that	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  mathematicians	  will	  fall	  in	  the	  short	  run	  following	  an	  increase	  in	  supply.	  

	  

9	  

shock	  equals	  φm.	  In	  the	  absence	  of	  human	  capital	  externalities,	  the	  long-­‐run	  impact	  of	  a	  
supply	  shock	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  mathematicians	  is	  zero.	  If	  spillover	  effects	  exist,	  
however,	  the	  long-­‐run	  impact	  is	  positive	  because	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  expanded.	  
	  
Fields and Networks
	  

The	  study	  of	  mathematics,	  as	  all	  academic	  disciplines,	  is	  composed	  of	  many	  fields,	  

and	  the	  theorems	  and	  techniques	  in	  the	  various	  fields	  join	  together	  to	  form	  the	  current	  
stock	  of	  “mathematical	  knowledge.”	  Because	  the	  supply	  shock	  induced	  by	  the	  collapse	  of	  
the	  Soviet	  Union	  had	  a	  differential	  impact	  on	  different	  fields,	  it	  is	  important	  to	  examine	  
how	  the	  variation	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  across	  fields	  alters	  the	  lessons	  from	  the	  
basic	  model.	  
The	  existence	  of	  distinct	  mathematical	  fields	  also	  allows	  us	  to	  generalize	  the	  notion	  
of	  human	  capital	  externalities.	  Up	  to	  this	  point,	  our	  model	  has	  focused	  on	  the	  productivity	  
impact	  of	  “global”	  human	  capital	  externalities.	  The	  specification	  of	  the	  aggregate	  
production	  function	  in	  equation	  (1)	  implies	  that	  the	  change	  in	  the	  total	  stock	  of	  
mathematical	  ideas	  shifts	  the	  productivity	  of	  all	  mathematicians	  by	  the	  same	  proportion.	  It	  
is	  possible,	  however,	  that	  a	  mathematician’s	  productivity	  also	  depends	  on	  “local”	  
externalities.	  For	  example,	  it	  seems	  plausible	  that	  a	  supply	  shock	  that	  differentially	  affected	  
the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  in,	  say,	  Geometric	  Topology	  and	  Quantum	  Theory	  would	  have	  
differential	  impacts	  on	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  useful	  to	  researchers	  in	  those	  two	  areas.	  Similarly,	  
a	  supply	  shock	  affecting	  a	  particular	  university	  may	  have	  strong	  repercussions	  on	  the	  
productivity	  of	  mathematicians	  at	  that	  location,	  but	  weaker	  repercussions	  on	  the	  
mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  geographically	  remote	  institutions.	  Finally,	  the	  externalities	  

	  

10	  

may	  be	  particularly	  strong	  among	  mathematicians	  belonging	  to	  the	  same	  collaboration	  
network.	  
The	  simplest	  way	  to	  introduce	  local	  externalities	  is	  to	  interpret	  L	  in	  equation	  (1)	  as	  
the	  number	  of	  efficiency	  units	  supplied	  by	  the	  entire	  mathematics	  workforce.	  Suppose	  
there	  are	  N	  distinct	  mathematical	  fields	  or,	  more	  generally,	  “networks.”	  It	  is	  analytically	  
convenient	  to	  use	  a	  nested	  CES	  framework	  to	  aggregate	  the	  contribution	  made	  by	  
mathematicians	  in	  the	  various	  networks.	  The	  total	  number	  of	  efficiency	  units	  provided	  by	  
the	  entire	  mathematics	  workforce	  is:	  
	  
(5)	  

	  

L = ( A1θ L1β + ...+ ANθ LNβ ) ,
1/β

	  

	  
where	  An	  gives	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  in	  network	  n;	  Ln	  gives	  the	  size	  of	  the	  mathematics	  
workforce	  in	  field	  n;	  θ	  is	  the	  local	  externality	  elasticity	  measuring	  the	  size	  of	  network-­‐
specific	  spillovers;	  and	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  mathematicians	  working	  in	  
different	  networks	  is	  defined	  by	  σN	  =	  1/(1	  -­‐	  β).	  
Suppose	  that	  the	  aggregate	  production	  function	  in	  (1)	  is	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  (Y	  =	  

ΑφΚ1−αLα)	   and	  that	  the	  stock	  of	  ideas	  in	  a	  network	  is	  proportional	  to	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
workforce	  in	  that	  network.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  the	  change	  in	  marginal	  product	  for	  
mathematician	  i	  in	  network	  n	  resulting	  from	  a	  supply	  shock	  that	  potentially	  affects	  the	  
number	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  all	  networks	  is:	  
	  
(6)	  

	  

d log MPin = (1 − α) d log K + (φ + α − β)m + (θ + β − 1)mn , 	  

	  

11	  

	  
where	  m	  =	  d	  log	  L;	  and	  mn	  =	  d	  log	  Ln	  .	  
	  

The	  short-­‐	  and	  long-­‐run	  productivity	  impacts	  are	  then	  given	  by:	  

	  

(7)	  

⎧⎛
⎛
1 ⎞
1 ⎞
m+⎜θ −
⎪⎜ φ − sk +
⎟
⎟⎠ mn ,
σ
σ
⎝
⎠
⎝
N
N
⎪
⎪⎪
d log MPin = ⎨
⎪
⎪⎛
⎛
1 ⎞
1 ⎞
⎪⎜ φ +
m+⎜θ −
mn ,
⎟
σN ⎠
σ N ⎟⎠
⎝
⎪⎩⎝

if d log K = 0

if d log K = m. 	  

	  
The	  productivity	  impact	  of	  the	  generalized	  supply	  shock	  on	  a	  particular	  
mathematician	  now	  depends	  on	  two	  distinct	  measures	  of	  the	  change	  in	  supply:	  the	  percent	  
change	  in	  the	  total	  supply	  of	  mathematical	  efficiency	  units	  (m);	  and	  the	  percent	  change	  in	  
the	  number	  of	  mathematicians	  conducting	  research	  in	  network	  n	  (mn).	  In	  general,	  the	  
short-­‐run	  impact	  of	  these	  distinct	  measures	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  can	  either	  be	  positive	  or	  
negative,	  depending	  on	  the	  relative	  strength	  of	  the	  relevant	  externalities	  elasticity	  and	  the	  
elasticities	  of	  substitution	  among	  the	  various	  groups.	  In	  the	  long	  run,	  the	  generalized	  
supply	  shock	  m	  will	  have	  a	  positive	  impact	  (since	  m	  is	  assumed	  to	  be	  positive),	  but	  there	  
will	  be	  distributional	  effects	  that	  may	  harm	  the	  mathematicians	  in	  networks	  that	  
experienced	  the	  largest	  supply	  shocks.	  
By	  construction,	  the	  model	  presented	  above	  constrains	  mathematician	  i	  to	  belong	  to	  
only	  one	  of	  these	  networks.	  It	  is	  straightforward	  to	  generalize	  the	  model	  by	  allowing	  
additional	  levels	  in	  the	  CES	  nesting.	  For	  example,	  think	  of	  a	  specific	  network	  as	  composed	  

	  

12	  

of	  mathematicians	  in	  a	  particular	  mathematical	  field	  (e.g.,	  Partial	  Differential	  Equations).	  It	  
is	  likely	  that	  some	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  in	  that	  field	  are	  frequent	  collaborators,	  while	  
others	  have	  more	  distant	  interactions.	  By	  defining	  yet	  another	  level	  in	  the	  CES	  nesting,	  it	  is	  
easy	  to	  model	  the	  impact	  of	  supply	  shocks	  at	  each	  level	  of	  the	  nesting:	  the	  generalized	  
supply	  shock	  (m);	  the	  field-­‐specific	  supply	  shock;	  and	  the	  collaboration-­‐specific	  supply	  
shock.	  The	  analogue	  of	  equation	  (7)	  would	  then	  contain	  a	  term	  for	  each	  of	  the	  relevant	  
supply	  shocks	  that	  would	  affect	  the	  productivity	  of	  a	  particular	  mathematician,	  and	  each	  of	  
the	  coefficients	  would	  measure	  the	  difference	  between	  the	  relevant	  externalities	  elasticity	  
and	  the	  relevant	  elasticity	  of	  substitution.6	  
	  

This	  framework	  has	  interesting	  implications	  for	  the	  interpretation	  of	  the	  findings	  

reported	  in	  the	  flurry	  of	  recent	  studies	  that	  measure	  the	  quantitative	  importance	  of	  human	  
capital	  externalities.	  The	  model	  implies	  that	  because	  these	  empirical	  studies	  exploit	  
conceptually	  different	  supply	  shocks,	  they	  are,	  in	  fact,	  estimating	  conceptually	  different	  
(net)	  spillover	  elasticities.	  Some	  studies	  estimate	  the	  spillover	  effects	  within	  a	  
collaboration	  network	  (e.g.,	  Waldinger,	  2010;	  and	  Azoulay,	  Zivin,	  and	  Wang,	  2010).	  In	  other	  
cases,	  the	  spillover	  effects	  are	  being	  measured	  within	  a	  geographic	  area	  (e.g.,	  Waldinger,	  
2012)	  or	  at	  the	  field	  level	  (e.g.,	  Borjas	  and	  Doran,	  2012).	  Moreover,	  none	  of	  these	  exercises	  
estimate	  the	  global	  externality	  φ	  since	  all	  workers	  within	  a	  particular	  natural	  experiment	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6	  Consider	  a	  three-­‐level	  nesting	  that	  defines	  the	  total	  labor	  supply	  of	  mathematicians	  (L)	  in	  terms	  of	  
the	  contribution	  of	  the	  supply	  in	  different	  networks,	  Ln,	  and	  then	  defines	  Ln	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  contribution	  of	  
collaborators	  (Lc)	  and	  non-­‐collaborators	  in	  that	  network.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  the	  short-­‐run	  impact	  on	  the	  
marginal	  product	  of	  mathematician	  i	  is	  given	  by:	  

⎛
⎝

d log MPinc = ⎜ φ − s k +

1
1 ⎞
1 ⎞
⎞ ⎛
⎛
m+⎜θ −
+ ⎟ mn + ⎜ λ − ⎟ mc . 	  	  
⎟
⎝ σ N σC ⎠
⎝ σC ⎠
σN ⎠
1

where	  λ	  is	  the	  collaboration-­‐specific	  externalities	  elasticity,	  and	  σC	  is	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  
collaborators	  and	  non-­‐collaborators.

	  

	  

13	  

are	  exposed	  to	  the	  same	  (total)	  shock,	  and	  hence	  the	  global	  externality	  elasticity	  cannot	  be	  
uniquely	  identified.	  
In	  short,	  the	  theoretical	  framework	  highlights	  the	  importance	  of	  properly	  defining	  
the	  nature	  of	  the	  “neighborhood”	  or	  space	  in	  which	  a	  human	  capital	  spillover	  is	  going	  to	  be	  
measured.	  Different	  natural	  experiments	  will	  inevitably	  create	  supply	  shocks	  in	  different	  
neighborhoods,	  and	  allow	  us	  to	  estimate	  different	  (net)	  externality	  elasticities.	  One	  take-­‐
away	  lesson	  from	  the	  existing	  evidence	  is	  that	  it	  seems	  easiest	  to	  observe	  positive	  
spillovers	  when	  the	  supply	  shocks	  hits	  a	  “local”	  neighborhood—such	  as	  a	  high-­‐quality	  
collaboration	  network.	  Once	  the	  analysis	  moves	  to	  a	  larger	  neighborhood,	  the	  traditional	  
laws	  of	  scarcity	  reappear	  and	  begin	  to	  dominate	  the	  data.	  	  
	  
III. Data
Our	  analysis	  examines	  how	  the	  output	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  
Soviet	  Union	  was	  affected	  by	  the	  supply	  shock	  that	  followed	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  USSR.	  We	  
use	  a	  database	  provided	  to	  us	  by	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  Society	  (AMS)	  that	  reports	  
the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  every	  mathematician	  in	  the	  world,	  by	  field	  and	  year,	  
since	  1939.	  The	  AMS	  data	  reports	  the	  mathematician’s	  institutional	  affiliation	  at	  the	  time	  
the	  paper	  was	  published,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  location	  of	  the	  affiliation,	  but	  this	  information	  is	  
only	  available	  on	  a	  systematic	  basis	  since	  1984.	  The	  AMS	  database	  also	  contains	  
information	  on	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  received	  by	  the	  papers,	  but	  the	  AMS	  only	  counts	  
citations	  in	  a	  limited	  number	  of	  journals,	  and	  only	  reports	  the	  post-­‐2000	  citations	  received	  
by	  a	  paper	  (regardless	  of	  when	  the	  paper	  was	  published).	  Finally,	  the	  AMS	  professional	  
staff	  assigns	  each	  publication	  to	  one	  of	  the	  many	  fields	  that	  make	  up	  the	  study	  of	  

	  

14	  

mathematics.	  The	  AMS	  provided	  us	  with	  the	  author-­‐year-­‐field	  information	  at	  the	  two-­‐digit	  
field	  level,	  identifying	  publications	  by	  every	  mathematician	  in	  each	  of	  63	  different	  fields.	  
Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (2012)	  used	  these	  data,	  combined	  with	  information	  from	  the	  
Thomson	  Reuters’	  Institute	  for	  Scientific	  Information	  (ISI)	  Web	  of	  Science	  archive	  and	  the	  
Mathematical	  Genealogy	  Project	  (MGP),	  to	  construct	  the	  universe	  of	  active	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  and	  to	  define	  the	  subsample	  of	  
Soviet	  émigrés.	  The	  population	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  were	  “active”	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse	  
of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  is	  given	  by	  the	  sample	  of	  persons	  who	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  
between	  1970	  and	  1989.	  We	  then	  determined	  if	  the	  mathematician	  reported	  a	  Soviet	  
affiliation	  in	  papers	  published	  before	  1990,	  and	  classified	  anyone	  who	  used	  a	  Soviet	  
affiliation	  at	  least	  half	  the	  time	  during	  this	  period	  as	  a	  “Soviet	  mathematician.”	  From	  this	  
population,	  we	  defined	  the	  subsample	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  as	  the	  group	  whose	  modal	  
affiliation	  after	  1992	  was	  in	  a	  country	  outside	  the	  geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  
Soviet	  Union.7	  The	  complement	  of	  this	  sample	  forms	  the	  population	  of	  Soviet	  “stayers”:	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  within	  the	  geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  
Soviet	  Union	  after	  1992.	  The	  online	  Supplemental	  Appendix	  contains	  a	  detailed	  description	  
of	  the	  data	  and	  the	  construction	  of	  the	  samples.	  
These	  definitions	  yield	  a	  pre-­‐existing	  population	  of	  12,224	  active	  Soviet	  
mathematicians.	  We	  also	  find	  that	  1,051	  of	  these	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  emigrated	  after	  
the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  Table	  1	  reports	  summary	  statistics	  for	  the	  samples	  of	  
Soviet	  mathematicians,	  both	  the	  émigrés	  and	  the	  non-­‐émigrés.	  The	  most	  striking	  finding	  is	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7	  By	  construction,	  an	  émigré	  must	  have	  published	  after	  1992	  (otherwise,	  we	  would	  never	  observe	  his	  
post-­‐1992	  affiliation).	  

	  

15	  

the	  very	  large	  degree	  of	  positive	  selection	  that	  characterizes	  the	  Soviet	  émigrés.	  Prior	  to	  
their	  migration,	  the	  émigrés	  were	  significantly	  more	  productive	  in	  terms	  of	  publications	  
and	  citations.	  In	  particular,	  before	  1992	  the	  average	  (future)	  émigré	  had	  published	  7	  more	  
papers	  and	  received	  32	  more	  citations	  than	  the	  typical	  Soviet	  who	  did	  not	  emigrate.	  After	  
1992,	  the	  émigrés’	  productivity	  far	  surpassed	  that	  of	  the	  Soviets	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  
former	  USSR.8	  
The	  strong	  positive	  selection	  that	  characterizes	  the	  sample	  of	  émigrés	  suggests	  that	  
the	  empirical	  analysis	  must	  carefully	  consider	  how	  the	  endogeneity	  of	  the	  out-­‐migration	  
decision	  influences	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  output	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  
who	  remained	  in	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union.	  We	  address	  the	  endogeneity	  issue	  in	  much	  
greater	  detail	  below.	  
The	  data	  allows	  us	  to	  calculate	  the	  supply	  shock	  faced	  by	  a	  given	  Soviet	  
mathematician	  in	  each	  of	  the	  three	  “spaces”	  defined	  earlier:	  the	  space	  of	  ideas;	  the	  space	  of	  
geography;	  and	  the	  collaboration	  network.9	  
We	  use	  the	  field	  composition	  of	  mathematician	  i’s	  pre-­‐1990	  publication	  record	  to	  
calculate	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  had	  a	  similar	  field	  mix.	  In	  
particular,	  let	  Pf0	  be	  the	  number	  of	  pre-­‐1990	  papers	  published	  in	  field	  f	  by	  mathematicians	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8	  Franzoni,	  Scellato,	  and	  Stephan	  (2012)	  and	  Grogger	  and	  Hanson	  (2013)	  report	  additional	  evidence	  
on	  the	  positive	  selection	  of	  scientific	  migrants,	  particularly	  those	  who	  move	  to	  the	  United	  States.	  
9	  While	  geographic	  space	  is	  an	  obvious	  metric	  in	  which	  the	  idea	  of	  "closeness"	  can	  be	  easily	  grasped,	  
and	  closeness	  in	  the	  collaboration	  network	  can	  be	  understood	  intuitively	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  number	  of	  nodes	  
separating	  two	  authors,	  the	  concept	  of	  closeness	  in	  idea	  space	  is	  more	  difficult	  to	  visualize.	  However,	  given	  
the	  technology	  of	  proof	  production,	  there	  is	  a	  well-­‐defined	  sense	  in	  which	  mathematicians	  who	  work	  on	  
topics	  that	  build	  on	  each	  other	  are	  "closer"	  in	  the	  space	  of	  ideas	  than	  are	  mathematicians	  who	  work	  on	  
disparate	  topics.	  When	  a	  mathematician	  works	  on	  a	  new	  theorem,	  he	  is	  usually	  inspired	  by	  intellectual	  work	  
that	  has	  already	  been	  done	  in	  a	  similar	  area,	  and	  then	  combines	  that	  work	  with	  new	  insights	  currently	  
circulating	  in	  related	  fields	  of	  inquiry.	  In	  fact,	  recent	  research	  has	  developed	  ways	  of	  measuring	  the	  “distance”	  
among	  fields	  of	  mathematics	  based	  on,	  for	  example,	  the	  frequency	  of	  co-­‐publishing	  across	  them	  (Basu	  and	  
Dobler,	  2012).	  

	  

16	  

who	  eventually	  remained	  in	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union,	  and	  let	  Pf1	  be	  the	  respective	  number	  
of	  papers	  published	  by	  mathematicians	  who	  eventually	  emigrated.	  Let	  αif	  be	  the	  share	  of	  
pre-­‐1990	  papers	  that	  mathematician	  i	  published	  in	  field	  f.	  The	  out-­‐migration	  rate	  of	  
persons	  who	  had	  a	  similar	  field	  mix	  as	  mathematician	  i	  is	  then	  given	  by:	  
	  
(8)	  

	  

qiD = ∑ α if
f

Pf 1
. 	   	  
Pf 0 + Pf 1

	  
The	  variable	  qiD	  gives	  the	  fraction	  of	  intellectually	  similar	  mathematicians	  who	  emigrated	  
after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  measuring	  the	  size	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  experienced	  
by	  mathematician	  i	  in	  idea	  space.	  
	  

A	  second	  type	  of	  supply	  shock	  occurs	  at	  the	  geographic	  level.	  Some	  Soviet	  

institutions	  may	  have	  been	  particularly	  hard	  hit	  by	  the	  outflow	  of	  mathematicians.	  Let	  k	  be	  
the	  last	  institution	  employing	  mathematician	  i	  before	  1990.	  Let	  Pk0	  be	  the	  number	  of	  pre-­‐
1990	  papers	  published	  by	  mathematicians	  who	  chose	  to	  remain	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  and	  
whose	  last	  affiliation	  before	  1990	  was	  at	  institution	  k,	  and	  let	  Pk1	  be	  the	  respective	  number	  
of	  papers	  published	  by	  mathematicians	  who	  eventually	  emigrated.	  The	  institution-­‐specific	  
outmigration	  rate	  affecting	  mathematician	  i,	  which	  measures	  the	  size	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  
geographic	  space,	  can	  then	  be	  defined	  as:	  
	  
(9)	  
	  

	  

qiG =

Pk1
. 	  	  
Pk 0 + Pk1

	  
	  

17	  
Finally,	  mathematician	  i	  may	  have	  a	  network	  of	  collaborators	  N,	  some	  of	  whom	  

remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  after	  the	  collapse	  and	  some	  of	  whom	  left.	  The	  AMS	  provided	  
us	  with	  a	  dataset	  that	  details	  all	  coauthorship	  relationships	  in	  the	  universe	  of	  the	  12,224	  
Soviet	  mathematicians.	  We	  can	  use	  the	  information	  on	  these	  collaboration	  networks	  to	  
estimate	  the	  collaboration-­‐specific	  supply	  shock.	  In	  particular,	  let	  PiC0	  be	  the	  number	  of	  
pre-­‐1990	  papers	  written	  by	  the	  collaborators	  of	  mathematician	  i	  who	  chose	  to	  remain	  in	  
the	  Soviet	  Union,	  and	  let	  PiC1	  be	  the	  respective	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  by	  the	  
collaborators	  who	  emigrated.	  The	  collaboration-­‐specific	  outmigration	  rate,	  which	  
measures	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space,	  is	  then	  given	  by:	  
	  
(10)	   	  

qiC =

PiC1
. 	  	  
PiC 0 + PiC1

	  
	  

The	  three	  panels	  of	  Figure	  1	  illustrate	  the	  frequency	  distribution	  of	  the	  three	  supply	  

shocks	  affecting	  the	  sample	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union.	  
All	  of	  the	  panels	  show	  a	  sizable	  dispersion	  in	  the	  supply	  shocks	  experienced	  by	  individual	  
mathematicians.	  For	  example,	  the	  frequency	  distribution	  for	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  in	  idea	  
space	  has	  a	  median	  of	  11.7	  percent,	  with	  the	  10th	  and	  90th	  percentile	  being	  7.3	  and	  20.8	  
percent,	  respectively.	  The	  mode	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  space	  is	  0.0	  percent,	  
indicating	  that	  over	  20	  percent	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  were	  associated	  with	  
departments	  that	  did	  not	  have	  any	  émigrés.	  Nevertheless,	  25	  percent	  of	  mathematicians	  
were	  associated	  with	  institutions	  that	  had	  out-­‐migration	  rates	  exceeding	  16.7	  percent.	  

	  

18	  

Finally,	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  shows	  that	  about	  20	  percent	  of	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  lost	  at	  least	  one	  collaborator	  to	  the	  post-­‐1992	  diaspora.	  
	  

Our	  empirical	  analysis	  examines	  the	  impact	  of	  these	  supply	  shocks	  on	  the	  output	  of	  

the	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  We	  use	  the	  regression	  model:	  
	  
(11)	   	  

yit	  =	  ϕi	  +	  ϕt	  +	  Xit	  γ	  +	  (qi	  × 	  T)	  π 	  +	  εit,	  

	  
where	  yit	  measures	  the	  output	  of	  mathematician	  i	  in	  year	  t;	  ϕi	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  fixed	  
effects;	  ϕt	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects;	  Xit	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  standardizing	  variables;	  qi	  gives	  
the	  vector	  of	  person-­‐specific	  supply	  shocks	  (qiD,	  qiG,	  qiC);	  and	  T	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  
indicating	  if	  the	  observation	  is	  observed	  after	  1992.	  The	  vector	  of	  variables	  X	  gives	  the	  
years	  of	  work	  experience	  for	  mathematician	  i,	  defined	  as	  the	  number	  of	  years	  that	  have	  
elapsed	  since	  the	  mathematician’s	  first	  publication,	  and	  is	  introduced	  as	  a	  fourth-­‐order	  
polynomial.	  
This	  regression	  model	  uses	  a	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  approach.	  Many	  things	  
happened	  simultaneously	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  during	  the	  end	  of	  Communist	  party	  rule,	  
which	  is	  why	  we	  compare	  mathematicians	  who	  did	  lose	  peers	  with	  mathematicians	  who	  
did	  not,	  using	  the	  latter	  group	  as	  a	  control	  for	  all	  of	  the	  other	  changes	  that	  occurred	  at	  that	  
time.	  We	  estimate	  the	  regression	  model	  using	  annual	  data	  between	  1982	  and	  2008,	  and	  use	  
two	  measures	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  output	  as	  dependent	  variables:	  an	  indicator	  variable	  set	  
to	  unity	  if	  mathematician	  i	  published	  at	  all	  in	  year	  t,	  and	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  in	  
that	  year.	  The	  theory	  suggests	  that	  the	  elements	  of	  the	  vector	  π 	  estimate	  the	  net	  spillover	  
effect	  resulting	  from	  each	  particular	  type	  of	  supply	  shock.	  

	  
	  

19	  
The	  various	  columns	  of	  Table	  2	  report	  the	  OLS	  coefficients	  from	  alternative	  

specifications	  of	  the	  regression	  model	  in	  equation	  (11).	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  there	  is	  a	  strong	  
positive	  correlation	  between	  each	  individual	  measure	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  and	  the	  output	  of	  
the	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  behind.	  For	  example,	  a	  10	  percent	  increase	  in	  the	  
outmigration	  rate	  in	  idea	  space	  increases	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  annually	  by	  0.09;	  
a	  10	  percent	  increase	  in	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  in	  geographic	  space	  increases	  the	  number	  of	  
papers	  published	  by	  0.05;	  and	  the	  loss	  of	  all	  collaborators	  increases	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  
by	  0.09.	  Obviously,	  a	  substantial	  correlation	  between	  the	  unobserved	  determinants	  of	  a	  
mathematician’s	  productivity	  and	  the	  supply	  shocks	  faced	  by	  that	  mathematician	  would	  
bias	  the	  OLS	  coefficients.	  	  
	  
IV. Accounting for Endogeneity
	  

The	  subsample	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés	  residing	  in	  a	  particular	  mathematician’s	  idea,	  

geographic,	  and	  collaboration	  spaces	  is	  not	  random.	  The	  productivity	  profile	  of	  
mathematicians	  who	  lose	  many	  intellectual	  peers	  to	  emigration	  likely	  differs	  from	  the	  
productivity	  profile	  of	  those	  who	  lose	  few	  peers.	  Similarly,	  there	  are	  unobserved	  factors	  
that	  allowed	  some	  mathematicians	  in	  a	  particular	  collaboration	  network	  to	  receive	  job	  
offers	  from	  the	  West.	  Any	  type	  of	  intra-­‐network	  correlation	  would	  contaminate	  the	  OLS	  
estimate	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  coauthors	  that	  
remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union.	  Hence	  we	  use	  three	  separate	  instruments	  for	  the	  supply	  
shocks	  in	  each	  mathematician's	  idea,	  geographic,	  and	  collaboration	  spaces.	  

	  

20	  

	  

All	  three	  of	  our	  instruments	  rely	  on	  the	  Jewish	  identity	  of	  the	  peers.10	  Jewish	  

mathematicians	  were	  more	  likely	  to	  emigrate	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  than	  their	  non-­‐Jewish	  
counterparts	  for	  two	  reasons.	  First,	  it	  has	  been	  repeatedly	  documented	  that	  Soviet-­‐era	  anti-­‐
Semitism	  affected	  the	  Jewish	  mathematical	  community,	  even	  at	  the	  highest	  levels	  (Saul,	  
1999;	  Graham,	  1993).	  Second,	  Israel	  was	  eager	  to	  welcome	  Jewish	  immigrants,	  granting	  
them	  and	  their	  families	  automatic	  citizenship.	  
To	  construct	  the	  instruments,	  we	  need	  to	  know	  which	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  were	  
likely	  to	  have	  Jewish	  ancestry.	  We	  do	  not	  have	  access	  to	  an	  externally	  supplied	  list	  of	  all	  
active	  Jewish	  scientists.	  However,	  we	  do	  have	  access	  to	  the	  surnames	  of	  the	  8,500	  well-­‐
known	  Russian	  Jewish	  individuals	  (all	  of	  whom	  were	  born	  before	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  
Union)	  listed	  in	  the	  1995	  Jewish	  Encyclopedia	  of	  Russia	  (Rossiyskaya	  Evreiskaya	  
Entsiclopediya).	  In	  addition,	  the	  AMS	  provided	  us	  with	  the	  full	  names	  of	  the	  12,224	  active	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  in	  our	  data.	  Because	  many	  Jewish	  family	  names	  have	  distinctive	  
Hebrew	  origins	  (such	  as	  ‫מרגליות‬,	  or	  Margulis)	  or	  are	  rarely	  used	  by	  non-­‐Jews	  in	  Russia,	  we	  
can	  identify	  mathematicians	  who	  are	  likely	  to	  have	  a	  Jewish	  identity	  by	  matching	  the	  
surnames	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  AMS	  database	  with	  the	  list	  of	  Jewish	  surnames	  in	  the	  
Encyclopedia.	  This	  matching	  technique	  identified	  1,051	  likely	  Jewish	  names	  out	  of	  the	  
12,224	  active	  Soviet	  mathematicians,	  or	  8.6	  percent	  of	  the	  active	  Soviet	  mathematics	  
workforce.11	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10	  This	  instrument	  has	  been	  used	  successfully	  in	  related	  studies;	  see	  Waldinger	  (2010,	  2012,	  2013);	  
and	  Moser,	  Voena,	  and	  Waldinger	  (forthcoming).	  
11	  According	  to	  the	  Soviet	  Census	  of	  1989,	  one	  half	  of	  one	  percent	  of	  the	  population	  in	  the	  Soviet	  
Union	  had	  Jewish	  ancestry	  (Demoskop	  Weekly,	  2013).	  

	  
	  

21	  
A	  simple	  regression	  of	  émigré	  status	  on	  likely	  Jewish	  identity	  is	  revealing.	  

Mathematicians	  with	  a	  Jewish	  identity	  were	  more	  than	  twice	  as	  likely	  to	  emigrate	  than	  
their	  non-­‐Jewish	  peers	  (17.4	  percent	  versus	  7.8	  percent).	  We	  can	  further	  check	  the	  
accuracy	  of	  our	  detection	  of	  likely	  Jewish	  identity	  by	  determining	  how	  many	  of	  the	  émigrés	  
who	  moved	  to	  Israel	  are	  predicted	  to	  be	  Jewish.	  Israel's	  immigration	  laws	  suggest	  that	  
practically	  all	  of	  the	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  moving	  there	  had	  a	  Jewish	  identity	  (although	  
many	  may	  have	  had	  gentile	  family	  names	  due	  to	  marriage	  or	  other	  reasons).	  In	  fact,	  over	  30	  
percent	  of	  the	  émigrés	  who	  moved	  to	  Israel	  had	  one	  of	  the	  Jewish	  surnames	  listed	  in	  the	  
Encyclopedia.12	  
	  

We	  construct	  the	  instrument	  for	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  in	  the	  space	  of	  ideas	  as	  

follows.	  In	  particular,	  let	   PfS* 	  be	  the	  total	  number	  of	  pre-­‐1990	  papers	  published	  in	  field	  f	  by	  
all	  Soviet	  mathematicians,	  and	   PfJ* 	  be	  the	  respective	  number	  of	  pre-­‐1990	  papers	  published	  
by	  Soviet	  Jewish	  mathematicians.	  We	  can	  then	  define	  an	  index	  measuring	  the	  proportion	  of	  
mathematician	  i	  's	  peers	  in	  idea	  space	  that	  are	  at	  risk	  of	  migrating	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  
collapse	  as:	  
	  
(12)	   	  

*
	   qiD
= ∑ α if
f

PfJ*
, 	  
PfS*

	  
where	  αif	  gives	  the	  share	  of	  pre-­‐1990	  papers	  that	  mathematician	  i	  published	  in	  field	  f.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12	  We	  tried	  several	  alternative	  approaches	  to	  determine	  likely	  Jewish	  identity	  based	  on	  by-­‐hand	  
inspection	  of	  the	  list	  of	  names	  of	  Soviet	  émigrés,	  and	  by-­‐hand	  Internet	  searches	  of	  individual	  names	  and	  even	  
biographical	  information	  about	  individual	  mathematicians.	  Every	  approach	  we	  tried	  yielded	  remarkably	  
similar	  results.	  We	  report	  the	  results	  that	  use	  the	  surname	  list	  in	  the	  Jewish	  Encyclopedia	  of	  Russia	  because	  
they	  are	  the	  simplest	  to	  explain	  and	  replicate.	  

	  
	  

22	  
There	  is	  little	  reason	  to	  believe	  that	  a	  Soviet	  mathematician's	  pre-­‐1990	  field	  mix	  

was	  chosen	  with	  the	  knowledge	  that	  fields	  with	  Jewish	  mathematicians	  would	  suffer	  a	  
sudden	  loss	  of	  talent	  after	  1992.	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (2012)	  summarize	  historical	  evidence	  
showing	  that	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  was	  unexpected	  on	  both	  sides	  of	  the	  Iron	  
Curtain.	  	  	  
We	  use	  an	  analogous	  approach	  to	  define	  the	  instrument	  for	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  
geographic	  space.	  Let	  k	  be	  the	  last	  institution	  employing	  mathematician	  i	  prior	  to	  1990;	   PkJ* 	  
be	  the	  number	  of	  pre-­‐1990	  papers	  written	  by	  Jewish	  mathematicians	  associated	  with	  
institution	  k;	  and	   PkS* 	  be	  the	  respective	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  by	  all	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  in	  that	  institution.	  We	  define	  the	  instrument	  for	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  
geographic	  space	  as	  
	  
(13)	   	  

*
qiG
=

PkJ*
. 	  
PkS*

	  	  
Note	  that	  the	  instrument	  in	  (13)	  has	  a	  value	  approaching	  one	  when	  all	  mathematicians	  
affiliated	  with	  institution	  k	  have	  a	  Jewish	  identity,	  and	  zero	  when	  none	  do.	  	  
	  

Finally,	  let	   α ip 	  be	  an	  indicator	  variable	  set	  to	  unity	  if	  the	  mathematician’s	  coauthor	  

in	  collaboration	  event	  p	  (p	  =	  1,…,P)	  has	  a	  Jewish	  surname.13	  We	  then	  define	  the	  instrument	  
as:	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13	  A	  collaboration	  event	  is	  a	  pairing	  between	  two	  authors	  in	  a	  single	  paper.	  If	  mathematician	  i	  writes	  
a	  paper	  with	  mathematicians	  j	  and	  k,	  then	  mathematician	  i	  has	  two	  collaboration	  events	  in	  that	  paper	  (one	  
with	  mathematician	  j	  and	  one	  with	  mathematician	  k).	  

	  

23	  

(14)	   	  

*
	   qiC
=

1
∑ α ip , 	  
P p

	  
where	  the	  summation	  is	  conducted	  over	  all	  collaborations	  that	  occurred	  prior	  to	  1990.	  The	  
instrument,	  therefore,	  is	  given	  by	  the	  (weighted)	  fraction	  of	  mathematician	  i’s	  
collaborators	  that	  are	  predicted	  to	  have	  a	  Jewish	  identity.14	  
	  
V. Results
Table	  3	  presents	  the	  relevant	  coefficients	  from	  the	  first-­‐stage	  regressions.	  The	  first	  
three	  columns	  show	  the	  relation	  when	  each	  instrument	  is	  included	  separately	  in	  the	  
relevant	  regression,	  while	  the	  last	  three	  columns	  show	  the	  coefficients	  when	  all	  three	  
instruments	  are	  introduced	  simultaneously.	  The	  instruments	  are	  sufficiently	  uncorrelated	  
that	  they	  are	  not	  collinear	  and	  can	  be	  included	  either	  separately	  or	  simultaneously	  as	  
instruments	  for	  the	  three	  supply	  shock	  variables	  in	  idea,	  geographic,	  and	  collaboration	  
space,	  respectively.15	  Each	  instrument	  has	  a	  positive	  and	  significant	  impact	  on	  the	  
proportion	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  peers	  who	  emigrated	  (in	  the	  relevant	  space).	  The	  Angrist-­‐
Pischke	  multivariate	  F	  test	  of	  excluded	  instruments	  is	  always	  highly	  significant,	  with	  F-­‐
statistics	  of	  88	  or	  higher,	  and	  p-­‐values	  extremely	  close	  to	  zero.	  
	  

Table	  4	  presents	  various	  alternative	  IV	  specifications	  of	  the	  regression	  model	  in	  

equation	  (11).	  The	  evidence	  clearly	  indicates	  that	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  idea	  space	  has	  a	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14	  We	  also	  experimented	  with	  specifications	  where	  the	  fraction	  is	  not	  weighted,	  and	  the	  results	  were	  
quite	  similar	  to	  those	  reported	  below.	  
15	  The	  pairwise	  correlations	  among	  the	  instruments	  for	  the	  shocks	  in	  idea,	  geographic,	  and	  
collaboration	  space	  range	  from	  about	  0.10	  to	  0.15.	  	  

	  

24	  

positive	  and	  significant	  effect	  on	  a	  mathematician’s	  productivity.	  A	  supply	  shock	  that	  
removes	  10	  percent	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  from	  a	  particular	  location	  in	  idea	  space	  leads	  to	  
an	  increase	  of	  0.06	  in	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  that	  a	  competing	  mathematician	  publishes	  in	  
any	  given	  year	  (using	  the	  specification	  in	  column	  4).	  Since	  the	  average	  non-­‐émigré	  
published	  0.8	  papers	  per	  year	  prior	  to	  1992,	  the	  10-­‐percentage	  point	  increase	  in	  the	  
outmigration	  rate	  is	  associated	  with	  an	  8	  percent	  increase	  in	  output.	  Notably,	  the	  
coefficients	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  space	  and	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  
space	  are	  frequently	  or	  always	  insignificantly	  different	  from	  zero.16	  It	  seems,	  therefore,	  as	  if	  
the	  various	  supply	  shocks	  sparked	  by	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  had	  their	  most	  
consistent	  average	  impact	  in	  idea	  space,	  where	  they	  significantly	  reduced	  competition	  and	  
allowed	  the	  stayers	  to	  publish	  more.17	  	  
	  

The	  raw	  data	  clearly	  reveals	  the	  source	  of	  the	  IV	  results	  reported	  in	  Table	  4.	  In	  

particular,	  Figure	  2	  illustrates	  the	  trends	  in	  the	  annual	  publication	  rate	  for	  the	  sample	  of	  
mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union.	  In	  the	  first	  two	  panels,	  we	  
identify	  two	  groups	  of	  mathematicians	  based	  on	  the	  value	  of	  each	  respective	  instrument:	  
the	  first	  group	  consists	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  have	  values	  of	  the	  instrument	  below	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16	  We	  also	  experimented	  with	  alternative	  “demand-­‐side”	  instruments	  that	  predict	  the	  migration	  of	  
peers	  in	  idea	  and	  geographic	  space	  using	  information	  on	  the	  pre-­‐shock	  worldwide	  demand	  for	  the	  topics	  the	  
peers	  worked	  on.	  The	  results	  are	  similar	  to	  those	  reported	  in	  the	  text.	  
17	  In	  addition	  to	  the	  main	  results	  in	  Panel	  B	  using	  papers	  per	  year	  as	  the	  outcome	  variable,	  we	  also	  
report	  ancillary	  results	  in	  Panel	  A	  using	  publication	  propensity	  (any	  publications	  at	  all)	  as	  the	  outcome	  
variable.	  Although	  the	  use	  of	  this	  binary	  outcome	  variable	  creates	  heteroscedasticity	  that	  could	  bias	  the	  
standard	  errors,	  the	  Huber-­‐White	  robust	  standard	  errors	  correct	  for	  this	  model-­‐based	  heteroscedasticity	  in	  
linear	  probability	  regressions,	  and	  the	  clustered	  standard	  errors	  that	  we	  report	  in	  the	  table	  do	  so	  as	  well.	  
While	  logit	  regressions	  would	  avoid	  such	  model-­‐based	  heteroscedasticity,	  they	  would	  introduce	  the	  very	  
difficult	  numerical	  problem	  of	  maximizing	  a	  likelihood	  function	  with	  thousands	  of	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  We	  
follow	  much	  of	  the	  empirical	  literature	  and	  make	  use	  of	  linear	  regressions	  for	  these	  ancillary	  specifications,	  
relying	  on	  Huber-­‐White	  standard	  errors	  (and	  their	  cluster	  generalization)	  to	  correct	  for	  any	  resulting	  
heteroscedasticity.	  

	  

25	  

10th	  percentile,	  while	  the	  second	  group	  consists	  of	  those	  with	  values	  above	  the	  90th	  
percentile.	  As	  Figure	  2a	  shows,	  there	  is	  a	  relative	  increase	  after	  1992	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
publications	  by	  mathematicians	  most	  exposed	  to	  a	  supply	  shock	  in	  idea	  space.	  
	  

Figure	  2b	  shows	  that	  there	  may	  have	  been	  a	  small	  relative	  increase	  after	  1992	  in	  the	  

number	  of	  publications	  by	  mathematicians	  most	  exposed	  to	  a	  supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  
space,	  but	  the	  effect	  is	  smaller,	  less	  visually	  precise,	  and	  ended	  quickly,	  corresponding	  with	  
the	  variation	  in	  the	  regression	  coefficients	  reported	  in	  Table	  4.	  The	  bottom	  panel	  of	  the	  
figure,	  which	  illustrates	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space,	  defines	  the	  groups	  based	  
on	  the	  presence	  of	  Jewish	  coauthors.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  there	  is	  little	  difference	  in	  the	  shape	  
of	  the	  output	  profiles	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  two	  groups.18	  
	  

There	  are	  several	  reasons	  why	  Soviet	  stayers	  who	  lost	  many	  intellectual	  

competitors	  in	  idea	  space	  may	  have	  published	  more.	  First,	  émigrés	  were	  less	  likely	  to	  
continue	  publishing	  in	  Russian-­‐language	  journals	  after	  departing;	  if	  the	  journals	  were	  
resistant	  to	  decreasing	  their	  pages	  in	  subfields	  heavily	  hit	  by	  departures,	  this	  would	  have	  
freed	  up	  space	  in	  the	  journal	  market	  for	  Soviet	  stayers	  in	  those	  fields.	  While	  such	  effects	  of	  
the	  journal	  market	  on	  knowledge	  generation	  are	  important	  to	  document,	  it	  is	  also	  
intriguing	  to	  consider	  another	  possibility:	  perhaps	  the	  departure	  of	  intellectual	  
competitors	  gave	  the	  stayers	  access	  to	  jobs,	  research	  funds,	  graduate	  students,	  or	  other	  
resources	  that	  improved	  their	  “true”	  productivity.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18	  Mathematicians	  who	  do	  not	  have	  a	  Jewish	  coauthor	  make	  up	  79	  percent	  of	  the	  sample,	  so	  we	  
cannot	  divide	  the	  categories	  in	  panel	  C	  as	  we	  did	  in	  the	  first	  two	  panels.	  For	  definitional	  symmetry,	  we	  divide	  
the	  categories	  according	  to	  no	  Jewish	  coauthors	  (the	  79th	  percentile	  and	  below)	  and	  all	  Jewish	  coauthors	  (the	  
97th	  percentile	  and	  above).	  The	  results	  look	  similar	  if	  we	  expand	  the	  Jewish	  coauthors	  group	  to	  the	  90th	  
percentile	  and	  above	  (more	  than	  one-­‐fourth	  Jewish	  coauthors).	  

	  

26	  

	  

We	  examine	  this	  possibility	  by	  considering	  a	  market	  relatively	  unaffected	  by	  

variation	  in	  Soviet	  journal	  space:	  the	  market	  for	  space	  in	  top	  international	  journals.	  We	  
define	  top	  international	  journals	  as	  those	  with	  high	  impact	  factors	  according	  to	  the	  
Thompson	  Reuters	  Web	  of	  Science.	  Specifically,	  we	  focus	  on	  an	  extremely	  selective	  list	  of	  
about	  40	  exceptional	  journals	  across	  all	  areas	  of	  pure	  mathematics,	  all	  areas	  of	  applied	  
mathematics,	  theoretical	  physics,	  statistical	  physics,	  and	  mathematical	  physics.	  The	  list	  
includes	  outlets	  such	  as	  Science,	  Nature,	  The	  Journal	  of	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  Society,	  
Physical	  Review	  Letters,	  and	  Communications	  on	  Pure	  and	  Applied	  Mathematics	  (see	  the	  
Supplemental	  Appendix	  for	  more	  details).	  We	  re-­‐estimated	  equation	  (11)	  using	  the	  number	  
of	  papers	  published	  in	  these	  top	  journals	  as	  the	  dependent	  variable.	  The	  regression	  
coefficient	  for	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  idea	  space	  is	  0.11	  (0.05),	  implying	  that	  a	  10-­‐percentage	  
point	  increase	  in	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  is	  associated	  with	  a	  22	  percent	  increase	  in	  output	  in	  
top	  journals.	  	  
	  

One	  problem	  with	  emphasizing	  publications	  in	  the	  top	  international	  journals	  is	  that	  

Soviet	  academics	  were	  strongly	  "discouraged"	  from	  publishing	  in	  Western	  outlets	  before	  
the	  collapse	  of	  Soviet	  communism,	  and	  needed	  special	  permission	  to	  do	  so.	  In	  an	  
environment	  in	  which	  even	  the	  best	  scientists	  were	  regularly	  arrested	  or	  banished	  (see	  the	  
list	  of	  scientific	  prisoners	  in	  Graham,	  1993),	  and	  in	  which	  any	  scientific	  contact	  with	  the	  
West	  could	  result	  in	  punishment,	  the	  relative	  trickle	  of	  Soviet	  output	  in	  top	  international	  
journals	  before	  1992	  represents	  something	  other	  than	  the	  sum	  total	  of	  high-­‐quality	  Soviet	  
achievement:	  rather,	  it	  represents	  the	  small	  subset	  of	  high-­‐level	  achievement	  that	  the	  
authorities	  deemed	  acceptable	  for	  foreign	  publication.	  A	  preferable	  approach	  might	  be	  to	  
compare	  output	  in	  the	  best	  outlets	  that	  Soviet	  academics	  could	  freely	  publish	  in	  before	  the	  

	  

27	  

collapse	  with	  output	  in	  the	  best	  outlets	  that	  Soviet	  academics	  could	  freely	  publish	  in	  after	  
the	  collapse.	  To	  do	  so,	  we	  create	  a	  variable	  that	  is	  identical	  to	  the	  “Top	  40”	  output	  measure	  
defined	  earlier	  in	  the	  years	  after	  the	  collapse,	  but	  only	  uses	  output	  in	  the	  top	  3	  Soviet-­‐era	  
journals	  in	  the	  years	  before	  the	  collapse:	  Математический	  сборник;	  Izvestiya	  Rossiiskoi	  
Akademii	  Nauk,	  Seriya	  Matematicheskaya;	  and	  Uspekhi	  Matematicheskikh	  Nauk.19	  We	  re-­‐
estimate	  equation	  (11)	  using	  this	  alternative	  dependent	  variable,	  and	  report	  the	  resulting	  
coefficients	  in	  column	  (5)	  of	  Table	  4.	  We	  again	  find	  a	  large	  and	  statistically	  significant	  
impact	  of	  the	  shock	  in	  idea	  space.20	  
	  

The	  evidence,	  therefore,	  strongly	  suggests	  that	  Soviet	  scientists	  who	  lost	  intellectual	  

competitors	  were	  indeed	  able	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  resources	  other	  than	  pages	  in	  (the	  now	  
more	  empty)	  Russian-­‐language	  journals.	  This	  finding	  is	  not	  surprising,	  considering	  that	  the	  
fierce	  competition	  for	  limited	  research	  positions	  familiar	  in	  academia	  today	  was	  at	  least	  as	  
prevalent	  in	  the	  scientific	  system	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  (see	  Graham,	  1993).	  Soviet	  scientists	  
often	  waited	  years	  for	  someone	  in	  a	  research	  post	  to	  retire.	  The	  sudden	  migration	  of	  key	  
scientists	  would	  have	  freed	  important	  research	  posts	  for	  the	  competitors	  who	  remained	  
behind,	  especially	  in	  comparison	  to	  stayers	  who	  lost	  few	  competitors	  during	  the	  shock	  but	  
suffered	  from	  the	  same	  overall	  trends.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19	  There	  was	  less	  international	  competition	  for	  top	  Soviet	  journals	  before	  the	  collapse	  than	  there	  
was	  for	  top	  international	  journals	  after	  the	  collapse,	  so	  to	  hold	  quality	  constant	  it	  is	  sensible	  to	  restrict	  the	  
pre-­‐collapse	  Soviet	  journals	  to	  a	  much	  smaller	  number.	  There	  are	  a	  small	  number	  of	  missing	  observations	  in	  
the	  disaggregated	  data	  set	  provided	  to	  use	  by	  the	  AMS	  that	  contains	  full	  author	  and	  journal	  information.	  The	  
results	  are	  almost	  identical	  if	  we	  treat	  missing	  observations	  as	  zeros	  in	  columns	  5	  and	  6	  of	  Table	  4	  or	  if	  we	  
simply	  exclude	  the	  observations.	  For	  simplicity,	  we	  only	  report	  the	  former	  set	  of	  results.	  
20	  We	  can	  also	  create	  a	  variable	  that	  uses	  output	  in	  both	  top	  Soviet	  and	  top	  international	  journals	  in	  
the	  years	  before	  the	  collapse,	  and	  only	  output	  in	  top	  international	  journals	  after	  the	  collapse.	  The	  resulting	  
coefficient	  is	  similar	  in	  magnitude	  and	  still	  statistically	  significant.	  

	  
	  

28	  
Up	  to	  this	  point	  our	  analysis	  gives	  each	  author	  of	  a	  paper	  full	  credit	  for	  the	  paper,	  

regardless	  of	  the	  number	  of	  coauthors.	  If	  the	  incidence	  of	  coauthorship	  is	  changing	  over	  
time,	  and	  perhaps	  changing	  differentially	  across	  fields,	  the	  evidence	  reported	  in	  Table	  4	  
could	  be	  contaminated	  by	  our	  measurement	  decision.	  To	  examine	  the	  robustness	  of	  our	  
results,	  we	  created	  a	  new	  outcome	  variable	  consisting	  of	  the	  total	  number	  of	  fractional	  
shares	  of	  papers	  that	  an	  author	  published	  in	  a	  given	  year,	  where	  an	  author	  earns	  a	  (1/n)	  
share	  of	  a	  paper	  in	  which	  there	  are	  n	  authors.	  The	  results	  in	  column	  (6)	  again	  show	  a	  large	  
and	  statistically	  significant	  impact	  of	  the	  shock.	  
	  

Finally,	  one	  potential	  problem	  with	  the	  analysis	  is	  that	  once	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  

were	  exposed	  to	  the	  Western	  mathematics	  community	  after	  1992,	  the	  exposure	  may	  have	  
increased	  the	  relative	  marketability	  of	  some	  types	  of	  mathematics.	  In	  particular,	  the	  
sudden	  interaction	  with	  the	  demand	  for	  (and	  supply	  of)	  "Western-­‐style"	  mathematics	  may	  
affect	  the	  results	  by	  making	  it	  either	  easier	  (or	  harder)	  to	  publish	  in	  Western-­‐style	  fields	  
after	  the	  shock,	  creating	  a	  differential	  time	  trend	  in	  output	  across	  fields	  of	  mathematics.	  
While	  our	  instrument	  is	  designed	  to	  avoid	  such	  issues	  (we	  have	  no	  reason	  to	  suspect	  that	  
Soviet	  Jewish	  mathematicians	  chose	  to	  cluster	  in	  Western-­‐style	  fields,	  nor	  is	  there	  a	  high	  
correlation	  between	  the	  fields	  they	  specialized	  in	  and	  the	  fields	  that	  were	  popular	  in	  the	  
West),	  we	  also	  address	  the	  problem	  by	  controlling	  for	  arbitrary	  field-­‐specific	  secular	  trends	  
in	  the	  regression	  model.	  The	  sample	  is	  now	  constructed	  so	  that	  a	  particular	  observation	  
represents	  an	  author-­‐field-­‐year	  cell.	  In	  other	  words,	  our	  data	  now	  consists	  of	  the	  
publication	  history	  of	  each	  Soviet	  non-­‐émigré	  in	  each	  of	  the	  63	  fields	  in	  mathematics	  for	  
each	  year	  in	  the	  sample	  period.	  The	  expanded	  regression	  model	  is:	  
	  

	  

29	  

(15)	   	  

yift	  =	  ϕi	  +	  ϕft	  +	  Xit	  γ	  +	  (qi	  × 	  T)	  π 	  +	  εift,	  

	  
where	  yift	  measures	  the	  productivity	  of	  mathematician	  i	  in	  field	  f	  in	  year	  t;	  and	  ϕft	  is	  a	  
vector	  that	  includes	  all	  interactions	  between	  field	  and	  year	  fixed	  effects.	  Once	  again,	  qi	  
gives	  the	  vector	  of	  person-­‐specific	  supply	  shocks	  (qiD,	  qiG,	  qiC)	  defined	  earlier.	  
Table	  5	  reports	  the	  relevant	  coefficients	  from	  this	  expanded	  specification.	  A	  
comparison	  of	  the	  coefficients	  in	  Tables	  4	  and	  5	  makes	  it	  evident	  that	  the	  results	  are	  
qualitatively	  similar.	  The	  numerical	  magnitude	  of	  the	  coefficients	  is	  smaller	  in	  Table	  5,	  but	  
this	  is	  purely	  a	  mechanical	  effect	  because	  the	  total	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  is	  divided	  
among	  the	  63	  fields	  that	  make	  up	  the	  mathematics	  discipline.	  The	  correct	  comparison	  is	  
obtained	  by	  multiplying	  the	  coefficients	  in	  Table	  5	  by	  63.	  Such	  a	  comparison	  reveals	  that	  
the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shocks	  on	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  is	  essentially	  the	  same	  
in	  the	  two	  tables.21	  
	  

The	  model	  presented	  in	  Section	  II	  provides	  a	  useful	  lens	  for	  interpreting	  the	  

regression	  evidence.22	  The	  impact	  of	  a	  specific	  type	  of	  supply	  shock	  depends	  on	  the	  relative	  
strengths	  of	  human	  capital	  spillovers	  and	  the	  relaxation	  of	  the	  scarcity	  constraints.	  The	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21	  It	  is	  also	  important	  to	  consider	  the	  impact	  of	  selection	  bias:	  the	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  
those	  areas	  of	  geographic,	  intellectual,	  and	  collaboration	  space	  that	  lost	  many	  peers	  may	  be	  intrinsically	  
different	  than	  the	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  those	  areas	  that	  lost	  few	  peers.	  The	  inclusion	  of	  person-­‐
specific	  fixed	  effects	  controls	  for	  average	  differences	  in	  performance.	  It	  may	  be,	  however,	  that	  the	  slope	  of	  the	  
productivity	  profile	  also	  differs	  between	  the	  two	  groups.	  These	  differences	  in	  slope,	  however,	  can	  be	  
controlled	  for	  by	  estimating	  a	  regression	  that	  has	  individual	  linear	  time	  trends	  (i.e.,	  interactions	  between	  the	  
individual	  fixed	  effects	  and	  years	  of	  experience).	  We	  estimated	  various	  specifications	  of	  the	  regression	  model	  
using	  this	  more	  general	  specification	  and	  the	  results	  repeatedly	  confirmed	  the	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
papers	  documented	  in	  Tables	  4	  and	  5.	  
22	  We	  do	  not	  have	  complete	  data	  on	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  received	  by	  the	  Soviet	  papers	  written	  
prior	  to	  1999.	  We	  note,	  however,	  that	  in	  related	  work	  where	  the	  citation	  data	  is	  more	  complete,	  the	  results	  
tend	  to	  be	  similar	  regardless	  of	  whether	  the	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  or	  the	  number	  of	  
citations	  (Borjas	  and	  Doran,	  2012,	  forthcoming).	  

	  

30	  

positive	  effect	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  the	  space	  of	  ideas	  implies	  that	  diminishing	  returns	  
play	  a	  very	  strong	  role	  in	  that	  particular	  space.	  In	  contrast,	  the	  precisely	  estimated	  zero	  in	  
collaboration	  space	  clearly	  indicates	  that	  the	  beneficial	  human	  capital	  spillovers	  are	  offset	  
by	  the	  power	  of	  the	  diminishing	  returns.	  	  
	  

At	  first	  glance,	  the	  result	  that	  a	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  has	  no	  effect	  on	  

productivity	  is	  surprising;	  Waldinger	  (2010)	  and	  Azoulay	  (2010)	  each	  document	  that	  the	  
loss	  of	  collaborators	  or	  mentors	  results	  in	  a	  substantial	  reduction	  in	  output	  among	  those	  
who	  remain.	  However,	  both	  of	  these	  studies	  focus	  on	  supply	  shocks	  associated	  with	  the	  
loss	  of	  extremely	  high-­‐quality	  coauthors	  and	  mentors.	  This	  insight	  suggests	  that	  we	  
estimate	  a	  separate	  set	  of	  regressions	  in	  which	  we	  allow	  the	  effect	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  
collaboration	  space	  to	  vary	  depending	  on	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  coauthors.	  
	  

We	  therefore	  rank	  authors	  according	  to	  the	  average	  quality	  of	  their	  coauthors.	  Table	  

6	  reports	  the	  estimated	  coefficients	  from	  regressions	  where	  we	  interact	  the	  variable	  
measuring	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  with	  two	  indicator	  variables	  set	  to	  unity	  
if	  mathematician	  i	  is	  below	  or	  above	  the	  95th	  percentile	  of	  this	  ranking.23	  The	  interacted	  
variables	  show	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  output	  is	  consistently	  negative	  and	  
significant	  for	  mathematicians	  with	  high-­‐quality	  coauthors	  and	  typically	  insignificant	  for	  
mathematicians	  with	  lower-­‐quality	  coauthors.	  It	  is	  evident,	  therefore,	  that	  the	  effects	  of	  
spillovers	  dominate	  the	  effects	  of	  competition	  in	  the	  subsample	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23	  We	  measure	  each	  coauthor's	  quality	  by	  calculating	  the	  percentile	  of	  their	  lifetime	  output	  in	  each	  
field,	  and	  then	  taking	  the	  paper-­‐weighted	  average	  of	  these	  percentiles	  across	  all	  fields	  that	  they	  contributed	  
to.	  We	  have	  tried	  a	  number	  of	  different	  ways	  of	  allowing	  the	  effects	  of	  loss	  of	  coauthors	  to	  vary	  according	  to	  
coauthor	  quality	  (including	  linear	  interactions	  of	  coauthor	  quality	  and	  separate	  regressions	  for	  high-­‐quality	  
coauthors).	  The	  results	  are	  robust	  to	  specification	  changes.	  

	  

31	  

collaborate	  with	  very	  high-­‐quality	  knowledge	  producers.24	  Moreover,	  the	  numerical	  impact	  
of	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  this	  select	  subsample	  is	  sizable.	  The	  loss	  of	  just	  ten	  percent	  of	  a	  
mathematician’s	  high-­‐quality	  coauthors	  reduces	  output	  per	  year	  by	  0.06	  papers	  (in	  the	  
specification	  in	  column	  2),	  implying	  roughly	  an	  8	  percent	  decline	  in	  publications.25	  
Figure	  3	  vividly	  illustrates	  this	  result	  by	  showing	  the	  trends	  in	  the	  annual	  
publication	  rate	  for	  the	  subsample	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  former	  Soviet	  
Union	  and	  were	  in	  the	  top	  5	  percent	  of	  the	  coauthor	  quality	  distribution.	  The	  figure	  shows	  
the	  productivity	  path	  for	  two	  values	  of	  the	  instrument:	  the	  first	  group	  consists	  of	  persons	  
who	  had	  no	  Jewish	  coauthors,	  while	  the	  second	  group	  consists	  of	  persons	  who	  only	  had	  
Jewish	  coauthors.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  mathematicians	  who	  had	  Jewish	  coauthors	  (who	  were	  
much	  more	  likely	  to	  emigrate)	  had	  fairly	  similar	  levels	  of	  output	  before	  the	  shock	  to	  
mathematicians	  with	  non-­‐Jewish	  coauthors,	  but	  much	  lower	  output	  after.	  
	  

We	  can	  also	  use	  the	  data	  to	  determine	  how	  the	  departure	  of	  a	  coauthor	  from	  the	  

Soviet	  Union	  adversely	  affected	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  coauthor	  left	  behind.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  
document	  the	  break	  in	  the	  collaboration	  linkage	  resulting	  from	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  
Union.	  Figure	  4	  illustrates	  the	  trend	  in	  the	  average	  annual	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  by	  a	  
coauthorship	  pair	  between	  1982	  and	  2008	  for	  two	  different	  types	  of	  collaborations:	  
coauthorship	  pairs	  where	  both	  coauthors	  remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  and	  coauthorship	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24	  We	  can	  analogously	  allow	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  geographic	  shock	  to	  vary	  depending	  on	  the	  quality	  of	  
the	  institutional	  colleagues.	  However,	  using	  a	  measure	  of	  colleague	  quality	  equivalent	  to	  that	  calculated	  for	  
coauthors,	  we	  do	  not	  find	  any	  consistent	  evidence	  of	  statistically	  significant	  differences	  in	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  
institutional	  shock	  at	  different	  levels	  of	  institutional	  quality.	  We	  cannot	  construct	  an	  analogous	  test	  in	  idea	  
space:	  measuring	  field	  quality	  would	  require	  ranking	  the	  subfields	  of	  mathematics	  according	  to	  some	  
absolute	  standard	  of	  achievement	  that	  transcends	  any	  one	  of	  them.	  
25	  The	  fact	  that	  the	  net	  beneficial	  spillovers	  are	  concentrated	  only	  around	  the	  highest-­‐quality	  
mathematicians	  and	  can	  be	  seen	  to	  accrue	  only	  to	  their	  actual	  coauthors	  could	  be	  taken	  to	  imply	  that	  
spillovers	  in	  knowledge	  production	  are	  not	  generally	  important.	  However,	  the	  productivity	  impact	  of	  even	  
these	  “limited”	  spillovers	  on	  some	  broad	  measure	  of	  mathematical	  knowledge	  could	  be	  quite	  substantial.	  

	  

32	  

pairs	  where	  one	  coauthor	  emigrated.	  It	  is	  clear	  that	  there	  was	  a	  much	  greater	  decline	  in	  the	  
intensity	  of	  collaboration	  in	  the	  latter	  type	  of	  coauthorship	  pairs.	  In	  short,	  the	  geographic	  
separation	  dramatically	  increased	  the	  costs	  of	  collaboration	  between	  the	  émigrés	  and	  the	  
non-­‐émigrés.	  
As	  in	  Azoulay,	  Zivin,	  and	  Wang	  (2010),	  we	  can	  document	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  shock	  in	  
collaboration	  space	  on	  independent	  work	  by	  creating	  a	  new	  outcome	  variable:	  the	  number	  
of	  papers	  that	  mathematician	  i	  wrote	  in	  year	  t	  that	  are	  not	  coauthored	  with	  future	  émigrés.	  
We	  report	  the	  results	  using	  this	  outcome	  variable	  in	  column	  4	  of	  Table	  6.	  The	  impact	  of	  the	  
supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  remains	  negative	  and	  significant	  for	  those	  
mathematicians	  with	  high-­‐quality	  coauthors,	  and	  the	  numerical	  magnitude	  of	  the	  impact	  is	  
roughly	  the	  same	  as	  that	  reported	  in	  the	  other	  specifications	  of	  Table	  6.	  
	  

In	  sum,	  the	  coauthors	  that	  remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  were	  adversely	  affected	  in	  

two	  ways	  by	  the	  departure	  of	  their	  high-­‐quality	  collaborators:	  they	  published	  less	  joint	  
work	  with	  their	  now-­‐absent	  coauthors,	  and	  they	  also	  published	  less	  of	  their	  own	  work	  as	  
well.	  It	  seems	  as	  if	  the	  severing	  of	  the	  coauthorship	  relationship	  made	  it	  harder	  to	  “pick	  up”	  
the	  knowledge	  that	  would	  have	  spilled	  over	  from	  the	  high-­‐quality	  collaborator.	  For	  
example,	  a	  mathematician	  will	  miss	  out	  on	  all	  the	  benefits	  that	  would	  have	  accrued	  from	  
frequently	  discussing	  various	  topics	  with	  his	  collaborator	  or	  from	  testing	  out	  new	  ideas	  in	  
casual	  conversation.	  These	  types	  of	  informal	  activities	  play	  a	  key	  role	  in	  the	  transmission	  of	  
tacit	  knowledge.	  
	  

	  

33	  

VI. Summary
	  

Many	  economists	  believe	  that	  knowledge	  production	  generates	  large	  positive	  

externalities	  among	  knowledge	  producers,	  allowing	  for	  steadily	  increasing	  technological	  
change	  and	  economic	  growth.	  We	  argue	  that	  these	  spillovers	  may	  occur	  in	  at	  least	  three	  
distinct	  dimensions:	  Spillovers	  may	  arise	  among	  knowledge	  producers	  who	  work	  on	  
similar	  topics	  or	  ideas;	  or	  among	  knowledge	  producers	  who	  work	  in	  the	  same	  university	  
department;	  or	  among	  knowledge	  producers	  who	  collaborate	  directly	  in	  the	  joint	  creation	  
of	  knowledge.	  
	  

We	  exploit	  the	  diaspora	  resulting	  from	  a	  single	  natural	  experiment	  to	  measure	  the	  

productivity	  impact	  of	  a	  supply	  shock	  in	  each	  of	  these	  conceptually	  distinct	  types	  of	  
“spaces.”	  In	  particular,	  we	  examine	  the	  consequences	  of	  the	  mass	  emigration	  of	  Soviet	  
mathematicians	  after	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  
mathematicians	  who	  remained	  behind.	  Some	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  lost	  peers	  who	  were	  
close	  to	  them	  in	  idea	  space	  (i.e.,	  they	  worked	  on	  the	  same	  topics);	  other	  mathematicians	  
lost	  peers	  who	  were	  close	  in	  geographic	  space	  (i.e.,	  they	  were	  employed	  by	  the	  same	  
university	  department);	  and	  some	  lost	  peers	  who	  were	  close	  to	  them	  in	  collaboration	  space	  
(i.e.,	  they	  had	  been	  coauthors	  prior	  to	  the	  collapse).	  
	  

Our	  theoretical	  model	  suggests	  that	  a	  supply	  shock	  in	  any	  particular	  space	  will	  

typically	  generate	  both	  spillover	  and	  competition	  effects.	  The	  law	  of	  diminishing	  returns	  
implies	  that	  the	  mass	  emigration	  should	  improve	  economic	  opportunities	  for	  the	  
mathematicians	  left	  behind,	  while	  the	  spillover	  hypothesis	  would	  imply	  that	  the	  mass	  
emigration	  should	  reduce	  their	  future	  output.	  The	  effect	  observed	  empirically	  represents	  

	  

34	  

the	  net	  impact	  of	  these	  two	  forces.	  Clearly,	  each	  of	  these	  forces	  may	  vary	  in	  intensity	  
depending	  on	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  space	  being	  considered.	  
	  

Our	  empirical	  analysis	  used	  a	  unique	  dataset	  that	  contains	  information	  on	  the	  

complete	  publication	  history	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  were	  active	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  prior	  
to	  its	  collapse.	  These	  data	  allow	  us	  to	  trace	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  diaspora	  on	  the	  output	  of	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  and	  to	  determine	  the	  relation	  between	  these	  trends	  and	  the	  supply	  
shocks	  that	  occurred	  along	  the	  various	  dimensions.	  The	  evidence	  indicates	  that	  the	  supply	  
shock	  in	  idea	  space	  led	  to	  an	  increase	  in	  academic	  output	  for	  the	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  left	  
behind;	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  space	  had	  no	  consistent	  statistically	  significant	  
effect	  on	  academic	  output;	  and	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  led	  to	  no	  change	  in	  
research	  output	  for	  the	  average	  mathematician,	  but	  let	  to	  a	  large	  decline	  for	  
mathematicians	  who	  lost	  high-­‐quality	  coauthors	  in	  the	  exodus.	  
	  

Our	  evidence	  emphasizes	  the	  fundamental	  but	  insufficiently	  studied	  fact	  that	  there	  

are	  different	  ways	  of	  defining	  a	  “peer.”	  As	  a	  result,	  spillovers	  may	  be	  more	  or	  less	  powerful	  
relative	  to	  competition	  for	  resources	  depending	  on	  which	  type	  of	  peer	  group	  is	  being	  
examined.	  Competition	  is	  too	  intense	  in	  the	  space	  of	  ideas	  for	  spillovers	  to	  be	  empirically	  
important	  among	  researchers	  who	  are	  not	  collaborating,	  but	  are	  working	  on	  the	  same	  
topics.	  Spillovers	  are	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  empirically	  relevant	  when	  two	  researchers	  are	  
interacting	  regularly,	  are	  jointly	  producing	  new	  intellectual	  content,	  and	  at	  least	  one	  of	  
them	  is	  of	  extremely	  high	  quality.	  Knowledge	  spillovers,	  in	  effect,	  are	  like	  halos	  over	  the	  
heads	  of	  the	  highest-­‐quality	  knowledge	  producers,	  reflecting	  only	  on	  those	  who	  work	  
directly	  with	  the	  stars.	  

	  

35	  
References	  

	  
	  
Abramitzky,	  Ran,	  and	  Isabelle	  Sin,	  “Book	  Translations	  as	  Idea	  Flows:	  The	  Effects	  of	  
the	  Collapse	  of	  Communism	  on	  the	  Diffusion	  of	  Knowledge,”	  Journal	  of	  the	  European	  
Economic	  Association	  (forthcoming).	  
	  
	  
Azoulay,	  Pierre,	  Joshua	  S.	  Graff	  Zivin,	  and	  Jialan	  Wang,	  “Superstar	  Extinction,”	  
Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  125:2	  (2010),	  549-­‐589.	  
	  
	  
Basu,	  Aparna,	  and	  Roland	  Wagner	  Dobler,	  "'Cognitive	  Mobility'	  or	  Migration	  of	  
Authors	  Between	  Fields	  Used	  in	  Mapping	  a	  Network	  of	  Mathematics,"	  Scientometrics	  91:2	  
(2012),	  353-­‐368.	  
	  
	  
Borjas,	  George	  J.,	  and	  Kirk	  B.	  Doran,	  “The	  Collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  and	  the	  
Productivity	  of	  American	  Mathematicians,”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  127:3	  (2012),	  
1143-­‐1203.	  
	  
	  
Borjas,	  George	  J.	  and	  Kirk	  B.	  Doran,	  “Cognitive	  Mobility:	  Labor	  Market	  Responses	  to	  
Supply	  Shocks	  in	  the	  Space	  of	  Ideas,”	  Journal	  of	  Labor	  Economics	  (forthcoming).	  
	  
Demoskop	  Weekly,	  "demoscope.ru/weekly/ssp/sng_nac_89.php",	  accessed	  on	  
February	  27,	  2013.	  
	  
Franzoni, Chiara, Giuseppe Scellato, and Paula Stephan, “The Mover’s Advantage:
Scientific Performance of Mobile Academics,” National Bureau of Economic Research working
paper (2012).
	  
	  
Ganguli,	  Ina,	  "Immigration	  &	  Ideas:	  What	  Did	  Russian	  Scientists	  `Bring'	  to	  the	  US?",	  
Stockholm	  School	  of	  Economics	  working	  paper	  (2012).	  
	  
	  
Ganguli,	  Ina,	  “Saving	  Soviet	  Science:	  The	  Impact	  of	  Grants	  When	  Government	  R&D	  
Funding	  Disappears,”	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Applied	  Economics	  (forthcoming).	  
	  
Graham,	  Loren,	  Science	  in	  Russia	  and	  the	  Soviet	  Union:	  A	  Short	  History	  (New	  York:	  
Cambridge	  University	  Press,	  1993).	  
	  
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon H. Hanson, “Attracting Talent: Location Choices of
Foreign-Born PhDs in the US,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper (2013).
	  
	  
Hunt,	  Jennifer,	  and	  Marjolaine	  Gauthier-­‐Loiselle,	  "How	  Much	  Does	  Immigration	  
Boost	  Innovation?"	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Macroeconomics,	  2:2	  (2010),	  31–56.	  
	  
	  
Jewish	  Encyclopedia	  of	  Russia	  (Rossiyskaya	  Evreiskaya	  Entsiclopediya),	  first	  edition,	  
1995;	  translated	  by	  Josif	  and	  Vitaly	  Charny	  (2003);	  available	  online	  at	  
www.jewishgen.org/belarus/rje_a.htm.	  
	  

	  

36	  

	  
Jones,	  Charles	  I.	  “Growth	  and	  Ideas,”	  in	  P.	  Aghion	  and	  S.	  Durlauf	  (eds.),	  Handbook	  of	  
Economic	  Growth	  Vol.	  1,	  Part	  2	  (New	  York:	  Elsevier,	  2005).	  
	  
	  
Jones,	  Charles	  I.,	  and	  Paul	  M.	  Romer,	  “The	  New	  Kaldor	  Facts:	  Ideas,	  Institutions,	  
Population,	  and	  Human	  Capital,”	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Macroeconomics	  2:1	  (2010),	  
224-­‐245.	  
	  
Lucas,	  Robert	  E.,	  “On	  the	  Mechanics	  of	  Economic	  Development,”	  Journal	  of	  Monetary	  
Economics	  22:1	  (1998),	  3-­‐42.	  
	  
Lucas,	  Robert	  E.,	  “Ideas	  and	  Growth,”	  Economica	  76:301	  (2009),	  1-­‐19.	  
	  
Moser,	  Petra,	  Alessandra	  Voena,	  and	  Fabian	  Waldinger,	  “German	  Jewish	  Émigrés	  
and	  U.S.	  Invention,”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  (forthcoming).	  
	  
	  
Romer,	  Paul	  M.,	  “Increasing	  Returns	  and	  Long-­‐Run	  Growth,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  
Economy	  94:5	  (1986),	  1002-­‐1037.	  
	  
	  
	  
Romer,	  Paul	  M.,	  “Endogenous	  Technological	  Change,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  
98:5	  (1990),	  S71-­‐S102.	  
	  
	  
Saul,	  Mark,	  "Kerosinka:	  An	  Episode	  in	  the	  History	  of	  Soviet	  Mathematics,"	  Notices	  of	  
the	  AMS	  46:10	  (1999),	  1217-­‐1220.	  
	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian,	  “Quality	  Matters:	  The	  Expulsion	  of	  Professors	  and	  the	  
Consequences	  for	  Ph.D.	  Student	  Outcomes	  in	  Nazi	  Germany,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  
118:4	  (2010),	  787-­‐831.	  
	  
	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian,	  “Peer	  Effects	  in	  Science:	  Evidence	  from	  the	  Dismissal	  of	  
Scientists	  in	  Nazi	  Germany,”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Studies	  79:2	  (2012),	  838-­‐861.	  
	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian,	  "Bombs,	  Brains	  and	  Science	  -­‐	  The	  Role	  of	  Human	  and	  Physical	  
Capital	  for	  the	  Creation	  of	  Scientific	  Knowledge,"	  University	  of	  Warwick	  working	  paper	  
(2013).	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

37	  
Figure	  1.	  Frequency	  distribution	  of	  outmigration	  rates	  

A.	  Idea	  space	  

	  

	  
B.	  Geographic	  space	  

	  
C.	  Collaboration	  space	  	  

	  	  

	  

Notes:	  The	  outmigration	  rate	  measures	  the	  fraction	  of	  the	  peers	  along	  a	  particular	  dimension	  that	  emigrated	  
from	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  after	  1992.	  See	  the	  text	  for	  a	  precise	  definition.	  

	  

38	  
Figure	  2.	  Scatter	  of	  publications	  per	  year	  by	  value	  of	  the	  instruments,	  1982-­‐2008	  

A.	  Idea	  space	  

	  	  
B.	  Geographic	  space	  

	  	  
C.	  Collaboration	  space	  

	  	  
Notes:	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  after	  1992.	  	  

	  

39	  
Figure	  3.	  Scatter	  of	  publications	  per	  year	  by	  value	  of	  the	  instrument	  in	  subsample	  of	  
Soviet	  mathematicians	  with	  high-­‐quality	  coauthors	  
	  

	  	  

	  

Notes:	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  remained	  in	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  after	  1992	  and	  had	  
high-­‐quality	  coauthors,	  defined	  as	  having	  coauthors	  where	  the	  average	  quality	  placed	  them	  in	  the	  top	  92	  
percentile	  of	  the	  quality	  distribution.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

40	  
Figure	  4.	  Break	  in	  coauthorship	  linkage	  following	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union,	  
1982-­‐2008	  

	  

Notes:	  The	  figure	  gives	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  written	  in	  any	  given	  year	  by	  coauthorship	  pairs	  within	  
each	  group.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

41	  
Table	  1.	  Summary	  statistics	  

	  
	  
Number	  of	  papers	  
1982-­‐1991	  
Mean	  
Median	  
Maximum	  
1992-­‐2008	  
Mean	  
Median	  
Maximum	  
	  
Number	  of	  citations	  
1982-­‐1991	  
Mean	  
Median	  
Maximum	  
1992-­‐2008	  
Mean	  
Median	  
Maximum	  
	  
Number	  of	  mathematicians	  
	  

Soviet	  émigrés	  
	  
	  

	  

12.8	  
10.0	  
	  90.0	  
	  
28.3	  
21.0	  
317.0	  
	  
	  
	  
38.5	  
6.0	  
1256.0	  
	  
131.7	  
44.0	  
1988.0	  
1,051	  

Soviet	  non-­‐émigrés	  
	  
	  

	  

6.3	  
4.0	  
153.0	  
	  
7.6	  
1.0	  
311.0	  
	  
	  
	  
6.7	  
0.0	  
2240.0	  
	  
13.4	  
0.0	  
1287.0	  
11,173	  

Notes:	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  “active”	  Soviet	  mathematicians	  who	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  1970	  
and	  1989	  and	  were	  predominantly	  affiliated	  with	  a	  Soviet	  institution	  prior	  to	  1989.	  The	  post-­‐1992	  modal	  
affiliation	  of	  a	  Soviet	  émigré	  is	  located	  outside	  the	  geographic	  boundaries	  of	  the	  former	  USSR.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

42	  
Table	  2.	  Impact	  of	  supply	  shock	  on	  Soviet	  non-­‐émigrés,	  OLS	  coefficients	  

	  
	  
Variables:	  
A.	  Publication	  propensity	  
Supply	  shock	  in	  idea	  space	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  space	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  
	  
	  
B.	  Number	  of	  papers	  
Supply	  shock	  in	  idea	  space	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  space	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  
	  
	  

(1)	  
	  
0.393	  
(0.044)	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
	  
0.889	  
(0.140)	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  

Specification	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
0.197	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
(0.023)	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.019	  
	  
(0.012)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
0.425	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
(0.067)	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.057	  
	  
(0.031)	  

(4)	  
	  
0.349	  
(0.044)	  
0.176	  
(0.024)	  
-­‐0.013	  
(0.012)	  
	  
	  
0.786	  
(0.140)	  
0.371	  
(0.069)	  
-­‐0.012	  
(0.033)	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  The	  publication	  
propensity	  dependent	  variable	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  mathematician	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  in	  any	  given	  year.	  
The	  supply	  shock	  in	  intellectual	  space	  gives	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  of	  persons	  who	  have	  a	  similar	  field	  mix;	  the	  
supply	  shock	  in	  geographic	  space	  gives	  the	  outmigration	  rate	  in	  the	  institution	  that	  last	  employed	  the	  
mathematician	  prior	  to	  1990;	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space	  gives	  the	  fraction	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  
coauthors	  that	  emigrated	  after	  1992.	  The	  table	  reports	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  interaction	  between	  the	  
respective	  supply	  shock	  and	  a	  post-­‐1992	  dummy	  variable.	  The	  regressions	  have	  283,169	  observations.	  All	  
regressions	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  quartic	  polynomial),	  year	  fixed	  
effects,	  and	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

43	  
Table	  3.	  First	  stage	  regressions	  

	  
	  

Dependent	  variable	  

	  

Instrument:	  
Idea	  	  ( qiD )	  
*

Geographic	  ( qiG )	  
*

Collaborator	  ( qiC )	  
*

Angrist-­‐Pischke	  F	  
test	  of	  excluded	  
instruments	  

Idea	  
Geographic	  
supply	  
supply	  
shock	  
shock	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
1.019	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
(0.023)	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.299	  
(0.023)	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
1979.28	  

	  

175.71	  

Collaborator	  
supply	  
shock	  
(3)	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.227	  
(0.021)	  
121.99	  

Idea	  
	  supply	  
shock	  
(4)	  
1.017	  
(0.023)	  
-­‐0.002	  
(0.005)	  
0.005	  
(0.003)	  
1428.53	  

Geographic	  
supply	  
shock	  
(5)	  
0.482	  
(0.043)	  
0.274	  
(0.022)	  
0.028	  
(0.006)	  
131.43	  

Collaborator	  
supply	  
shock	  
(6)	  
0.680	  
(0.082)	  
0.084	  
(0.022)	  
0.211	  
(0.021)	  
88.89	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  The	  regressions	  
have	  283,169	  observations.	  All	  regressions	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  
fourth-­‐order	  polynomial),	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  See	  the	  text	  for	  
a	  detailed	  description	  of	  the	  construction	  of	  the	  instruments.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

44	  
Table	  4.	  Impact	  of	  supply	  shock	  on	  Soviet	  non-­‐émigrés,	  IV	  coefficients	  

	  
	  

Specification	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

Only	  top	   Coauthor	  
journals	  
share	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
	  
	  

Variables:	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
A.	  Publication	  propensity	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  in	  a	  given	  year	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in:	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Idea	  space	  
0.570	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.357	  
0.376	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
(0.088)	  
	  
	  
(0.105)	   (0.048)	  
	  
Geographic	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.366	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.316	  
-­‐0.023	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
(0.080)	  
	  
(0.095)	   (0.048)	  
	  
Collaboration	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  0.118	  
	  0.009	  
-­‐0.026	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.058)	   (0.067)	   (0.032)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
B.	  Number	  of	  papers	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  in	  a	  given	  year	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in:	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Idea	  space	  
0.791	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.563	  
0.532	  
1.049	  
	  
(0.250)	  
	  
	  
(0.294)	   (0.073)	   (0.203)	  
Geographic	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.471	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.432	  
	  0.012	  
	  0.374	  
	  
	  
(0.310)	  
	  
(0.365)	   (0.069)	   (0.219)	  
Collaboration	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.092	  
-­‐0.063	  
-­‐0.015	  
0.103	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.142)	   (0.173)	   (0.049)	   (0.125)	  
	  
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  The	  regressions	  
have	  283,169	  observations.	  All	  regressions	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  
fourth-­‐order	  polynomial),	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  See	  the	  text	  for	  
a	  detailed	  description	  of	  the	  instruments.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

45	  
Table	  5.	  Impact	  of	  supply	  shock,	  adjusting	  for	  field-­‐year	  trends,	  IV	  coefficients	  

	  
	  

Specification	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

Only	  top	   Coauthor	  
journals	  
share	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
	  
	  

Variables:	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
A.	  Publication	  propensity	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  in	  a	  given	  field	  in	  a	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  given	  year	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in:	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Idea	  space	  
0.012	   -­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.007	  
0.006	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
(0.002)	  
	  
	  
(0.002)	   (0.001)	  
	  
Geographic	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.008	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.007	  
-­‐0.000	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
(0.002)	  
	  
(0.003)	   (0.001)	  
	  
Collaboration	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.002	  
-­‐0.000	  
-­‐0.000	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.001)	   (0.002)	   (0.001)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
B.	  Number	  of	  papers	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  in	  a	  given	  field	  in	  a	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  given	  year	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in:	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Idea	  space	  
0.012	   -­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.009	  
0.008	  
0.013	  
	  
(0.004)	  
	  
	  
(0.005)	   (0.001)	   (0.003)	  
Geographic	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.007	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.007	  
0.000	  
0.005	  
	  
	  
(0.005)	  
	  
(0.006)	   (0.001)	   (0.003)	  
Collaboration	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.002	  
-­‐0.001	  
-­‐0.000	  
0.002	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.002)	   (0.003)	   (0.001)	   (0.002)	  
	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  The	  regressions	  
have	  18,122,816	  observations.	  	  All	  regressions	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  
as	  a	  fourth-­‐order	  polynomial),	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  a	  full	  
vector	  of	  all	  field-­‐year	  fixed	  effects.	  See	  the	  text	  for	  a	  detailed	  description	  of	  the	  instruments.	  Because	  the	  unit	  
of	  observation	  used	  in	  the	  regressions	  is	  at	  the	  author-­‐year-­‐subject	  level,	  the	  coefficients	  need	  to	  be	  
multiplied	  by	  63	  (for	  63	  fields	  of	  mathematics)	  to	  be	  comparable	  to	  those	  reported	  in	  Table	  4.	  

	  

	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

46	  
Table	  6.	  Quality	  of	  coauthors	  and	  the	  supply	  shock	  in	  collaboration	  space,	  	  
IV	  coefficients	  

	  

	  

	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
A.	  Publication	  propensity	  
	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in:	  
	  
	  
Idea	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.335	  
	  
	  
(0.106)	  
Geographic	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.326	  
	  
	  
(0.095)	  
Collaboration	  space	  
	  
	  
0.162	  
0.045	  
×	  Low-­‐quality	  coauthors	  
	  
(0.061)	   (0.071)	  
-­‐0.316	  
-­‐0.355	  
×	  High-­‐quality	  coauthors	  
	  
(0.091)	   (0.091)	  
	  
	  
	  
B.	  Number	  of	  papers	  
	  
	  
Supply	  shock	  in:	  
	  
	  
Idea	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.529	  
	  
	  
(0.295)	  
Geographic	  space	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
0.448	  
	  
	  
(0.365)	  
Collaboration	  space	  
	  
	  
0.160	  
-­‐0.007	  
×	  Low-­‐quality	  coauthors	  
	  
(0.152)	  
(0.184)	  
-­‐0.638	  
×	  High-­‐quality	  coauthors	   -­‐0.583	  
	  
(0.184)	  
(0.190)	  
	  
	  

Specification	  
	  
Coauthor	  
share	  
(3)	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
1.017	  
(0.205)	  
0.389	  
(0.220)	  
	  
0.156	  
(0.133)	  
-­‐0.427	  
(0.142)	  

Excludes	  papers	  
coauthored	  with	  
émigrés	  
(4)	  
	  

	  
0.572	  
(0.108)	  
0.446	  
(0.099)	  
	  
0.074	  
(0.070)	  
-­‐0.207	  
(0.098)	  
	  
	  
	  
1.223	  
(0.281)	  
0.751	  
(0.305)	  
	  
0.181	  
(0.174)	  
-­‐0.427	  
(0.179)	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.	  The	  regressions	  
in	  columns	  1-­‐4	  have	  283,169	  observations;	  the	  regressions	  in	  column	  5	  have	  18,122,816	  observations.	  All	  
regressions	  include	  the	  mathematician’s	  years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  fourth-­‐order	  polynomial),	  a	  
vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  fixed	  effects;	  the	  regressions	  in	  column	  5	  also	  include	  a	  
vector	  of	  field-­‐year	  fixed	  effects.	  The	  “low-­‐quality”	  and	  “high-­‐quality”	  coauthor	  variables	  are	  indicator	  
variables	  set	  to	  unity	  if	  the	  average	  quality	  of	  a	  mathematician’s	  coauthors	  placed	  the	  author	  in	  the	  bottom	  95	  
percent	  or	  top	  5	  percent	  of	  the	  quality	  distribution.	  See	  the	  text	  for	  a	  detailed	  description	  of	  the	  instruments.	  

	  

