                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     COLONIAL INSTITUTIONS, COMMODITY BOOMS, AND THE DIFFUSION OF
               ELEMENTARY EDUCATION IN BRAZIL, 1889-1930

                                           Aldo Musacchio
                                           Andre Martinez
                                           Martina Viarengo

                                         Working Paper 20029
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20029


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2014




Research assistance for this paper was ably provided by Jenna Bernhardson, Diego Galeano, and Carlos
L. Góes. We want to thank the comments and helpful suggestions of Paul Rhode and the anonymous
referees of this journal. We benefited from comments on earlier drafts by Ran Abramitsky, Dan Bogart,
Carlos Capistrán, Eric Chaney, Karen Clay, Rafel Di Tella, Catherine Duggan, Stan Engerman, Felipe
T. Fernandes, Cláudio Ferraz, Mary Hansen, Eric Hilt, Richard Hornbeck, Lakshmi Iyer, Joseph L.
Love, Ricardo Madeira, Robert Margo, Noel Maurer, João Manuel P. de Mello, David Moss, Steve
Nafziger, Joana Naritomi, Tom Nicholas, Nathan Nunn, Ian Read, Eustáquio Reis, Rodrigo Soares,
Peter Temin, John Wallis, Jeff Williamson, and participants in seminars at Harvard University, Harvard
Business School, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, USP and Insper in Sao Paulo, PUC
and FGV in Rio de Janeiro, and CIDE and Banco de México in Mexico City. We also thank commentators
and participants at the ASSA, EHA, Cliometrics, and CLADE-II conferences. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Aldo Musacchio, Andre Martinez, and Martina Viarengo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Colonial Institutions, Commodity Booms, and the Diffusion of Elementary Education in Brazil,
1889-1930
Aldo Musacchio, Andre Martinez, and Martina Viarengo
NBER Working Paper No. 20029
April 2014
JEL No. H40,N46

                                            ABSTRACT

We explain how the decentralization of fiscal responsibility among Brazilian states between 1889
and 1930 promoted a unequal expansion in public schooling. We document how the variation in state
export tax revenues, product of commodity booms, explains increases in expenditures on education,
literacy, and schools per children. Yet we also find that such improvements did not take place in states
that either had more slaves before abolition or cultivated cotton during colonial times. Beyond path-
dependence, ours story emphasizes the interaction between colonial institutions and subsequent fiscal
changes to explain radical changes in the ranking of states which persists until today.


Aldo Musacchio                                     Martina Viarengo
Harvard Business School                            The Graduate Institute, Geneva
Morgan Hall 279                                    Maison de la Paix
Soldiers Field                                     Chemin Eugène Rigot 2
Boston, MA 02163                                   1202 Geneva
and NBER                                           Switzerland
amusacchio@hbs.edu                                 and Harvard Kennedy School
                                                   martina.viarengo@graduateinstitute.ch
Andre Martinez
Banco de Mexico
Av. 5 de Mayo No. 18
Col. Centro
C.P.06059
México
amartinez@banxico.org.mx
Introduction
         Recent research links current levels of development in former colonies, and even across
regions in former colonies, to colonial institutions (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Acemoglu, et
al., 2001; pp. 44-45; Engerman and Sokoloff, 2002; Nunn, 2008; Bruhn and Gallego, 2012)
According to this literature, conditions and endowments at the time of colonization determined
political institutions that created and then perpetuated an unequal distribution of land, wealth,
and political power. Most of these papers then present cross-sectional regressions showing how
initial colonial institutions are correlated with per capita expenditures on public goods such as
education, both across (Engerman, et al., 2009; Gallego, 2010; Frankema, 2012) and within
countries (Banerjee and Iyer, 2005; Wegenast, 2009; Iyer, 2010; Wegenast, 2010; Acemoglu, et al.,
2012).
         Yet, correlations between variables observed hundreds of years apart demand further
examination. As a matter of fact, we know that there have been significant reversals of fortune
among former colonies in terms of economic prosperity (Acemoglu, et al., 2002), legal
institutions (Musacchio, 2008) and financial development (Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Musacchio,
2010). We also know that trade shocks in the nineteenth century increased inequality in the
Americas (Coatsworth, 2005, 2008; Williamson, 2009; Arroyo-Abad, 2013). Thus, it is worth
examining whether colonial institutions determine outcomes that then persist for hundreds of
years or if institutional changes or trade shocks interact with those initial institutions to alter the
development trajectories of national or subnational units in the long run.
         In this paper we study the effect that colonial institutions and subsequent changes in
fiscal institutions had on educational outcomes in Brazilian states. Rather than correlating some
variables in the past with today’s outcomes, we document how the variation in export tax
revenues in Brazilian states between 1889 and 1930, and their interaction with colonial
institutions, explain which states spent on education and forged ahead, and which states lagged
behind in the education rankings. This exercise is relevant because if we were looking only at
the path-dependent effects of colonial institutions on education indicators at the end of the
twentieth century, we would miss much of the radical changes and reversals that we find in the
ranking of Brazilian states according to educational outcomes between 1872 and 1940. That is,
many of the states that had low literacy rates throughout the nineteenth century ended up in the
leading positions by 1940, while states that were among the most educated states in 1872 ended
up at the bottom of the ranking in 1940 (see Table 1). Something changed, and it was not the
colonial past.
       We take advantage of the fact that Brazil had a peculiar federal arrangement during its
First Republic, 1889-1930. During this period, the Constitution decentralized fiscal
responsibilities and the right to tax exports. Thus, we show how the change in fiscal institutions
in 1889 triggered changes in the development trajectories of states. We use the variation in fiscal
revenues across states and over time to explain the variation in education expenditures at the
state level. As the majority of revenues came from export taxes, states that exported
commodities that had price ramp ups could collect more revenues per capita and could—if they
chose—spend more on education.
       Using both ordinary least square and instrumental variable techniques and controlling
for a series of macro variables, fixed effects, year dummies, and state-specific linear trends, we
find that changes in export prices and export tax revenues are positively correlated with
education expenditures per capita and with education outcomes such as literacy and the
number of schools. We then show how institutions, such as the extent to which slavery
prevailed in each state by the 1860s, attenuated some of the positive effects of export tax
revenue windfalls. The basic idea is that there are conditions that may come from the initial
colonial settling and exploitation patterns (for example, the prevalence of slavery or the type of
agricultural systems used) that led, in turn, to the creation of specific political institutions that,
in turn, determined how much provincial elites and politicians wanted to invest in mass
education. After adding a series of interactive effects between export tax revenues and different
dummy variables that try to capture which states had more extractive colonial institutions, we
find that in states in which slavery was stronger right before abolition (1888) and states that had
the most exploitative cotton plantation systems at the end of the colonial era, increases in export
tax revenues were not translated into more expenditures in education.
       The shocks we document are not only statistically significant but also relevant in
economic terms. Between 1889 and 1930 Brazil as a whole had the largest increase in literacy
rates in Latin America, going from 19.8 percent in 1890 to 40 percent in 1940 for the population
over the age of four. However, this improvement in literacy rates was uneven across states, with
states such as São Paulo improving literacy from 18.8 percent to 52 percent of the population
and others such as Maranhão, Mato Grosso, or Bahia keeping literacy rates at 20 percent
throughout the period we study.
         Our findings contribute to a growing literature on the long-term effects of colonial
institutions in Brazil. Naritomi, Soares, and Assunção (2012) find that municipalities that
exported mining products or sugar during colonial times tend to have worse current indicators
of rule of law and legal sophistication.. Wegenast (2010) shows in a cross-sectional framework
that, at the state level, land inequality, which supposedly persists from colonial times, is
correlated with educational attainment. In contrast, Summerhill (2010) finds no long-term
correlation between colonial institutions and land inequality or GDP per capita among
municipalities in São Paulo. Similarly, de Carvalho Filho and Colistete (2010) find strong
correlation between education levels at the municipal level in São Paulo around 1905 and today;
but do not attribute education levels today to colonial institutions.
         Below we first review the rapid expansion in the provision of public education by the
states of the Brazilian Federation between 1889 and 1930. We then examine the determinants of
expenditures on schooling, presenting statistical evidence showing the relation between export
tax revenue and expenditures on education. We end with a discussion of our results and of
possible alternative explanations.


The Diffusion of Elementary Education in Brazil, 1890-1930

         We focus our attention on the period that goes from 1889 to 1930 because before that the
political and fiscal institutions of Brazil held back the expansion of mass schooling. On the one
hand after independence in 1821, Brazilian politicians chose a political system that perpetuated
the elitist nature of the political institutions imposed by the Portuguese during colonial times.
For instance, in the 1824 Constitution Brazil’s founding fathers adopted a constitutional
monarchy with a clear division of power, an elected parliament, and an emperor, but they
restricted the right to vote by imposing an income requirement that ranged between 100 and
200 times the annual income of most skilled workers. Moreover, elections were indirect, with
parliamentarians (senators and deputies) elected by state electoral colleges.1



        1 Voters in parishes (known as eleitores) voted to elect an electoral college similar to that of the United States.

The members of this electoral college were known as votantes (voters). The Constitution of 1824 included income
requirements for both eleitores and votantes. For the former it was approximately US $60, while the latter needed to
         On the other hand, even if elites across states in Brazil wanted to spend on education,
the resources state coffers had were limited. This is because even though the 1824 Constitution
decentralized the provision of education, the collection of revenues, mostly coming from
foreign trade, was highly centralized during the imperial period (1821-1889) (Hilsdorf, 2003).
The central government actually spent disproportionately on public goods that benefited the
capital city of Rio de Janeiro or the armed forces (Villela, 2005, 2007). .
         Under such a political system, whatever resources provincial elites spent on public
elementary education went to pay for schools that educated mostly their own children or those
of other elites. As a sign of how elitist the system was, consider the following data. Enrollment
rates during the imperial period stayed below 10 percent. The privileged children who attended
school in Brazil during that time benefited from public expenditures per enrolled student that
were as high as the expenditures per children of school age observed in European countries at
the time (Chaudhary, et al., 2012).
         By the end of the imperial period, the low penetration of public education had left its
mark in Brazil. Using data from the 1890 census we know that Brazil had one of the lowest
literacy rates in the Americas (16.6 percent). In fact, some Brazilian states had literacy rates of 10
percent. Furthermore, there were two schools for every 1,000 school-age children in the country
and in some states, such as Bahia and Ceará, there was only one school per 1,000 children.
         In 1879, Leôncio de Carvalho, Minister for Internal Affairs, sent Congress an educational
reform bill that introduced secular education and mandated the creation of schools of education
to train teachers. Despite these reforms, there was no significant change in school infrastructure,
the number of teachers, and the curriculum in the provinces until after the Republican parties
took over in 1889.
         Things changed rapidly after 1889 when a Republican revolution overthrew the
monarchy and heralded positivism. One of the central tenants of positivism in Brazil was the
idea that to become a civilized nation, the government had to provide secular education on a
massive scale. Thus, the Republicans drafted a new constitution in 1891, significantly reforming
the way schooling was financed and organized.




prove an income of $120. This requirement allowed professionals to vote, but restricted the vote for most workers
and day laborers. There were exceptions to this requirement, mostly for members of the army. See Porto(2002) ,
especially pp. 44-45 . Law 3029 of January 9, 1881 increased the income requirement for voters to $120.
       The 1891 constitution decentralized the collection of export taxes and the responsibility
of providing public goods such as education, health care, and infrastructure. Because the
constitution did not include any mechanism by which the federal government would aid poor
states, other than some subsidies for ports and railroads, expenditures on education were
limited to the funds states could generate from their own export and internal taxes. This
boosted state coffers in states that exported commodities in high demand, such as rubber and
coffee, and kept stable the public finances of states that exported commodities that did not have
price increases such as sugar and tobacco. Table 2 shows that, from the Empire to the Republic,
real per capita expenditures on education increased 71 percent, on average, but declined in
states that exported sugar and tobacco. Also in Table 2 we can see that the states with higher
average expenditures on education per capita, higher enrollment rates, and more schools per
capita between 1889 and 1930 were those that exported rubber, coffee, and cattle. States that
exported coffee and rubber, for instance, outspent sugar-exporting states 2.5 times and cotton-
exporting states 3.5 times.
       With the change in ideology and the new revenues, state governments promoted a
gradual and uneven transformation in elementary education in Brazil. They began a shift from
the Lancaster method, in which students of all ages studied together in one room and helped
each other learn with the guidance of one teacher, to a system that separated            students
according to grades and scheduled one subject at a time. These changes required more teachers
and also more buildings, not only for the separate grades but also for facilities such as gyms and
libraries. Some schools in large cities adapted more rapidly to such changes and introduced a
new school layout and schedule, but schools in the interior were slower or never adopted such
changes (De Souza, 1998).
       The transition to the Republic also brought about changes in the incentives of politicians
and state parties to spend on education. The Constitution of 1891 introduced direct elections for
governor, for local assemblies, and for representatives to the Senate and National Congress.
Thus, improving education became a political prerogative, not only because voters could
demand education, but because due to the literacy requirement to vote, increasing literacy
could help local political bosses to mobilize more voters in state and national elections. At the
national level the introduction of direct elections changed the way local parties negotiated
favors with the ruling national coalition. National parties no longer negotiated coalitions with
state parties on the basis of electoral college votes, but rather on the basis of the total votes the
state parties could deliver in national elections. The kind of favors state parties negotiated
included subsidies for railways and port projects, and political support against opposition
candidates.2
         All of those positive incentives and new ideologies led politicians to invest in public
education at the state level, specifically on elementary education. School enrollment, teacher-
pupil ratios, and the number of schools per children enrolled improved significantly between
1889 and 1930. Enrollment rates in elementary school, defined as the ratio of the number of
students enrolled to the population of children from 5 to 14 years old, went from 6 percent in
1889 to 23 percent in 1933 (Table 2). This improvements were mostly due to improvements in
the public provision of elementary education. In fact, the advance of state-sponsored schools
was such that they gained market share from private and municipal schools; increasing their
share of total enrollment from 53 percent to 65 percent between 1907 and 1933, while private,
municipal, and the few federal schools lost ground proportionally.
         With enrollment rates increasing at over 700% between 1889 and 1930, we would expect
teacher-pupil ratios to have fallen. Yet, even with the rapid increase in enrollment, teacher-pupil
ratios in state schools went down from 43 in 1889 to 40 in 1933. This was a consequence of the
efforts to train and recruit teachers. Both national and state governments built new education
schools, known as Normal Schools, and recruited their graduates en masse, paying them a
higher salary than what teachers without a degree earned. Teachers without a degree were also
hired in large numbers, but they had to pass an exam and were paid according to experience
and training.3



         2  These exchanges of favors were formalized in 1902 by President Manuel Ferraz de Campos Sales.
According to this agreement, a state party could appeal to the president and the ruling coalition in Congress for help
if an opposition state party threatened its hold on power. Since contested elections for governors or for federal
senators and congressmen had to be scrutinized by the national Congress, the ruling coalition could help a state party
to annul the election of an opposition candidate on some technical ground. This practice was commonly referred to
as “beheading.” See Porto (2002), p. 196 and Fausto (1999) pp. 258-259. For some examples of beheading see the vote
count in the Diario do Congresso on June 27, 1902. Moreover, the federal government intervened regularly in states
where the local party in power opposed the ruling federal coalition. Thus, state politicians another bargaining chip
between national and state parties were ways to avoid federal government intervention. Such interventions occurred
in Paraná, Pernambuco, and Santa Catarina in the 1890s, in Pernambuco in 1908-1915, and in Rio de Janeiro in 1923.
For a discussion of some of these electoral conflicts, see De Souza, “O Processo Político.”
         3 Just to give an idea of how the supply of teachers changed after 1890, in the state of São Paulo, the Central

Normal School (the Central School of Education) operated on and off between 1846 and 1880 and, thus, trained only
315 new teachers . Between 1890 and 1921, 10,508 teachers graduated from 11 such teaching schools in the same state.
State schools also hired teachers without diplomas through a “concurso” (contest) in which teachers competed for
        Thanks to cohort data from the 1960 census, we know that some of these changes in the
education system between 1889 and 1930 actually improved outcomes. Table 3 shows the
literacy and attendance rates for children who were 6 to 10 years old in 1910, 1920, and 1930.
While in the 1890 census the literacy rate in Brazil was 16 percent, those children who attended
school circa 1910 had a literacy rate of 44.8 percent. Moreover, the cohort that studied
elementary education in the late 1920s (see the third column of Table 3) had a literacy rate of
56.2 percent according to the 1960 census.
        Yet there is a significant difference in the educational attainment of blacks and mixed-
race Brazilians compared to whites. Literacy rates among white Brazilians who attended school
during our period were close to 60 percent. In contrast, literacy among black Brazilians the
literacy rate was 33.1 percent according to cohort data from the 1960 census. We think the poor
improvement in education outcomes among blacks is to a large extent due to the fact that the
percentage of blacks who never attended school in the 1910 cohort was 80 percent and in the
1930 cohort it was 70.2 percent (see Table 3).
        That is, during the period we study, the number of public schools and teachers grew
rapidly, but the expansion of elementary education benefited mostly the white and mixed race
elites. . Despite the enthusiasm of the Republican elites for expanding public schooling and
reducing illiteracy, the expansion of public education did not grow in all the states at the same
rates. As we elaborate below, states in which the percentage of slaves to total population had
been large during the Empire saw less improvement in education outcomes after 1889.


Explaining the Variation in Expenditures on Education

        The period 1889-1930 had rapid increases in the number of schools, teachers, and
students. This expansion required resources and not all states were able to collect the same level
of revenues to pay for public schools. Thus, in this section we explain how the variation in
export tax revenues explains increases in education spending at the state level.
        To document the drivers of education expenditures we created a panel with state-level
data on expenditures, export tax revenues, population density, and imports per capita between



jobs by taking exams and being interviewed. See da Costa, A Escola…, pp. 109-112. For further discussion of the
Normal Schools and the recruitment of teachers see De Souza, “Templos; Moacyr, “Instrução”; and reports from the
ministers of education of states.
1890 and 1930 (the Appendix explains the sources and methodology we used to put together
our key variables). The panel is unbalanced for expenditure,revenue and education data. We
have a complete panel with data on state’s export prices and volumes exported between 1901
and 1930. However, we have expenditure and revenue data for only three periods: 1901-07,
1914-19, and 1923-25.
         We start by running a simple OLS regression using our panel and a baseline
specification for examining the determinants of per capita expenditures on education of the
following form:
         eeit= β sit + δXit + ζi+φt +εit,
         where eeit is the log of expenditures on education per capita (or per child of school age,
5-14) in state i in year t and sit is the log of export tax revenue per capita for state i in year t. We
also include a vector of state characteristics, X, which includes population density and debt per
capita4. We use the natural logarithms of the variables to minimize the effect of outliers and to
ensure that most variables follow a normal distribution. While all regressions include year
dummies (φt) to account for time-varying trends common to all states, we run regressions with
and without state fixed effects (ζi) and state-specific, linear trends.
         The main coefficient β, then, should be interpreted as an (export) income elasticity for
state governments that tells us, in percentage points, how much education spending would
increase given a 1 percent increase in export tax revenue. Our OLS estimates in Table 4 show
that a 1 percent increase in export tax revenues is correlated with an 11 to 27 percent increase in
education expenditures. If a state’s export tax revenues per capita jumped 100 percent in one
year, which indeed took place in states that exported rubber or cotton, education expenditures
per capita could go up by over 20 percent. This is a large and significant effect. In fact, the
“elasticity of income” for education expenditures is higher than the elasticity of income of other
normal public goods such as healthcare.5 Moreover, even when we control for the composition



          4 We include debt per capita as an independent variable to control for the actual size of the budget

constraint in each state. We include population density because we think it is a good proxy for the growth in
urbanization and income per capita and as such it should help us control for factors that drive the demand for
education. For instance, ideally we would want to control for GDP per capita at the state level. One can imagine that
the average family, as it got richer, was in a better position to send kids to school. Yet, there is no annual GDP data at
the state level that can be used in a panel setting.
          5 We compare the elasticities for healthcare and education expenditures using panel data from 1901 to

1908—for which we have complete expenditures on both items, including state and year fixed effects—and
controlling for imports per capita and population density. The elasticities for healthcare and education expenditures
of the export basket, we find that the coefficient for export revenues per capita is still significant
and of similar magnitude. That means that it was not changes in the composition of exports that
determined the increase in revenues and expenditures, but either increases in export prices or
changes in the capacity to export greater volume.
         There is, however, a possible problem of using OLS with fixed effects to study the effect
of changes in export tax revenues on education spending. Running OLS may confound the
effect of, say, a commodity price increase with state-specific trends that may have begun before
our period. There might even be state-specific trends that are correlated with commodity price
increases but not caused by them. Therefore, in Specifications 4 and 9 of Table 4, we run OLS
specifications that include state-specific, linear time trends in addition to the fixed effects and
time dummies we had in previous specifications. In these Specifications we find that export tax
revenues still explain increases in education expenditures, and even if the coefficient is smaller
(closer to 0.10), it is statistically significant at almost 5 percent.
         In Specifications 8 and 9, we run the baseline model with and without state-specific
trends, using expenditure on education per child as the dependent variable. We find results that
are consistent with our estimates using expenditures per capita. We prefer to rely on the per
capita expenditures data because, in order to estimate expenditures per child, we have to make
assumptions about the trend of the population pyramids between census years. Moreover, since
some of the education was also for adults, expenditures per child may not be the proper way to
think about education spending during this period.


Robustness checks

         One concern with our estimates is how exogenous the variation in export tax revenues
is. For instance, if Brazilian states could control the prices of the commodities they exported,
then it would be hard to argue export tax revenue is exogenous to the political economy of each
state. This is particularly a concern for states that were large coffee and rubber exporters. Brazil
was the world’s largest exporter of those two commodities in the period we study and there
were efforts on the part of the national and state governments to control international coffee
prices in different moments in time. The states of São Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro,



are 0.026 and 0.11, respectively. We conducted a t-test to check if the elasticity for healthcare expenditures is bigger
than that for education and reject this hypothesis with 99% confidence.
as price setters in the international coffee market, largely determined the growth rate of national
coffee exports (especially in 1905-1914 and in some years in the 1920s). Amazonas and Pará
were the principal suppliers in the international rubber market, but their governments did not
coordinate to control prices. Thus, In Specification 5 of Table 4, we omit the coffee-exporting
states, Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo from the estimates. In this specification the coefficient of
export tax revenue is unchanged. Then, in Specification 6 we omit the rubber-exporting states,
Amazonas and Pará from the sample and the coefficient for the log of export tax revenues goes
to 0.15, but remains statistically significant at 1 percent.
         There are two additional concerns related to the exogeneity of our variable of interest.
The first concern is whether the variation in export tax revenues is attributable to exogenous
conditions in commodity markets, especially to changes in prices. The second concern is
whether the variation in export tax revenues are a product of changes in tax rates rather than
prices (since tax rates can be endogenous to political outcomes and to changes in prices).6
         To check the connection between export prices and expenditures on education, we
created a series of export price indices (one per state) and used them as instruments for export
tax revenues. We focus on international prices because we wanted an instrument that could
capture both supply and demand conditions. During our period, most of the shocks to
commodity prices were demand-driven, rather than created by, say, a drought or a bad harvest
that reduced the supply.7
         In the first stage, we use these indices as an instrument for export tax revenue per capita,
assuming that our export price indices per state will reflect how much state governments could
extract in export taxes. Since export taxes were ad valorem, increases in export values were
translated into higher tax revenues. In the second stage, we use our estimated state export tax
revenues per capita as an independent variable to estimate the coefficient of the elasticity of
export tax revenue to per capita education spending.


         6  Serial correlation could also be a concern that justifies the use of instrumental variables. Yet, we conducted
appropriate tests and found that once we clustered errors at the state level (as we did in all of our estimates), there is
no serial correlation in the errors that we should be concerned about.
          7 We created an export price index for each state, which includes the eight largest export commodities. We

use world market prices for commodities, which we obtain from Global Financial Data or from the database of Jacks,
O’Rourke, and Williamson (2009), and we then weight those prices using the 1901 export basket, the earliest
observation we have of the export mix. We do this exercise for each state. We use fixed weights because one can
imagine that the export mix might be endogenous to changes in expenditures in public goods and we want the
export mix to be as exogenous as possible to expenditures on education and other public goods. In any case, the
results do not change much if we use the export basket in each year to weight prices
       Table 5 shows the results of our instrumental variables (IV) estimates. The state-level
variation in export prices seems to explain the variation in education spending over time quite
strongly. We find strong and significant coefficients in the first and second stages. This might
imply that what did the most to increase revenues and expenditures was the price ramp-ups
and not, for instance, tax increases or changes in the export mix. In Specification 2, we include a
control for export shares, which should capture the dynamics of the export mix as a reaction to
changes in prices. The coefficient of our instrumented export tax revenue per capita remains
strong and significant, with an elasticity of 0.355, very close to the upper bound estimates of our
OLS regressions.
       Using price indices of commodity exports, however, assumes that states did not
themselves influence the growth rate of prices in international markets. To deal with the
potential endogeneity in coffee and rubber prices, Specifications 3 and 4 exclude coffee and
rubber states, respectively. When we exclude coffee states, the results do not change, which is a
comforting result given the explicit efforts those states made to control coffee prices in 1905-
1914 and 1923-1928. Yet, when we exclude rubber states, the coefficient of our estimated export
tax revenues per capita loses significance.
       A final concern with our IV setup is that, when prices moved, state governments could
have changed tax rates in order to smooth export tax revenue. In that case, our use of prices as
an instrument should lead to weak first-stage results. But our strong first-stage results disprove
that hypotheses and show that changes in taxes, which did take place from time to time, were
not big enough or timed in such a way as to weaken the coefficient that measures the sensitivity
of changes in export tax revenues to to changes in export prices. In fact, the F-test of the first
stage shows that our instrument is strong in the first stage and, according to the Anderson
likelihood ratio test, does not seem to be correlated with the error term. We do, however, have a
weaker instrument in Specification 4.
       Interestingly, the coefficients for the variable of interest (export tax revenues) in the
second stage are larger than our OLS panel coefficient. These coefficients in the second stage,
however, are close to one standard error larger than those of the OLS estimates. This leads us to
believe there is no significant bias or measurement error driving our IV results. One could think
that the coefficients could be biased upwards because the prices of commodities affect
expenditures through other channels than export tax revenues, resulting in violation of the
exclusion restriction. For example, commodity prices could have pushed land prices up and
thus increased the collection of land taxes and, in turn, the expenditures on education.
However, in Table 5 we have controlled for the other tax revenues—including land taxes, a tax
on industries and professions, and other stamp taxes—in order to study the pure effect of
export tax revenues on education expenditures. Even after including these other sources of
funding for the state, the coefficient of the elasticity of export tax revenues per capita does not
change much from what we found in the OLS regressions.
       One final robustness check has to do with alternative factors that could be driving the
demand for education and that have not been controlled for in our estimates. One obvious
hypothesis to explain why positive windfalls coming from export taxes were used on education
is that industrialists pressured governments to provide more education and that families
themselves demanded more education because skill premia increased in states that were more
industrialized. Another obvious hypothesis is that the rapid increase in European immigration
to Brazil after 1890 created an increase in demand, either because planters (e.g., coffee planters)
pushed local governments to offer better public education to attract immigrants or simply
because the immigrants themselves demanded public schools.
       For us to be concerned about immigration and industrialization as drivers of the
demand for education we would have to find positive correlations between these variables and
education expenditures. We test these hypotheses in Table 6 and find no evidence that either
industrialization or immigration drove the increase in state-level education spending. Since
there is no panel data for industrialization or immigration by state, we use cross-sectional data
from the population censuses (1890, 1920, 1940) and industrial censuses (1907, 1920, and 1940)
and interact variables measuring either industrialization or the relative size of the immigrant
population with our variable of interest (export tax revenue per capita), using panel data and
our OLS basic specification. In fact, we find a negative correlation between education
expenditures and the number of immigrants per state in 1890 and 1920 (Specifications 1 and 2).
In Specifications 3-10, we interact export tax revenue per capita with growth in industrial
production between 1907 and 1940, the number of industrial firms per state, or the value of
industrial production in 1907, 1920, and 1940 and find significant negative coefficients.
       We feel confident about these results for at least two reasons. One the one hand, the
great majority of the European immigrants who went to Brazil were from countries such as
Italy, Portugal, and Spain, where governments did not spend much on education (Lindert,
2004). We have no reason to expect that people who did not demand more education in Europe
demanded it in Brazil. On the other hand, the industrialization of Brazil did not depend mainly
on technology with skill complementarities. For instance, following Goldin and Katz (1998), we
divide the industries for which we have data on technology imports between those that use the
technology of the first industrial revolution (textile and woodworking machinery) and those
that use the technology of the second industrial revolution (turbines to generate electricity and
all sorts of electric equipment); the former does not require skilled labor but the latter does. We
find that the largest increase in machinery imports took place in sectors linked to the first
industrial revolution, which were labor-intensive and required less-skilled workers. Therefore,
we should not expect to find that either industrialists or families were pushing for more
education because it is not clear that there were any skill premia in the more industrialized
states.
          All told, it is not clear that immigration or industrialization increased the demand for
education. It could be the case that changes in income or in societal preferences may have
changed the demand, but as we control for this only imperfectly in our statistical work, we
prefer to leave such hypotheses as candidates for future research.


Colonial Institutions and Education Expenditures

          In the previous section we explained how the decentralization of fiscal responsibilities
created heterogeneity in export tax revenues and on expenditures on education. In this section
we examine how colonial institutions may have mitigated or not how much state governments
spent on education when they had windfall revenues from export taxes. For instance, politicians
may have spent less on education per capita in states with higher initial levels of education or in
states in which there was more inequality in the distribution of assets such as land (Engerman,
et al., 2009). Alternatively, political elites in Brazilian states in which there had been more slaves
before emancipation might have wanted to restrict education for blacks, as a way to have a
cheap pool of unskilled labor or as a way to preserve the political status quo.
          We, therefore, examine both the direct and interactive effect of a set of variables
proxying for colonial institutions. Our proxies for colonial institutions are (1) variables that
measure the main commodity produced in a given province during colonial times, (2) the state’s
slave population as a percentage of its total population in 1819 and in 1864, (3) distance to the
equator (to proxy for weather)8, and (4) a dummy for high concentration of land ownership
(indicating whether or not the percentage of large farms—those over 100 hectares—is above the
mean).9
         We use three dummies to proxy for colonial commodities. First, we have a dummy for
good and bad colonial institutions. This variable is coded as 0 if the state’s main commodity
during colonial times was produced using plantation agriculture or some form of coerced labor,
1 otherwise. We follow Bruhn and Gallego (2012) in coding states according to an assumption
that certain commodity industries, such as sugar and mining, led to bad institutions. Second,
following the work of Naritomi et al. (2012), we include a dummy for sugar, cotton, and mining
because some of those industries may have left a worse system of political institutions that then
hindered the expansion of education.10 Third, we control separately for the agricultural
commodities that relied most intensively on slaves during colonial times (and for a good part of
the nineteenth century), such as sugar and cotton. This is a partial correction to the Bruhn and
Gallego coding, which excluded cotton from the colonial commodities that relied on coerced
labor.
         In Panel A of Table 7, we use random-effects regressions to examine the degree to which
colonial    institutions might         explain     cross-sectional      variation    in education         spending.
Specifications 1 through 3 show that, in states that used coerced labor for mining and sugar
production during colonial times, per capita expenditures on education were significantly lower
than the average between 1889 and 1930. Interestingly, being a cotton colony (Specification 4)
was not correlated with having lower per capita expenditures in the long run, despite the fact
that cotton states, such as Maranhão, had extremely large slave populations. In Specifications 5



          8 Distance to the equator in our view is a proxy for tropical weather, which in the literature is related to

colonial institutions in two ways. First, in Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) they argue that weather and other
conditions found by European colonizers determined the kind of crops they could produce and the scale of their
plantations, which then ended up determining how unequal was the distribution of land and also the proportion of
slaves or indians to Europeans. These two variables then determine how egalitarian were political institutions in
colonial and post-colonial times. In, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) the important determinant of colonial
institutions was the disease environment found by the colonizers. We hope that weather variables can be a good
proxy for it. We also experimented with a variable that measred mortality from tropical diseases (mostly yellow fever
and gastrointestinal diseases) and we did not find any significant results.
          9 The variable of land concentration follows Wegenast {, 2010 #11}.
          10 We follow Bruhn and Gallego’s classification of good/bad commodities; see Panel C of the Appendix for

the coding of this variable. We use Naritomi et al. “Institutional Development” to code states as mining states or
sugar producers. Their data was at the municipal level, so we just generalize their variable in order to code states.
and 6 of Panel A, we can see that the dummy variable that that indicates when that ratio of
slaves to population is higher than the average is only relevant to explain per capita
expenditures across states when we measure it in 1864 and not when we measure it in colonial
times (1819). That is, slavery may generate perverse elitist institutions, but it does not have to
have begun in colonial times to be correlated negatively with expenditures on education.
         Other than these variables, we do not find any other significant correlations of our
dummies for colonial institutions with per capita education spending. The dummies for high
distance from the equator, high mortality rates, and high concentration of land ownership are
not significantly correlated with our dependent variable. For instance, Specification 7 includes
distance to the equator as a control and does not yield significant results. Specification 8
includes the 1910 mortality rate from tropical diseases as a proxy for mortality rates during
colonial times and its coefficient is also not statistically significant .11
         We take a historical liberty when we include an interaction of export tax revenue with a
dummy that measures if there was high concentration of land ownership in 1920, instead of
measuring land concentration during colonial times. Wegenast (2010; pp. 115-118) assumes that
land concentration has been stable since colonial times and even uses the Gini coefficient for
land concentration in 1950 as an “exogenous” source of variation to explain expenditures on
education in the twentieth century, using a cross-sectional regression. However, including a
dummy for high concentration of land ownership in our panel setting (coded 1 when the
percentage of farms with more than 100 hectares is above the mean) did not yield significant
coefficients.
         Beyond the direct effect of colonial institutions, we are interested in the interaction
between our proxies for colonial institutions and expenditures on education per capita. That is,
we want to understand how institutions moderated (or amplified) the effects that windfall
revenues had on education expenditures. In Panel B of Table 7, we replicate the random-effects
regressions of Panel A, but this time we include an interactive term for each of our colonial
institutions with our main variable of interest (the log of export tax revenue per capita). The
results we get in these specifications are slightly different from what we find in Panel A. The
coefficients for the colonial institutions dummies lose all significance, with two exceptions. As


         11 We use the 1910 mortality rate because there is no data for earlier periods. Also, the diffusion of cures for

malaria and other tropical diseases only began around 1905, so we expect a high correlation between mortality rates
in 1910 and 1800.
we can see in Specifications 4 and 6, the only coefficients that are significant are those for the
interaction between export tax revenues and the dummies for cotton colonies and for high slave
population in 1864. According to the results of those specifications, on average, cotton states or
states with a high ratio of slaves to population had less than half the expenditures on education
per capita than the average state. States with large slave populations in 1864 were the worst.
Elites in those states did not show much interest in increasing education funding with their
windfall export taxes. We do not have specific information as to whether elites in those states
discriminated against blacks when they set up new schools, but we do know that most of the
education expenditures in those states went to schools in the cities and that blacks rarely
attended them.
       Yet, these cross-sectional regressions and the inferences we can draw from them have to
be interpreted carefully because we are not controlling for unobservables that may be driving
the variation in expenditures. Therefore, in Table 8, we reproduce the same specifications of
Panel B of Table 7, but adding state fixed effects. Again, in this setting the only significant
interactions are those with the cotton colony dummy and with the dummy that measures if a
state had a high ratio of slaves to population in 1864.
       We think that the interactions with the other commodity dummies are not yielding any
results because there is too much variation in education expenditures within states that belong
to each of the categories for colonial institutions. For instance, when we interact a dummy
variable for states that produced sugar during colonial times with per capita export tax
revenues, we do not get a significant coefficient (see Specification 2 in Table 8). That is, there is
wide variation even within the states that supposedly produced “bad” commodities during
colonial times. We find sugar states with very poor records on education between 1889 and
1930, such as Pernambuco, which actually lowered its per capita spending, and we find states
that did much better, such as Sergipe, which increased spending by almost 30 percent.
       The case of states that exported cotton during colonial times exemplifies how
institutions constrained how much of a state’s windfall export tax revenues were put into
education. We can see in Specification 4 of Table 8 that a one percent increase in export tax
revenues per capita would not lead to a large increase in education expenditures. This is
because the net effect of an increase in export tax revenues would need to add up the elasticity
of export tax revenues alone, which is 0.37, and the interaction with the cotton state dummy,
which is -0.339. In fact, cotton had a large, positive price spike in the early 1920s, but that was
not translated into greater spending on education in Maranhão, Piauí and Rio Grande do Norte,
the main cotton states.. Those states, toward the end of the colonial period, used slaves
intensively to cultivate cotton and had some of the most extractive colonial systems in Brazil. In
Maranhão, for instance, slaves represented 80 percent of the population during colonial times.
This state was developed from a small outpost into one of the largest entrepôts of Brazil when
the Portuguese crown created the Companhia Geral do Comércio do Grão Pará e Maranhão
(1755) with the explicit aim of importing African slaves to aid in the production of sugar and,
later, of cotton (Silva, 1984; p. 265).
        To avoid inferring too much from commodity dummies, in Specifications 5 and 6 of
Table 8 we add an interaction with the ratio of slaves to population in each state in 1819—right
before independence—and in 1864—almost 25 years before the abolition of slavery in 1888.
Interestingly, we do not get any significant effect when we intereact export tax revenue with the
dummy that measures if there was a high ratio of slaves to population in 1819, but we do get a
large and significant (at 10 percent) coefficient when we use the 1864 ratio. Again, this
coefficient shows how institutions may constrain the diffusion of education. In states with an
above-the-mean proportion of slaves in 1864, a positive trade shock would not be translated
into more education spending at all because the coefficient of the interaction is larger than the
elasticity of export tax revenues. This means that there is something about the intensity with
which slavery prevailed in a state which later led to lower education spending.
        At least two hypotheses can explain the correlation of slavery with lower education
spending in our regressions in Table 8. First, it could be that pure racism led the elites, which
were mostly white, to spend less on education. In fact, as we show in Table 3, cohort data from
1960 shows that the expansion of education we document in this paper benefited mostly whites.
Second, it could be that the states in which slavery prevailed had a steeper distribution of
economic assets and political power and therefore the elites preferred not to expand public
education because it could expand the voting population and, thus, disrupt the political status
quo. In Pernambuco, a sugar states with a large slave population, governments actually
decreased their spending on education during our period of study and the Monarchists stayed
in power despite the rise of Republican parties throughout Brazil.
       In Specifications 7 through 9 of Table 8, we try other interactions with proxies for
colonial institutions used in the literature and we do not get any significant results. Perhaps
those variables are not the ones that create differences between states over time, or perhaps
their effects are correlated with the crops those states produced and, thus, with export tax
revenues per capita.
       Finally, we include an interaction with the ratio of voters to population in 1875, 15 years
before our period begins. We can see that in states with a higher percentage of voters in 1875,
positive trade shocks are barely translated into higher spending on education. This could be
counterintuitive if we agree with Lindert that the percentage of voters in the population should
be correlated with per capita spending on education Lindert (2004, pp. 33-43). Yet, there are two
explanations of why the results point in the opposite direction (i.e., more voters correlated with
less education spending). First, in Brazil, there was an income requirement to vote until 1881.
Since states with slaves were richer they also had more voters. Second, as we explain before,
during the Republican years state parties had an incentive to invest in education to increase the
number of voters they could mobilize for national presidential elections. States that started with
a larger number of voters, thus, did not have to rush to educate future voters.
       Therefore, it seems that if commodities can help us proxy for institutions, what matters
is not what commodities a state exported during colonial times, but the economic system used
to produce those commodities and the institutions that system left in place in the nineteenth
century. This is the point that Engerman and Sokoloff made in their work and others have now
simplified using dummies for commodities produced during colonial times.
       Brazil and other New World colonies were under colonial rule for over 300 years, so it is
unreasonable to expect simple commodity dummies or dummies to capture the intensity of
slavery in one year will reflect a country or region’s institutional dynamics since colonial times.
Take for instance the ratio of slaves to population at the end of colonial times (in 1809). In São
Paulo, Amazonas, Pará, and Minas Gerais, slaves made up over 25 percent of the population in
1819, yet these states were top spenders on education during our period of 1889-1930. In states
such as Rio Grande do Norte and Piauí, slaves made up less than 15 percent of population in
1819, yet these states spent very little on education during our period (see Table 2). In contrast,
states that ended up with more slaves before abolition, such as Sergipe, Pernambuco, and Bahia,
ended up spending less on education during the Republican period. That is, it was not so much
the specific colonial institutions that mattered, but how they were preserved or recreated in the
nineteenth century that drove different states to spend more or less on education.
        In sum, our empirical strategy shows that state governments collected more tax revenue
when the prices of their export commodities went up. Those states that had higher export tax
revenues and comparatively fewer slaves before abolition ended up spending more on
education. We would expect those states to also end up having better education outcomes, such
as higher literacy and enrollment rates or more schools. Below, we use reduced-form estimates
to test that expectation.


Export Tax Revenues and Education Outcomes

        In this section we argue that the variation in export tax revenues not only explains the
variation in education spending, but that those expenditures were also translated into changes
in education outcomes. We show the connection between trade shocks and education outcomes
using data from the Education Census of 1872, 1890, 1900, 1920, and 1940 (see Appendix for
sources). We take two approaches. First, in Table 9, we use the average of our variables to run a
simple cross-sectional regression (with a limited sample size of 20) to see if average per capita
education spending is correlated with the literacy rate (1890-1940), the number of schools (1890-
1940), and the number of students (1890-1940). We find significant correlations for the first two.
The correlation with number of students is only significant when we control for state
characteristics.
        Second, in Table 10, we run a similar regression using panel data. We use export
prices—the most exogenous component of export tax revenue—as our independent variable.
We get consistent significant results showing that positive price shocks led to improvements in
education outcomes (with the exception that the correlation with enrollment is not significant
when we control for population density).


Conclusion

        We have shown that there was progress in the provision of elementary education in
Brazil between 1889 and 1930 and that it was largely a consequence of the decentralization of
revenues and expenditures in this period. Thanks to the decentralization of fiscal resources
states that could get more taxes from commodity exports were able to spend more on public
education. In those states education outcomes improved more rapidly.
       We see at least two ways in which our findings are original and surprising for a broad
literature that studies the political economy of development. First, the literature defending the
persistent effect of colonial institutions seldom discusses in depth the kind of shocks that can
change the development trajectory of a country or state. We show that institutional changes,
such as fiscal decentralization, actually matter to determine major changes in the development
path of states. More specifically, we show that the effect of rapid increases in revenues, due to
commodity booms, did not lead to increases in education expenditures across the board but that
such windfall revenues were only translated into education spending in states that had
egalitarian institutions.
       Second, we show that major increases in tax revenues can have long-lasting effects on
human capital accumulation and their distribution across states. For instance, we show that the
ranking of Brazilian states according to literacy rates changed significantly between 1872 and
1930, but that it has not changed much since then.                      This is partly because the post-1930
industrialization and the massive internal migration of the second half of the twentieth century
reinforced the ranking of states observed in 1930. That is, the initial push in some of the richer
states generated increasing returns, such thatstates that were the most educated by 1930 became
Brazil’s most educated and industrialized states at the turn of the twenty-first century. Thus,
our paper suggests one explanation of the origin of Brazil’s severe regional inequality.
       Now, despite the progress in education during the First Republic in Brazil, we are
cautious because improvements in education did not translate into a broad improvement in
human capital accumulation for the masses. 12 In the first place, for the period we examined, we
could not infer anything about the quality of education, only its quantity. Second, even if
commodity booms generated windfall revenues that Brazilian state governments spent on
education, the money was mostly spent on educating whites and mixed-race Brazilians. Former
slaves and blacks in general did not benefit much from the expansion of public education
between 1889 and 1930.




       12   This is now commonplace in the development literature; see, for example, Pritchett et al. “Solutions.”
Appendix. Data Sources

Panel A. Sources for Education Indicators, 1872–1940




                                                                                         Public/Private
                 Variable




                                      1872

                                             1890

                                                    1900

                                                             1907

                                                                    1920

                                                                           1933

                                                                                  1940
                                                                                                          Source
                                                                                                          1872, 1890, 1900, and 1920 from Brazil (1923);
 Literacy rate                        X      X      X               X             X
                                                                                                          1940 from Brazil (1950)
 Population, age brackets, and data                                                                       1872, 1890, 1900, and 1920 from Brazil (1923);
                                      X      X      X               X             X
 on foreign population                                                                                    1940 from Brazil (1950)
                                                                                                          For 1872, from Brazil (1917a); 1907 from
 Number of primary schools            X                       X     X      X      X      Both             (1917b); 1920 from Brazil (1923); 1933 from
                                                                                                          Brazil (1936) and 1940 from Brazil (1946)
                                                                                                          For 1872 from Brazil (1940); 1907 from
 Enrollment in primary schools        X                       X     X      X      X      Both             (1917b); 1920 from Brazil (1923); 1933 from
                                                                                                          Brazil (1936) and 1940 from Brazil (1946)
                                                                                                          1907 from (1917b); 1920 from Brazil (1923);
 Primary schools teachers                                     X            X      X      Both             1933 from Brazil (1936) and 1940 from Brazil
                                                                                                          (1946)



 Panel B. Fiscal and Trade Data

 Variable                                                  Source:
 Education expenditure and export tax revenue13            Willeman (1909) and Brazil (1926), data for the 1880s from Brazil (1887)
                                                           For data before 1897, we use Brazil (1914). For data from 1897 to 1939, see AEB V
 State public revenue14
                                                           (1939/40).
 Commodity prices                                          Global Financial Data and Jacks et al (2009).
                                                           Data from 1902 (imports) and 1901 and 1902 (exports) from Brazil (1904); 1908-1912
                                                           comes from Brazil (1917a); Data from 1913-1927 and 1935-40 comes from
                                                           Commerico Exterior do Brasil, several years.; Information from 1928-1934 is from
 Exports and imports
                                                           Brazil (1938); Data for 1887, 1892 to 1897 and 1903-1907 is from Brazil (1908).
                                                           Except for Minas Gerais15 and the Federal District (Distrito Federal).16 Data for
                                                           Minas Gerais from Minas Gerais (1929)


          13 We only have state expenditures in schooling for the periods 1901-1907, 1914-1916, 1919-1921, and 1924-

1926. Expenditures come from the state budgets and may differ from the actual amounts spent.
          14 The data is the budgeted and not the “actual” amounts spent. The data sources we have reported budgets

for either 6 or 18 months, thus we had to annualize the amounts, multiplying by 2 or 2/3, respectively. Finally, we
completed some missing data using simple linear interpolation between the closest data points available.
          15 We have information only for states that had customs offices and a port (or a navigable river that
connected it to the ocean). For this reason, we originally had no data for Góias (GO) and Minas Gerais (MG). Yet for
Minas Gerais, we have some reports of total exports, but not the ports from which they were shipped. We know that
most exports were shipped from Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Santos (in São Paulo, SP), and, in the 1920s, Espírito Santo (ES).
For simplicity, we assume that the exports of MG were exported through RJ and SP in equal proportions. We
therefore subtract the exports from MG from those of those two other states. For the MG export data for 1927-1931,
we assume that the MG average export share between 1923 and 1927 will prevail for the rest of the studied period
and we proceed with the same methodology as explained above. We also estimate using the exports as reported by
the federal publications (excluding MG); the results do not change. Unfortunately, data for imports for MG are not
available. Therefore, all the estimations that include imports as a control exclude the observations from MG.
          16 The city of Rio de Janeiro was the capital of Brazil, known as the Federal District (Distrito Federal or DF).
Rio de Janeiro City is in the middle of what was Rio de Janeiro State, now Guanabara. Both the city and the state
collected their own tax revenue, yet export taxes collected in the port of Rio de Janeiro accrued mostly to the State of
Panel C. Data Sources for Variables That Measure Institutions, Industrialization, and Electoral
Participation
 Variable                  Definition                                                                                 Source:
                           1 if the state grew a “good” commodity; 0 otherwise. Good commodities
                           include cacao, cattle, and cotton; bad commodities include mining,
                           sugar, and the trade of enslaved Indians. We use Bruhn and Gallego’s
 Dummy good                coding, but add Ceará and Piauí as cotton and sugar states, respectively.
                                                                                                       Bruhn and Gallego (2007)
 commodity                 Thus we code states as follows: AL=Sugar, AM=Cacao; BA=Sugar;
                           CE=Cotton; ES=Sugar; GO=Mining; MA=Cotton; MG=Mining;
                           MT=Cattle; PA=Cacao; PB=Sugar; PE=Sugar; PI=Sugar; PR=Mining;
                           RJ=Sugar; RN=Cattle; RS=Cattle; SC=Cattle; SE=Sugar; SP=Indians.
 Industrial production     Industrial production in 1920 milreís and number of industrial
 and number of             establishments.                                                             1907, 1920, and 1940
 industrial                                                                                            Industrial Census
 establishments
                           Population/km2                                                              For population, see Panel A;
 Population density                                                                                    for state areas, see Wileman
                                                                                                       (1909)
 Precolonial native        Population per km2at the time of colonization
                                                                                                       Bruhn and Gallego (2007)
 population
 Size of rural             Average number of hectares per rural establishment in 1920.
                                                                                                       1920 Industrial Census
 establishments in 1920
                           Slave population in 1819 and 1864. We divide them by the population of      Stein, Vassouras, p. 295 and
 Slave population          each state in 1823 and 1872, respectively.                                  1872 Population Census
                           Before 1891 we only have the number of registered voters, not the
 Voters in 1875, 1910,     number of people who actually casted a vote. Between 1891 and 1934 we
 and 1934                  have data for the number of registered voters (eleitores) and the number    Brazil (1913) and
                           of actual votes.                                                            ipeadata.com




Additional References for Appendices A, B and C
Bouças, Valentim. 1932. Financas dos estados do Brasil. Volume I. Rio de Janeiro, Ministério da Fazenda.
Brazil. 1887. Secretaria de Estado dos Negocios do Império. Trabalhos da Secção de Estatística...anno de 1886.
            Rio de Janeiro, Imprensa Nacional.
Brazil. 1894. Constitution of the United States of Brazil. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Brazil. 1904. Commercio exterior do Brazil (1902). Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa Nacional.
Brazil. 1908. Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Commercio. Boletim Comemorativo da Exposição Nacional
            de 1908. Rio de Janeiro: Directoria Geral de Estatística
Brazil. 1914. Balanços da Receita e Despeza da República. Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa Nacional



Rio de Janeiro, while import taxes accrued to the federal government, as in other parts of the country. Moreover, the
port of Rio de Janeiro, in the Federal District, served the states of Rio de Janeiro and Minas Gerais. Rio de Janeiro state
had no other port until it added Angra dos Reis in the 1920s. Therefore, we cannot distinguish the exports made from
the capital itself and from Rio de Janeiro State (or from Minas Gerais; see note above). We are confident, however,
that most of the exports shipped from the port of Rio de Janeiro were commodities produced in the state of Rio de
Janeiro and not in the Federal District. Furthermore, we consider that the state of Rio de Janeiro benefited from the
exports and economic activity of the port of the city of Rio de Janeiro and vice versa and, for this reason, we use the
same level of international trade activity for both state and city.
Brazil. 1917a. Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Commercio. Anuário Estatístico do Brasil I/1908-1912
         (AEB I). Rio de Janeiro: Diretoria Geral de Estatística.
Brazil. 1917b. Estatística da Instrucção. Volume I. Rio de Janeiro: Diretoria Geral de Estatística
Brazil. 1923. Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Commercio. Recenseamento do Brasil, 1920. Rio de
         Janeiro: Directoria Geral de Estadística
Brazil. 1926. Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Comércio. Estatística das Finanças do Brasil. Rio de
         Janeiro: Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Comércio.
Brazil. 1936. Anuário Estatístico do Brasil II/1936 (AEB II). Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Nacional de Estatística.
Brazil. 1938. Quadros Estatístico., Rio de Janeiro: Diretoria de Estatistica Economica e Financeira.
Brazil. 1940. Anuário Estatístico do Brasil V/1939-1940 (AEB V). Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de
         Geografia e Estatística.
Brazil. 1946. Anuário Estatístico do Brasil VI/1941-1945 (AEB VI). Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de
         Geografia e Estatística.
Brazil. 1950. Recenseamento do Brasil, 1940. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística.
Correia, Manoel Francisco. 1878. Relatorio e Trabalahos Estatisticos Apresentados a Illm. E Exm. Sr. Conselheiro
         Dr. Carlos Leoncio de Carvalho, Ministro e Secretario de Estado dos Negocios do Imperio, pelo Director
         Geral Conselheiro Manoel Francisco Correia em 20 de Novembro de 1878. Rio de Janeiro, Typographia
         Nacional.
Minas Gerais. 1929. Carteira Estatística de Minas Gerais, Serviço de Estatística Geral, Imprensa Official.
Moacyr, Primitivo. 1939. A instrução e as provincias: subsídios para a história da educação no Brasil, 1835–1889.
         Vols. I and II. Sao Paulo, Recife, e Porto Alegre, Cia. Editora Nacional.
Stein, Stanley. 1957. Vassouras: A Brazilian Coffee County, 1850–1890. Harvard, Ma.: Harvard University
Press.
Wileman, J. P. 1909. The Brazilian Year Book. Rio de Janeiro and London.
REFERENCES FOR THE PAPER
Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo García-Jimeno, and James A. Robinson. "Finding El Dorado: Slavery
       and Long-Run Development in Colombia." Journal of Comparative Economics 40, no. 4
       (2012): 534-64.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. "The Colonial Origins of
       Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review 91,
       no. 5 (2001): 1369-401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. "Reversal of Fortune: Geography
       and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution." Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 117, no. 4 (2002): 1231-94.
Arroyo-Abad, Leticia. "Persistent Inequality? Trade, Factor Endowments, and Inequality in
       Republican Latin America." Journal of Economic History 73, no. 1 (2013): 38-78.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer. "History, Institutions and Economic Performance: The
       Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India." American Economic Review 95, no. 4
       (2005): 1190-213.
Bruhn, Miriam, and Francisco Gallego. "Good, Bad, and Ugly Colonial Activities: Do They
       Matter for Economic Development?" Review of Economics and Statistics 94, no. 2 (2012):
       1190-213.
Chaudhary, Latika, Aldo Musacchio, Steven Nafziger, and Se Yan. "Big Brics, Weak
       Foundations: The Beginning of Public Elementary Education in Brazil, Russia, India, and
       China." Explorations in Economic History 49, no. 2 (2012): 221-40.
Coatsworth, John H. "Structures, Endowments, and Institutions in the Economic History of
       Latin America." Latin American Research Review 40, no. 3 (2005): 126-44.
Coatsworth, John H. "Inequality, Institutions and Economic Growth in Latin America." Journal
       of Latin American Studies 40 (2008): 545-69.
Da Costa, Ana Maria Catelli Infantosi. A Escola Na República Velha: Expansão Do Ensino Primário
       Em São Paulo. São Paulo: Edec, 1983.
de Carvalho Filho, Irineu , and Renato P. Colistete. "Education Performance: Was It All
       Determined 100 Years Ago? Evidence from São Paulo, Brazil." In MPRA Paper Munich:
       University Library of Munich, 2010.
De Souza, Rosa Fátima. Templos De Civilização: A Implantação Da Escola Primária Graduada No
       Estado De São Paulo, 1890–1910. Sao Paulo: UNESP Fundacao, 1998.
Engerman, Stanley, Elisa V. Mariscal, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "The Evolution of Schooling in
       the Americas, 1800-1925." In Human Capital and Institutions: The Long Run View, edited by
       Frank D. Lewis David Eltis, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, 93-142. Cambridge and New York:
       Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential
       Paths of Growth among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of
       the United States." In How Latin America Fell Behind, edited by Stephen Haber, 260-304.
       Stanford, Ca.: Stanford University Press, 1997.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of
       Development among New World Economies." Economía 3, no. 1 (2002): 41-109.
Frankema, Ewout. "The Origins of Formal Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: Was British Rule
       More Benign?" European Review of Economic History 16, no. 4 (2012): 335-55.
Gallego, Francisco. "Historical Origins of Schooling: The Role of Democracy and Political
       Decentralization." Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 2 (2010): 228-43.
Hilsdorf, Maria Lúcia Spedo. História Da Educação Brasileira : Leituras. São Paulo: Thomson, 2003.
Iyer, Lakshmi. "Direct Versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Consequences."
         Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 4 (2010): 693-713.
Jacks, David S., Kevin H. O'Rourke, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Commodity Price Volatility and
         World Market Integration since 1700." In NBER Working Paper 14748. Cambridge, Mass.,
         2009.
Lindert, Peter H. Growing Public : Social Spending and Economic Growth since the Eighteenth
         Century. 2 vols. Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge, 2004.
Martins de Andrade, Beatriz. "O Discurso Educacional Do Maranhão Na Primeira República."
         Fundação Getúlio Vargas, 1982.
McCabe, Kevin A., Stephen J. Rassenti, and Vernon L. Smith. "Reciprocity, Trust, and Payoff
         Privacy in Extensive Form Bargaining." Games and Economic Behavior 24 (1998): 10-24.
Musacchio, Aldo. "Can Civil Law Countries Get Good Institutions? Lessons from the History of
         Creditor Rights and Bond Markets in Brazil." Journal of Economic History 68, no. 1 (2008):
         80-108.
Musacchio, Aldo. "Law and Finance Circa 1900." In NBER working paper series working paper
         16216. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.
Naritomi, Joana, Rodrigo R. Soares, and Julian J. Assunção. "Institutional Development and
         Colonial Heritage within Brazil." Journal of Economic History 72, no. 2 (2012): 393–422.
Nickerson, Jack A., and Todd R. Zenger. "Being Efficiently Fickle: A Dynamic Theory of
         Organizational Choice." Organization Science 13, no. 5 (2002): 547-67.
Nunn, Nathan. "Slavery, Inequality, and Economic Development in the Americas: An
         Examination of the Engerman-Sokoloff Hypothesis." In Institutions and Economic
         Performance, edited by Elhanan Helpman, 148-80. Cambridge, Ma.: Harvard University
         Press, 2008.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. "The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
         Development in the Twentieth Century." Journal of Financial Economics 69 (2003): 5-50.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Stanley L. Engerman. "History Lessons: Institutions, Factors
         Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World." Journal of Economic
         Perspectives 14, no. 3 (2000): 217-32.
Summerhill, William R. III. "Colonial Institutions, Slavery, Inequality, and Development:
         Evidence from São Paulo, Brazil." In University Library Munich MPRA Paper 22162, 2010.
Villela, André. "Política Tarifaria No Ii Reinado: Evolução E Impactos, 1850-1889." Nova
         Economia 15, no. 1 (2005): 35-68.
Villela, André. "Distribuição Regional Das Receitas E Despesas Do Governo Central No Ii
         Reinado, 1844-1889." Estudos Econômicos 37, no. 2 (2007): 247-74.
Wegenast, Tim. "The Legacy of Landlords: Educational Distribution and Development in a
         Comparative Perspective." Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Politikwissenschaft – Comparative
         Governance and Politics 3, no. 1 (2009): 81-107.
Wegenast, Tim. "Cana, Café, Cacau: Agrarian Structure and Educational Inequalities in Brazil."
         Revista de Historia Económica / Journal of Iberian and Latin American Economic History 28, no.
         1 (2010): 103-37.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. "History without Evidence: Latin American Inequality since 1491." In
         NBER Working Paper No. 14766, 2009.
Table 1. Ranking of States by Literacy Rates In the Long Run
Panel A. Ranking of States by Literacy Rates
                               1872                    1890                 1940                  2007

                        Literacy         Literacy                  Literacy              Literacy
                          Rate   Ranking   Rate   Ranking            Rate      Ranking     Rate          Ranking
States that moved up the ranking over time
São Paulo                18.8        10       16.6      10          52.1            2      95.4             3
Santa Catarina           16.5        11       23.3       3          49.1            3      95.6             2
Goiás                    16.2        12       12.6      16          22.8           16      91.2             8
Amazonas                 14.1        15       19.0       6          36.6            9      92.0             6
Espírito Santo           13.1        17       16.0      13          39.8            8      91.5             7
Minas Gerais             11.2        20       12.2      17          33.0           10      91.1             9
Rio de Janeiro           19.1         9       17.8       8          42.5            5      95.7             1
States that did not move significantly from their ranking in 1872 a
Paraná                    28.9        1         22.5           4     42.9           4      93.4             5
Rio Grande do Sul         22.5        3         30.3           1     54.4           1      95.0             4
Sergipe                   13.4       16         11.6          19     27.2          11      83.2            12
Ceará                     13.0       18         16.3          11     26.2          13      80.8            15
Paraíba                   12.9       19         14.9          15     20.8          18      76.5            18
States that moved down the ranking over time
Pará                      26.7        2         26.0           2     41.1           6      88.3            11
Maranhão                  22.1        4         15.4          14     21.2          17      78.5            17
Mato Grosso               20.5        5         19.4           5     40.5           7      89.9            10
Bahia                     20.3        6         10.1          20     23.7          15      81.5            13
Pernambuco                19.6        7         16.8           9     25.1          14      81.5            14
Rio Grande do Norte       19.1        8         18.3           7     27.1          12      80.4            16
Piauí                     15.0       13         11.8          18     19.0          20      76.5            19
Alagoas                   14.3       14         16.2          12     19.5          19      74.8            20
                                               b
Panel B Correlation of Literacy Rates by State
                          1872        1890       1900      1920        1940        1950       1970       1980    1991
         1890            0.8215*        1
         1900            0.6735* 0.8666*           1
         1920            0.7432* 0.9107* 0.9256*             1
         1940            0.6555* 0.8372* 0.8631* 0.9731*                 1
         1950            0.6070* 0.7888* 0.8055* 0.9427*              0.9895*        1
         1970            0.3969     0.5539* 0.6529* 0.7840*           0.8719*     0.9127*       1
         1980            0.3914      0.5381    0.6447* 0.7718*        0.8592*     0.8984*    0.9922*       1
         1991            0.3545      0.4844    0.6069* 0.7382*        0.8301*     0.8732*    0.9792*    0.9925*    1
         2007            0.3295      0.4735    0.6504* 0.7384*        0.8218*     0.8550*    0.9684*    0.9801* 0.9839*
Notes:a) This group shows states that did not move more than five places in the overall ranking between 1872 and 2007.
b) These correlations include all states except the Federal District. Stars (*) denote 1% significance.
Table 2. State Expenditures on Education and Outcomes By Commodity Exported
                                                          1875-1884 (average)        1901-1925 (average)


                                                                                  Expenditure                                           Enrollment    Enrollment
                                                                                                               Slaves to    Slaves to                                Schools per   Schools per
                                Main                  Expenditure on Expenditures on education Expenditures                               Rate in       Rate in
                                                                                                              population   population                                   1000´s        1000´s
                             commodity                 education per on education per capita   on education                               Primary       Primary
                                                                                                                 1819         1864                                  children 1889 children 1933
                              exported   Main colonial capita (1913     /total        (1913       /total                                School 1889   School 1933
                             (1889-1930)  commodity      milreis)    expenditure    milreis)   expenditure
High expenditures on education
Amazonas                    Rubber          Cacao          1.8           12%          3.2           9%           26%           5%          10.0          23.2            3.4           8.9
Ceará                       Cattle          Cotton         0.4           23%          0.7          19%           28%           5%           4.2          13.0            1.0           1.8
Espírito Santo              Coffee          Sugar          1.2           22%          1.0           9%           17%          20%           7.2          25.2            2.9           4.4
Mato Grosso                 Rubber          Cattle         0.9           23%          1.7          12%           26%          10%           7.9          22.8            2.2           3.3
Minas Gerais                Coffee          Mining         0.4           28%          2.4          15%           47%          12%           5.7          23.4            2.1           2.1
Pará                        Rubber          Cacao          2.4           25%          2.1          11%           26%          13%          13.5          27.9            3.8           4.2
Paraná                       Mate           Mining         0.9           20%          1.4          14%           18%          17%          10.2          25.2            3.1           3.8
Rio de Janeiro              Coffee          Sugar          1.6           19%          1.2          11%           32%          29%          14.4          29.1            3.9           3.4
Rio Grande do Sul           Cattle          Cattle         1.1           19%          1.8          15%           19%          10%           9.8          33.2            2.0           5.7
Santa Catarina               Mate           Catlle         0.6           27%          0.8          13%           18%          10%          10.0          37.3            2.3           6.4
São Paulo                   Coffee       Indian slaves     0.7           14%          3.6          16%           28%          10%           6.3          31.6            3.1           3.2
Low expenditures on education
Alagoas                        Sugar        Sugar          0.5           19%          0.5          13%           53%          15%           5.4          13.2            1.6           2.2
Bahia                         Tobacco       Sugar          0.5           15%          0.4           6%           22%          23%           4.4           9.2            1.3           1.7
Goiás                           n.a.        Mining         0.4           21%          0.2           8%           44%          23%           4.4          12.1            1.6           2.1
Maranhão                       Cotton       Cotton         0.9           32%          0.5          10%           81%          20%           5.7          12.2            1.5           2.3
Paraíba                       Cotton        Sugar          0.4           18%          0.5          12%           14%           8%           2.0          16.0            0.7           2.2
Pernambuco                     Sugar        Sugar          1.0           20%          0.5           7%           20%          31%           7.5          15.7            2.9           3.0
Piauí                         Cotton        Sugar          0.3           16%          0.2           9%           14%          11%           2.9           8.0            1.1           0.9
Rio Grande do Norte           Cotton        Cattle         0.5           27%          0.5           9%           13%          10%           7.7          20.6            2.3           2.5
Sergipe                        Sugar        Sugar          0.7           19%          0.9          14%           22%          32%           4.9          17.4            2.7           3.5
Brazil                                                     0.7           19%          1.2          17%           27%          12%           7.0          23.3            2.2           3.0
Sources: See the appendix.
Table 3. Education Outcomes Using Census Data from 1960
                                        Population 6-10 years old in:
                                       1910        1920          1930
Literacy rate (%)                      44.8          51.5          56.2
    Whites                             55.3          62.0          67.0
    Blacks                             21.7          27.6          33.1
    Mixed race                         26.8          33.5          37.7
Completed elementary
education (% of cohort)                2.5           3.2           3.5
   Whites                              3.6           4.5           5.1
   Blacks                              0.2           0.4           0.5
   Mixed race                          0.5           0.6           0.9
Completed up to fourth grade           10.3          11.8          13.2
   Whites                              14.1          15.7          17.3
   Blacks                              3.3           4.2           5.8
   Mixed race                          3.3           4.6           5.5
Never attended school (% cohort)       59.9          53.1          48.1
     Whites                             49.8           42.6          37.3
     Blacks                             81.4           75.7          70.2
     Mixed race                         77.2           71.1          66.5
Source: Brazil, VII Recenseamento Geral do Brasil , IBGE, 1960.
Note: Part of the diffrerences between whites and mixed race Brazilians
and blacks could be driven by survival bias. Yet for it to be a problem,
literate blacks would have to have had a lower mortality rate than other
black Brazilians.
Table 4. OLS Regressions with Expenditures on Education Per Capita at the State Level, 1901-1926
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)             (8)              (9)
                                                                                                                                  Dep var is expenditures
                                           Dep variable: Log of expenditures on education per capita                                    per child

                                                 Macro        Controls for State-specific excl. coffee          excl. rubber     Controls for State-specific
VARIABLES                    No controls        controls       crop mix       trends        states                 states         crop mix       trends

ln(export tax rev pc)           0.324***        0.326***         0.286***         0.107*          0.296***         0.153***        0.285***          0.111*
                                 (0.100)         (0.100)          (0.075)         (0.056)          (0.078)          (0.048)         (0.072)          (0.057)
ln(popdensity)                                    0.665             1.011           7.475            1.140            1.164           0.975            8.311
                                                 (0.831)          (0.622)         (6.704)          (0.746)          (0.706)         (0.609)          (6.878)
ln(state debt per capita)                         0.001            -0.029          -0.095           -0.025           -0.036          -0.030           -0.090
                                                 (0.065)          (0.050)         (0.067)          (0.047)          (0.059)         (0.052)          (0.070)
Additional controls:
State-specific trends              N               N                N                Y               N                N                N               Y
Crop mix                           N               N                N                Y               Y                Y                Y               Y
Year dummies                       Y               Y                Y                Y               Y                Y                Y               Y
State dummies                      Y               Y                Y                Y               Y                Y                Y               Y
Observations                      292             285              255              255             214              228              255             255
Num. of states                     21              20               18               18              16               17               18              18
R2 overall                        0.34            0.01             0.01             0.01            0.07             0.00             0.01            0.01
R2 between                        0.13            0.00             0.04             0.02            0.11             0.00             0.04            0.02
R2 within                         0.25            0.27             0.43             0.65            0.49             0.34             0.45            0.64
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Errors clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 per cent,
respectively. All regressions include a constant. The sample includes only 18 states once we control for the export crop mix because we exclude the
landlocked state of Goias and the capital of the country, the port of Rio de Janeiro, which had import duties as an additional source of revenue.
Table 5 Instrumental Variables Regressions for Expenditure on Education.
                                                  Dependent variable is the log education expenditures per capita
                                                 Macro controls Controls for      Excluding coffee   Excluding
                                                                export crop mix         states      rubber states


                                                           (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
Second Stage (IV: export price index per state)
Log (Export tax revenue pc)                             0.484***         0.355***           0.372***          0.492*
                                                        (0.092)           (0.098)            (0.092)         (0.251)
Log (non-export tax revenue)                            0.207***         0.149***           0.253***         0.175***
                                                        (0.057)           (0.053)            (0.063)         (0.064)
Observations                                              270               255                214             240
R2 Adjusted                                              0.877             0.904              0.901            0.88
Anderson canonical correlations LR statistic            46.6***          38.2***            40.34***          8.89**
First stage:
Log (Export prices)                                     -9.42***         0.684***           0.784***          .3.41*
                                                        (1.609)           (0.164)            (0.175)         (0.165)
R2 Adjusted                                               0.81              0.83               0.82            0.81
F statistic                                             23.79***         17.42***           20.00***          4.25**
OLS Coefficients:
Log (Export tax revenue pc)                             0.326***         0.286***           0.296***         0.153***
                                                        (0.100)           (0.075)            (0.078)         (0.048)
Fixed Effects and Year Dummies                             Y                 Y                  Y               Y
Population Density and debt per capita                     Y                 Y                 Y                Y
Commodity mix (exports)                                    N                 Y                 Y                Y

Note: Our instruments are a set of export price indices, one per state. We created an export price index for each state
using the prices of the eight largest exports and leaving the weights fixed for the entire period (we use weights for
1900). Robust state cluster standard errors shown in parenthesis. Coefficients marked with: *** indicates significant at
1%, ** at 5% and * at 10%
Table 6 Education Expenditures per capita at State Level. 1901-1926 .
                                                                                   Dependent Variable: Expenditure on Education per capita
                                                           (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)
                                                          % of       % of        # of       # of       # of   Industrial Industrial Industrial Production Production
                                                       Foreigners Foreigners Industries Industries Industries Production Production Production growth       growth
Variables interacted with Export Tax Revenue:             1890       1920      in 1907    in 1920    in 1940    in 1907    in 1920    in 1940   1907-1920 1907-1940
Export Tax Revenue pc                                    0.106***     0.069***      0.033**      0.054***      0.053***     0.052***     0.056***     0.054***      0.057***     0.060***
                                                          (0.018)      (0.010)       (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.010)       (0.010)
Export tax Revenue pc interacted with (see               -0.070**       -0.047      -0.111**     -0.020***     -0.019**     -0.039*      -0.021***     -0.020**    -0.021***     -0.024***
columns):
                                                         (0.026)       (0.028)      (0.045)    (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.021)         (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.005)
Controls:
Population density and imports pc                           Y             Y            Y            Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y             Y
Fixed effects and year dummies                              Y             Y            Y            Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y             Y
Constant                                                    Y             Y            Y            Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y             Y
Observations                                               257           262          262          262           262          262           262          262          262           262
Adjusted-R squared                                        0.923         0.927        0.931        0.923         0.923        0.922         0.924        0.923        0.923         0.924

The dependent variable is the state expenditure per capita on education. Regressions look at the effects of interaction terms between export tax revenue per capita and
immigration and industrialization indicators from different census. All the interacted variables were normalized with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. All variables in monetary
terms are in 1913 reis. Robust standard errors shown in parenthesis (clustered at the state level). Coefficients marked with: ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively. All regressions include a constant.
Table 7. OLS Regressions to Study the Effect of Colonial Institutions on Education Expenditures at the State Level (Random Effects)


Panel A. Correlations Between Colonial Institutions and Expenditures on Education per Capita
                                      OLS random effects regressions: dependent variable is education expenditures per capita
                                                                  Dummies for colonial institutions
                                                          Sugar or              High       High                           High
                                    Good         Sugar     mining    Cotton slave pop slave pop Far from Mortality        conc.
                                  commodity colony         colony    colony     1819       1864     equator   (1910)      Land
VARIABLES                             (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)         (9)

Log(export tax revenue per capita)      0.368***    0.364***    0.368***    0.358***    0.356***    0.373***    0.353***    0.360***    0.354***
                                        (0.086)     (0.090)      (0.086)     (0.095)     (0.094)     (0.091)     (0.097)     (0.094)     (0.095)

Colonial institutions dummies           0.622***    -0.607***   -0.622***     0.020      -0.226     -0.554*       0.356      -0.092      -0.339
(variable names on column titles)       (0.235)      (0.215)     (0.235)     (0.181)     (0.243)    (0.283)      (0.257)     (0.220)     (0.250)
Constant                                -5.469***   -5.004***   -4.847***   -5.153***   -5.072***   -5.102***   -5.328***   -5.123***   -4.874***
                                         (0.592)     (0.634)     (0.592)     (0.653)     (0.648)     (0.623)     (0.727)     (0.660)     (0.683)
Observations                              285         285         285         285         285         285         285         285         285
Number of states                           20          20          20          20          20          20          20          20          20
R2 between                                0.74        0.72        0.74        0.68        0.64        0.76        0.63        0.68        0.63

Panel B. Interaction of Export Tax Revenues per capita and Colonial Institutions Dummies (random effects)

Log(export tax revenue per capita)      0.358***    0.393***    0.383***    0.466***    0.384***    0.388***    0.353***    0.395***    0.200**
                                        (0.087)     (0.098)      (0.099)     (0.067)     (0.102)     (0.091)     (0.118)     (0.135)    (0.084)
Colonial institutions dummies             0.755      -1.009      -0.755     -2.988***    -1.209     -4.200***     0.284      -0.477       0.659
(variable names on column titles)        (0.917)     (0.871)     (0.917)     (0.764)     (1.425)     (1.277)     (0.899)     (1.111)     (0.855)
Interactive terms (see columns)           0.025      -0.072      -0.025     -0.454***    -0.162     -0.637***    -0.013      -0.067       0.175
                                         (0.138)     (0.132)     (0.138)     (0.102)     (0.213)     (0.179)     (0.142)     (0.177)     (0.130)
Constant                                -5.546***   -4.879***   -4.791***   -4.585***   -4.886***   -5.033***   -5.322***   -4.919***   -5.746***
                                         (0.689)     (0.641)     (0.631)     (0.498)     (0.698)     (0.611)     (0.851)     (0.878)     (0.675)

Observations                               285         285         285       285           285        285          285         285          285
Number of states                            20          20         20         20           20         20            20         20            20
R2 between                                0.75         0.75       0.75       0.69         0.60       0.73         0.63        0.70          0.62
Additional controls
log of pop density                          Y           Y           Y         Y             Y          Y            Y           Y            Y
log of debt per capita                      Y           Y           Y         Y             Y          Y            Y           Y            Y
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Errors clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1
per cent, respectively. The sample includes only 18 states once we control for the export crop mix because we exclude the landlocked state
of Goias and the capital of the country, the port of Rio de Janeiro, which had import duties as an additional source of revenue.
Table 8. Expenditures on Education Interacted with Colonial Institutions (Fixed Effects OLS)
                                                                                    Dep variable: Log of expenditures on education per capita

                                        Dummy for                      Dummy for                    Dummy for     Dummy for
                                           good                         sugar and                    high % of     high % of    Dummy Dummy for Dummy for            High % of
                                        commodity        Dummy        mining colony      Dummy       slaves to     slaves to   above avg.   high         high         voters to
                                         (Bruhn &        for sugar     (Naritomi et     for cotton population in population in distance to mortality concentration   population
                                         Gallego )        colony           al.)           colony       1819          1864       equator rate in 1910    of land        in 1875
VARIABLES                                   (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)       (8)           (9)           (10)


log(export tax revenue per capita)         0.215*         0.282***       0.278***        0.370***      0.303***         0.318***      0.258**   0.339**    0.207      0.369***
                                           (0.109)         (0.086)        (0.086)         (0.077)       (0.080)          (0.079)      (0.092)   (0.140)   (0.123)      (0.093)
Interaction w/ colonial institutions
                                            0.063           -0.091         -0.063        -0.339**        -0.202         -0.336*        0.065     -0.132    0.074      -0.345**
variable (see column titles)
                                           (0.137)         (0.137)        (0.137)         (0.125)       (0.215)         (0.168)       (0.128)   (0.159)   (0.154)      (0.133)
Additional controls:
Pop. density and debt per capita           Y                Y               Y               Y              Y                Y           Y         Y         Y            Y
Year and state dummies                     Y                Y               Y               Y              Y                Y           Y         Y         Y            Y
Constant                                   Y                Y               Y               Y              Y                Y           Y         Y         Y            Y
Observations                              255              255             255             255            255              255         255       255       255          255
Num. of states                             18               18              18              18             18               18          18        18        18           18
R2 overall                               0.003            0.010           0.003           0.002          0.001            0.003       0.005     0.002     0.002        0.000
R2 within                                0.370            0.371           0.370           0.410          0.380            0.398       0.371     0.378     0.371        0.411
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 per cent, respectively.
Table 9 Conditional Correlations between Expenditures and Education Outcomes (Cross Section regressions--We display only the
coefficients of interest).
                                                         Dependent variables                              Controls

                                                                              % change in                                                            Chg. in
                                                                Change in      primary               Change in                                       private
                                                               Literacy Rate schools 1890-           Enrollment                     Initial        enrollment Pop density,
          Main independent variable:                            1890-1940         1940               1940/1907         none       Conditions       1940/1907 imports pc
Coefficient Avg. expenditure pc education                         6.412***       0.815                 0.041*           Y
Coefficient Avg. expenditure pc education                         6.608***      1.011***               0.032                            Y
Coefficient Avg. expenditure pc education                         6.627***      1.011***               0.032                            Y                Y
Coefficient Avg. expenditure pc education           7.179***         1.540***         0.029                                             Y                Y                Y
Robust errors in parenthesis. Coefficients marked with: *** indicates significant at 1%, ** at 5% and * at 10%

Table 10 OLS Regressions: Trade Shocks and Education Outcomes (Reduced Form--We display only the coefficients of interest)
                                                        Dependent variables                              Controls
                                                                                              Log                                                                   FE, macro,
                                                               Log(Literacy               (Enrollment                                                 Macro            year
          Main independent variable:                              Rate)     Log (schools)    Rate)                     none            FE            controls       dummies
Coefficient of Log(state export price index)                      0.207**            0.647***          0.329***         Y
Coefficient of Log(state export price index)                      0.340***           0.576***          0.340***                         Y
Coefficient of Log(state export price index)                      0.278***           0.214**           0.272***                         Y                Y
Coefficient of Log(state export price index)                       -0.068             -0.104            -0.073                          Y                Y                Y

Dependent variables are education outcomes. The independent variable of interest is logarithm of our state price indices for three periods. Panel data using three education
census years: 1890, 1900, 1920. In this reduced form We test the hypothesis that favorable fluctuations in the international price of commodities increased the expenditure on
schooling, which was reflected in higher education outcomes . The expected sign of the coefficient is positive. Coefficients marked with: *** indicates significant at 1%, ** at
5% and * at 10. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Errors clustered at the state level.
