                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE FLIGHT FROM MATURITY

                                         Gary B. Gorton
                                         Andrew Metrick
                                            Lei Xie

                                       Working Paper 20027
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20027


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Gorton was a consultant to AIG Financial Products during
1996-2008.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Gary B. Gorton, Andrew Metrick, and Lei Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Flight from Maturity
Gary B. Gorton, Andrew Metrick, and Lei Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 20027
April 2014
JEL No. E32,E42,E44,G01

                                              ABSTRACT

Why did the failure of Lehman Brothers make the financial crisis dramatically worse? The financial
crisis was a process of a build-up of risk during the crisis prior to the Lehman failure. Market participants
tried to preserve an option or exit by shortening maturities – the “flight from maturity”. With increasingly
short maturities, lenders created the possibility of fast exit. The failure of Lehman Brothers was the
tipping point of this build-up of systemic fragility. We produce a chronology of the crisis which formalizes
the dynamics of the crisis. A crisis is a dynamic process in which “tail risk” is endogenous.


Gary B. Gorton                                        Lei Xie
Yale School of Management                             AQR Capital
135 Prospect Street                                   2 Greenwich Plaza
P.O. Box 208200                                       Greenwich, CT 06830
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                              lei.xie@aqr.com
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu
                                                                                                                  1


        “The Lehman episode was not just a disaster for Lehman. It was a disaster for our
        country. And like any calamity, it should be subjected to careful, independent scrutiny.”
        Timothy Geithner, written testimony before the House Financial Services Committee,
        April 20, 2010.

1. Introduction

Why did the failure of Lehman Brothers make the financial crisis dramatically worse? We argue that the
financial system became increasingly fragile during the crisis, so that even a small shock would have led
to a large response at that point in the crisis. During the crisis lenders in the money markets sought to
shorten the maturities of their loans while borrowing banks sought to lengthen the maturities. Lenders
wanted to be able to exit quickly while banks sought to avoid roll risk, which would force them to sell
assets at fire sale prices. The desperate maturity struggle between lenders and borrowers manifests
itself in the term structures of money market spreads becoming positively sloped, and increasingly so,
finally culminating in a sudden massive exit at a sign of trouble – Lehman. We empirically produce a
narrative of the crisis that documents the dynamic process of the build-up of fragility during the crisis.
We show that a “crisis” is not just a “shock.” The run on Lehman was the result of an endogenous
buildup of risk.

Our argument, that fragility is endogenous, conflicts with the standard “two shock” view of the recent
crisis. In this view, a “crisis” corresponds to a “large shock.” As expressed for recent events, the financial
crisis of 2007-2008 involved two distinct phases, corresponding to two distinct shocks, the “subprime
shock” and the “Lehman shock,” e.g. Mishkin (2011). First, there was the period from August 2007 to
August 2008 which started with a shock to subprime residential mortgages due to house price declines
and a disruption in financial markets, but real GDP continued to rise. Some economists predicted a mild
recession.1 But, in mid-September 2008, the failure of Lehman Brothers caused a much more virulent
global financial crisis—“the imminent collapse of the global financial system” (Bernanke, 2009). Thus,
the widespread view of the crisis is that it was caused by the disorderly liquidation of Lehman Brothers,




1
  Lucas (2009, p. 67) wrote that, “Until the Lehman failure the recession was pretty typical of the modest
downturns of the post-war period . . . After Lehman collapsed and the potential for crisis had become a reality, the
situation was completely altered.” And, according to Blinder (2009), “everything fell apart after Lehman . . . After
Lehman went over the cliff, no financial institution seemed safe. So lending froze, and the economy sank like a
stone. It was a colossal error, and many people said so at the time” (Blinder 2009).
                                                                                                                  2


the view that informs the Dodd-Frank legislation. Some economists attributed this to policy failure: the
Fed should not have let Lehman fail.2

In this paper, we argue that this two shock view of the crisis is not accurate. Rather, the crisis was an
ongoing build-up of fragility as the maturities of money market instruments shortened, starting around
August 2007 and continuing, finally resulting in the Lehman failure, in effect caused by this build-up of
fragility. In order for Lehman to fail suddenly, enough creditors had to be in the position to not renew
their loans, i.e., a very large amount of Lehman financing had to be in the form of, say, overnight sale
and repurchase agreements (“repo”). 3 The shock to subprime starts things off—the economy becomes
anxious-- and then the situation evolves into a crisis. The build-up of fragility was protracted, involving
spreads increasing, maturities shortening, and repo haircuts increasing.4 Finally, this buildup culminates
in the run on Lehman. Thus, a crisis is a dynamic process in which the effect of a “shock” is essentially
endogenous.5

Understanding the dynamics of the crisis requires determining the timing of important events. To set
ideas we provide a small model of the money market which shows the timing of events: spreads rise,
maturities shorten, the term structure of spreads increases, and lastly lenders exit by not rolling over
their loans (i.e., haircuts rise, possibly to 100%). In the model loans are collateralized, as in repo. Lenders
want to lend short when a shock has occurred, and banks want to borrow long. Banks offer a higher
spread for longer loans and a lower spread for shorter loans. The economy can become fragile when
lenders lend a sufficient amount short so as to be able to force the bank into bankruptcy early if there is
a need to exit.


We document the model chronology, by showing that it matches an empirical chronology of the crisis.
The empirical chronology is based on locating the dates of structural breaks in panel data sets, based on

2
  For example, Taylor (2009) and Meltzer (2009) have articulated this view.
3
  “Repo” is short for sale and repurchase agreement. Under a repo contract the lender deposits (i.e., lends) money
to the borrower (the bank) for a short period of time at interest and receives bonds as collateral to ensure the
safety of the deposit. The collateral is marked-to-market. The return on the bonds used as collateral accrues to the
borrowing bank. Repo was central to the crisis; see Gorton (2010), and Gorton and Metrick (2012).
4
  Suppose a bank which wants to finance assets worth V with repo debt (D) and equity (E), so V=D+E. A haircut is
defined as follows:              which implies that the amount lent to the bank by the lender, where the collateral
is V, is D=V(1-H). Substituting this into the balance sheet identity (V=D+E) shows that E=HV, which is the amount of
equity that the bank would have to raise to back the assets. If the haircut is zero, then with respect to these
assets, the entire amount can be repo-financed, for example.
5
  This is the viewpoint of Gorton and Ordoñez (2014) who show that a credit boom can result in a crisis due to a
“small shock”, one that would not have caused a crisis had there been no credit boom.
                                                                                                                      3


the methodology of Bai (2010). Our chronology dates the first structural break in panels of spreads on
subprime-related instruments, secured money market instruments (repo), unsecured money market
instruments, credit derivative (CDS) measures of the risk in financial firms, and price-based measures of
real economic activity.

The chronology of the crisis is also very important because it allows us to formalize the notion of a
financial crisis. What is a “crisis”? A financial crisis can be defined as a common breakpoint in the
characteristics (e.g., spreads, maturities) of different forms of bank-produced money (i.e., repo and
asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP)). 6 In a crisis short-term bank debt becomes suspect and banks
are unable to satisfy demands for cash. This causes the breakpoints. But, individual crisis episodes have
unique features and it has been difficult to empirically formalize the general notion of a crisis to date.
For example, Boyd, De Nicolò, and Loukoianova (2011), examining a cross country panel of modern
financial crises, point out that it has been difficult to date the start of crises, or even to determine
whether there has been a crisis in some cases. Existing data sets of international crises, based on annual
data, do not agree on start dates or on crisis episodes. We use daily data and seek to formalize the crisis
dating for the events of 2007-2008 and, in the process, understand crises.

We date the subprime shock and the resulting financial crisis, coming some months later. The crisis was
first located in the money markets, and emanated outwards ultimately to the real economy. We show
that the repo market was the first money market to be disrupted, followed by the unsecured money
markets, in particular the asset-backed commercial paper market (ABCP). But, this was only the
beginning. We also trace subsequent breakpoints, in spreads, in the term structures of spreads, haircuts,
the risk of financial firms, and so on, to determine the dynamics of the crisis.

Once a (perhaps small) shock has occurred, the dynamics of the crisis depend upon the response of
market participants. Initially, spreads on money market instruments rise, as shown in Figure 1. The
figure shows (annualized) spreads (relative to the overnight index swap rate) on overnight loans. The
figure shows spreads for federal funds, general collateral repo (GC), four categories of commercial
paper, and six categories of repo, differentiated by the nature of the collateral. 7



6
  Asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP)is commercial paper that is issued by conduits, which is a special purpose
vehicle (a legal entity) that buys asset-backed securities, financing this by issuing commercial paper. See Covitz,
Liang, and Suarez (2009) and Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2011).
7
  General collateral (GC) repo is repo where the underlying collateral is U.S. Treasury debt. The overnight index
swap rate is a fixed-to-floating interest rate that ties the floating leg of the contract to a daily overnight reference
                                                                                                                  4


As shown in Figure 1, low spreads on money market instruments is consistent with money markets
being integrated via arbitrage. Although the money markets have different clienteles, some large U.S.
banks can trade in federal funds, LIBOR, commercial paper, and sale and repurchase (repo) markets to
keep the rates in line. Market participants determine the acceptable maturities of money market
instruments so that they are indifferent.

During the crisis this changes, as shown in Figure 1. If there is a desire by borrowers to borrow at longer
maturities and a desire by lenders to lend at shorter maturities then the term structure of spreads will
become upward sloping (as shown in the model). The “spread” refers to the particular money market
(annualized) rate minus the “riskless” rate for a given maturity. The “term structure of spreads” refers to
such spreads at different maturities. An increase in the term structure of spreads reflects the differing
concerns of borrowers and lenders. Banks want to lock-in funding and so they offer to pay a higher rate
for longer maturity borrowing, and a lower rate for shorter maturities. But, lenders are only willing to
lend short, keeping open their exit option. In other words, lenders care about shortening the maturity –
the flight from maturity-- when they are concerned about being in a position to get their cash at very
short notice. An upward sloping term structure of spreads is an indication of these concerns on the
parts of borrowers and lenders. During the financial crisis spreads widen and the term structures of
spreads steepen dramatically. The steepening of the term structures of spreads indicates an increase in
fragility as lenders position themselves to demand cash at very short notice.

Fragility builds up as maturities shorten. We document the build-up of fragility by showing that the
maturities of money market instruments shortened starting in July 2007. However, only in the case of
commercial paper (CP) is daily issuance data available that can be used to directly examine maturity.
The maturity of CP declined during the crisis even though the average quality of the issuers was
improving because lower quality borrowers were forced out of the market. This is shown in Figure 2,
which graphs the ratio of 20 days and under maturities to over 20 days for ABCP issuance rated AA. The
figure shows the decline in maturity starting in August 2007, even for the issuers that remain in the
market. Due to a lack of issuance data for other money market instruments, we focus on a prediction of
the model that the term structures of money market spreads rise during the crisis. During normal times
the spreads are all very low and the term structure of spreads is flat, corresponding to money market
instruments being near-riskless. During the crisis the term structure becomes increasingly positively


rate. The reference rate is often the Federal funds rate. The floating rate is equal to the geometric average of the
overnight reference rate.
                                                                                                         5


sloped, reflecting the desire of lenders to lend short and the desires of the borrowers to borrow long.
Figure 3 shows the term structure of spreads of LIBOR loans at three dates (corresponding to the break
points we find). The increasingly positive tilt of the term structure of spreads is apparent.

We find that repo spreads, the term structure of spreads and repo haircuts all show second breakpoints
before Lehman. This is the buildup of risk. Finally, the build-up reaches a finale when lenders exit from
Lehman—the run.

As maturities shortened, the economy faced a hair trigger—the exit option in the model-- in which a
small shock could cause a large sudden exit from the money markets. This occurs at the date of the
Lehman Brothers failure. Note that our argument makes no assumption about whether Lehman’s failure
was a small or large event in terms of the information conveyed to market participants. Rather, we are
arguing that market participants by shortening maturities were in a position to massively react. This is
the key tipping point, and it is endogenously created.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we outline the model and the results. In Section 3 we
review the design of money market instruments and present the data that we will use. In Section 4 we
analyze the spreads on money market instruments before and during the crisis. The chronology of the
financial crisis with respect to spreads is produced and analyzed in Section 5. We then go on to examine
other data panels and find their breakpoints. We determine the date of the subprime shock, the date of
the run on repo and the subsequent runs on unsecured instruments. We also date the start of the real
effects of the crisis. We also date later breaks. In Section 6 we document the build-up in fragility during
the crisis, that is, the maturity shortening. Commercial paper issuance was at reduced maturities. And
we examine the term structure of spreads in the money markets. Section 7 provides the overall
chronology of the crisis and an associated discussion. Section 8 concludes.


2. A Model of the Money Market

In this section we present a very simplified model that illustrates some propositions that will be the
focus of attention in the empirical work. The main point is the endogenous creation of fragility via a
buildup of a sufficient amount of short-term lending that can cause banks to potentially face runs. The
conflict between lenders wanting to lend short and borrowers wanting to borrow long has noted before
by other authors. In Stein (2012) banks have an incentive to issue long debt because they believe that
they can avoid being forced to sell assets at an interim date if lenders do not renew their short loans.
                                                                                                             6


Stein’s focus is on possible “excessive” creation of short-term debt and the resulting fire sales. In
Diamond (1991) borrowers who privately expect their credit rating to improve have an incentive to issue
short-term debt. But doing so exposes them to early liquidation.8

In subsection A we present the model. Then in subsection B we further interpret the model further to
inform the empirical work. We layout the dynamic phases of the overall crisis.

A. A Simple Model of Repo

We examine a world of risk neutral borrowing banks and lenders (or “depositors”), where each period
the borrowing bank must renew its financing using one- or two-period collateralized debt (repo). There
are two possible states of the world: Normal (N) and Anxious (A).9 The transition probabilities are given
by:

                                          At+1        Nt+1
                                   At     pAA         pAN
                                   Nt     pNA         pNN

where pAA+pAN=1 and pNA+pNN=1. We also assume that 1≈pNN>pAN>pAA and that pNA ≈0. The probability
of the Anxious state occurring is very low (a rare event), hence the economy is usually in the Normal
state. If it does occur, we say the economy is in a Crisis.

In the Normal state, the per dollar value of assets is $1. In a Crisis, the per dollar price of assets is φt at
date t. If the path of states is ever AAA (i.e., three Anxious states in a row), then the bank is
(exogenously) insolvent and the economy is in a Depression.10 If the Anxious state path is AA then at
date t+1 E[φt+1|AA]<φt, i.e. fundamentals are deteriorating. We will call this state bank Runs. See Figure
4. The runs here will be endogenous.

The (representative) bank has assets, L, which at the end of a period are worth RL so long as the bank is
solvent. The bank’s assets are financed by one- and two-period collateralized loans (repo), where L is
used as collateral. In what follows,       refers to the value of the variable contracted for at date t for τ
periods (i.e. a τ maturity). At each date t the bank’s loan portfolio, L, must be financed by one- and two-
period repo:
8
  In Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2013) borrowers also may have an incentive to rely excessively on short-term
financing because this dilutes other creditors.
9
  We have borrowed the term “anxious” from Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008).
10
   We recognize the irony of calling this path AAA.
                                                                                                               7


                                                                                 (1)

where       and      are chosen now, at date t, and            was chosen last period, t-1. In the Crisis state
of the world the bank cannot raise external funds by issuing equity or other non-repo debt. But, the
bank can raise cash in the amount of via asset sales if need be, but it would prefer not to do this.

At date t, the amount the bank owes lenders is:                                        . At date t the bank must
pay off the one-period loans from last period as well as the two-period maturity loans made at date t-2.
The bank seeks to pay the interest owed and “roll” the amount                                 with new one- and
two-period loans. Notice that if:

                                  [            ]                                 (2)

at any date t, then the bank is insolvent if an insufficient amount is rolled and lenders ask for cash back.
From (2) there is a critical minimum amount of one-period loans,          , such that lenders would cause the
bank to be insolvent at date t+1 since the bank could no pay enough cash out to the lenders. This could
lead to a Run at date t+1 if:
                                               ̂ .                               (3)

When           ̂ , we say that the bank is vulnerable to a run on repo. Normally, lenders would just

renew their loans without ever receiving cash. This is what it means to “roll” the loan. So, to emphasize,
(3) could hold, but there would be no problem if enough lenders rolled their loans, rather than asking
for cash and then relending the cash or not renewing the loans.

The bank does not know the fraction of lenders that will want cash, rather than roll their loans. Prior to
entering the Crisis, banks made a risk management choice about how much of this liquidity risk to bear.
Bank risk management chooses a parameter               so that the constraint is             ̂ , that is there is

a bound how much one period repo the bank can use. If condition (3) is satisfied and all (or more than
of the) lenders go to the bank and ask for their cash then the bank is insolvent.11 This possibility of a run




11
  Because the bank has only available, a sequential service constraint could generate a run, as in Diamond and
Dybvig (1983) or these multiple equilibria could be eliminated as in Goldstein and Pauzner (2005). For simplicity
we follow Diamond and Dybvig.
                                                                                                              8


is not taken into account by the lenders, as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983).12 Or, the positive probability
of a run is “neglected,” as in Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2012).13

If there is a run and the bank is insolvent, then the lenders take possession of the collateral, which in the
Anxious state at time t+1 has a value of:

                                                                  .             (3)

In particular, this includes the collateral backing        which is also recovered even though this loan
matures at date t+2.14

We will imagine that the economy has just arrived in state A, a “shock”, and is in Crisis. This is not a a
full blown Run but may induce a Run subsequently, which will be endogenous if (2) becomes satisfied
and if lenders ask for their cash next period. The representative lender is unaware that he is
representative; he takes prices as given and chooses one- and two-period loans that he is willing to
make. He is unaware of the total amount of one-period loans. Unbeknownst to him, it can happen that
         ̂ . We will focus on the case where this does occur. In this case, there can be a “run on repo”

if the lenders have any reason to believe that the bank’s liquid assets are insufficient to repay the loans.

The bank, recognizing the possibility of a run, would prefer at date t that only, or a sufficient amount, of
two-period loans be made at that date so as to avoid the possibility of being liquidated at date t+1 if the
the economy gores to Run. The bank does not know what fraction of lenders will ask for their cash,
possibly none. The bank has already chosen         . We assume that       is chosen by the risk manager and is
exogenous to the model.15 In choosing       the bank would like to avoid the event of a fraction of lenders
exiting at date t+1, since there is a chance that at date t+2 the state is N.

So, at any date t there is one of four outcomes:

        Roll the repo; this always occurs when the state is N;
        Roll, but such that the bank is vulnerable because           ̂ ;

        The bank is vulnerable and there is a run on repo in state AA;


12
   There are well-known problems with this (e.g., see Postlewaite and Vives (1987)), but we do not pursue these
issues here. Also, see Morris and Shin (2012).
13
   This is assumed to simplify the model for the purposes of exposition.
14
   This is, indeed, how repo contracts work. Either party can unilaterally terminate the contract upon the other
party’s insolvency.
15
   Perhaps it is set by a regulator.
                                                                                                          9


       The bank is exogenously insolvent, if the path of states is AAA; the economy is in Depression.

In state N             because pNN≈1, i.e., the term structure is flat in the Normal state, as we saw in
Figure 3. But upon entering state A, we have:

Proposition 1 (Upward tilt in the term structure of repo rates in a Crisis): In state A, repo rates are
upward sloping,              in equilibrium.

This is shown in the Appendix A. Given its risk preferences,    , the bank must attract lenders to the two-
period loan, so the bank sets the term structure to be upward sloping, providing an incentive to lend for
two periods and a disincentive to lend for one period. Lenders also want an upward sloping term
structure because the risk of loss at date t+2 is greater than at date t+1. See Figure 3.

Proposition 2 (Run on Repo): In state A, if, in aggregate,        ̂    at date t, then there can be a run on
repo at date t+1.

Proposition 2 is obvious by construction and the assumption of sequential service (as in Diamond and
Dybvig (1983)). The model is simple enough to display the properties highlighted in the above two
propositions, which encapsulate the basic dynamics we will examine in the data.

B. Interpreting the Model

Figure 4 shows the paths of the model that we will be interested in. We want to be clear about the
dynamics of the crisis and assign names to certain phases. This is important for the empirical work. In
the figure the economy is in the Normal state until the first node labeled “A.” At this node the
representative agent is Anxious; the economy is in a Crisis. The economy could still recover, but still in a
Crisis agents take actions to protect themselves should things get worse. They shorten maturities, in
particular.   If the economy does not recover, another A state is realized, then there are Runs
(corresponding to Lehman). This is the panic. Even with bank runs the economy could still recover
(perhaps because of government intervention), but if not, then the economy goes into a Depression or
Great Recession.

The sequence Crisis-Runs-Depression is clearly the worst outcome. Our point will be that these are fairly
distinct phases. We think of the “Runs” phase as corresponding to the Lehman failure. This is preceded
by the endogenous build-up of fragility during the Crisis phase. We discuss this further in the Conclusion
after the empirical results are presented.
                                                                                                              10


Reality of course is more complicated than the model. For one thing, the process can be prolonged, in
which the term structure moves up in several steps and haircuts increase in steps. For simplicity we did
not include haircuts in the model, and haircuts can rise in steps before the Run phase.16

3. The Money Markets
Money market instruments include U.S. Treasury bills and privately-produced instruments. Privately-
produced money market instruments are short-term debt instruments that are liabilities of financial
intermediaries. These were at the heart of the financial crisis, in particular asset-backed commercial
paper (ABCP) and sale and repurchase agreements (repo). Money market instruments serve as short-
term stores of value for financial and nonfinancial firms, and for investors, like pension funds,
institutional money managers, hedge funds, and money market funds. Money market instruments are
not insured, but otherwise resemble demand deposits in important ways. In particular, they offer a
fairly safe store of value and easy access to the cash because of their short maturities. In this section we
briefly review the relevant money market instruments and introduce the data that we will subsequently
analyze.17


A. Description of the Instruments

Privately-produced money market instruments are designed to be as close to riskless as privately
possible, so that they can function as money, as described below. Money market instruments are not
insured by the government. They are, however, structured to be safe. They often have maturities of
overnight or a few days, weeks, or sometimes months and they are either secured by collateral or can
only be issued by high-quality borrowers.

Privately-produced money market instruments include secured instruments, namely sale and
repurchase agreements (“repo”) which are backed by explicit collateral and unsecured instruments that
are backed by the issuer’s portfolio of assets, usually in the form of a portfolio of bonds of a financial
firm or of a managed special purpose vehicle. There may be overcollateralization in the form of a
haircut.18



16
   A previous version of the paper included haircuts and richer dynamics but the simpler version is sufficient to
make our points.
17
   We omit consideration of bankers’ acceptances and wholesale certificates of deposit because we do not have
daily data on their rates.
18
   See footnote 4.
                                                                                                                  11


Repo involves providing specific collateral to depositors who are lending money. The collateral might be
government bonds or privately-created “high quality” bonds, such as asset-backed securities.
Depositors must agree with borrowers on the type of collateral and its market value, and then
depositors/lenders take possession of the collateral.19 If the counterparty fails, then the non-defaulting
party can unilaterally terminate the transaction and sell the collateral (or keep the cash). This is because
in the U.S. repo is carved out of the bankruptcy process. This facilitates its use as money.

Unsecured money issuers are screened; they must be high-quality so the backing assets are viewed as
near riskless. Commercial paper (CP) issuers are screened by investors and rating agencies. Only high
quality financial and nonfinancial firms can issue CP. CP does not have explicit insurance or specific
collateral, but access to the CP market is reserved for low-risk issuers with strong credit ratings. And CP
is also backed up by a bank line of credit (see, e.g., Moody’s (2003), Nayar and Rozeff (1994)). Hence CP
issuers have very low default risk. CP issuers are high quality, and if they deteriorate there is “orderly
exit.” When a firm’s credit quality drops, perhaps as indicated by its rating, it cannot issue new CP
because investors will not buy it. The firm may instead draw on its bank line to pay off its maturing CP.
This process of “orderly exit” from the commercial paper market maintains the high quality of the
issuers. Because of the possibility of exit occurring firms must maintain back-up lines of credit.20

Asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits are a special type of CP issuer. Such a conduit is a
special purpose vehicle (a legal entity) that buys asset-backed securities, financing this by issuing
commercial paper. See Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) and Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2011). The
activities of ABCP conduits are circumscribed by their governing documents, and they are required to
obtain high ratings. One important feature of asset-backed commercial paper is that the conduits must
have back-up liquidity facilities in case they cannot renew issuance of their commercial paper. These
liquidity facilities cover the inability of the conduits to roll CP for any reason. In most cases these
facilities are sized to cover 100 percent of the face amount of outstanding CP. They are typically
provided by banks rated at least as high as the rating of the CP. See Fitch (August 23, 2007). Such a




19
   The collateral is valued at market prices. During the period of the repo, there may be margin required to
maintain the value of the collateral exactly.
20
   “Orderly exit” is discussed by Fons and Kimball (1991) and Crabbe and Post (1994). The back-up lines were
introduced after the Penn Central failure led to a crisis in the CP market; see Calomiris (1989, 1994) and Calomiris,
Himmelberg and Wachtel (1995).
                                                                                                                 12


liquidity agreement is usable immediately if the commercial paper cannot be remarketed (rolled).21 If a
conduit draws on its liquidity facility, the provider of the liquidity facility, usually the sponsoring bank,
purchases bonds from the conduit or loans money to the conduit to purchase commercial paper in the
case that the commercial paper cannot be issued.

We also examine the two largest interbank money markets, the London interbank market (the “Euro-
dollar” or “LIBOR” market) and the U.S. federal funds market. In the LIBOR market banks deposit excess
U.S. dollars with other banks, sometimes referred to as “Eurodollar deposits,” and earn interest at the
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR).22 The Eurodollar or LIBOR market involves large global banks,
which are monitored by their domestic bank regulators. The LIBOR and federal funds markets are
unsecured, but both rely on screening and monitoring by bank regulators.

Each money market has different clienteles. Regulated banks are the participants in the LIBOR and
federal funds market. Only U.S. commercial banks can participate in the federal funds market. The repo
banks are the financial institutions that can borrow in the repo market, a larger group than commercial
banks, including most notably the old U.S. investment banks and large foreign banks. Non-financial
firms and non-bank financial firms can issue commercial paper.23 However, these four major money
markets are connected. While not all financial institutions have access to all four markets, as mentioned
above, the largest U.S. banks are active as borrowers and lenders in all four markets. Because these
banks would eliminate arbitrage opportunities across these markets, we would expect that all four
money markets would display the same near-money-like riskless qualities; their spreads should normally
be “low,” and the term structure of spreads should be flat. Indeed, see Figure 1. In Section 4 we further
examine the proposition that money markets are near riskless.

The secured and unsecured markets behave differently (as we will show subsequently). On the one
hand, repo involves specific collateral as opposed to the general credit of a firm or a conduit, whose



21
   There are no material adverse change (MAC) clauses in ABCP liquidity facilities. A MAC is a contract provision
that specifies contingencies under which the contract is null and void. See Moody’s Update (Prepared Remarks
Sept. 12, 2007).
22
   LIBOR interest rates are based on a survey by the British Bankers’ Association. The rate is the simple average of
the surveyed bank rates excluding the highest and lowest quartile rates. The rates are announced by the BBA at
around 11.00 am London time every business day. Such rates are estimated for maturities of overnight to up to 12
months and for 10 major currencies. The Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) took over the administration of LIBOR on
February 1, 2014.
 See http://www.bba.org.uk/bba/jsp/polopoly.jsp;jsessionid=aAEWKNo02dUf?d=103 .
23
   CP issuance by nonfinancial firms is small as shown below.
                                                                                                                13


asset portfolios may be high quality but which are harder to monitor. On the other hand, a depositor in
the repo market may accept lower quality privately-issued bonds as collateral.


B. Data


We analyze the following money market instrument categories: federal funds; LIBOR (Eurodollars);
general collateral repo (GC); four categories of commercial paper: A2/P2 nonfinancial, A1/P1 asset-
backed commercial paper, A1/P1 financial, and A1/P1 nonfinancial;24 and six categories of repo, which
differ by the type of privately-produced collateral used as backing: AAA/Aaa-AA/Aa asset-backed
securities (ABS), including residential mortgage-backed (RMBS) and commercial mortgage-backed
securities (CMBS), RMBS and CMBS with ratings between AA and AAA ,AAA/Aaa-A/A auto loan-backed,
credit card receivables-backed and student loan-backed ABS, AAA/Aaa-AA/Aa collateralized loan
obligations (CLOs), AAA/Aaa-AA/Aa corporate bonds, and A/A-Baa/BBB+ corporate bonds. In addition,
we use a number of other series to capture the state of the real economy, the state of the subprime
market, and the state of the dealer banks (the old investment banks).

All the data series we will use are listed in Table 1.25 The first four rows are series that describe the real
sector of the economy: the VIX index, the S&P 500 index return, the JP Morgan high yield index, and the
Dow Jones investment grade index of credit default swaps. The next two rows are measures of subprime
risk: two tranches of the ABX index, an index linked to subprime securitizations, and home equity loan
securitizations.26 “Financial CDS” refers to an equally-weighted index of the 5-year credit default swaps
(CDS) on U.S. financial institutions, including some commercial banks and dealer banks.27 We also use
the individual banks’ CDS prices. Then there are thirteen money market instruments, including four
categories of commercial paper, fed funds, LIBOR, and the rates on seven categories of repo, including
general collateral repo (GC).



24
   Commercial paper ratings are as follows: “Superior” CP is rated P1 by Moody’s, A1+ or A1 by S&P, and F1+ or F1
by Fitch; The next category, “satisfactory,” is rated P2 by Moody’s, A2 by S&P, and F2 by Fitch.
25
   We also looked at spreads on thirteen categories of non-mortgage asset-backed securities and also CDS for
thirteen European banks. We mention these results in passing later.
26
   Because of clientele effects, different tranches of the ABX index did not always move together. The ABX index is
a     product      of     Markit;      see     http://www.markit.com/en/products/data/indices/structured-finance-
indices/abx/abx.page . Background on the ABX can be found in Fender and Scheicher (2008).
27
   A “broker-dealer” or “dealer” bank refers to a financial intermediary which is licensed the Securities and
Exchange Commission to underwrite and trade securities on behalf of customers. Broker-dealers are regulated
under the U.S. Securities and Exchange Act of 1934.
                                                                                                              14


We analyze spreads, where the spread is the promised contractual rate minus the federal funds target
rate. All spreads are annualized. There is noise in the actual (effective) federal funds rate, as it deviates
from the target, resulting in Fed action. This deviation worsens during the crisis. For the spread
calculation, other candidates are the Treasury bill rate or the overnight index swap rate (OIS) rate.
Treasury rates are affected during the crisis due to a flight to quality, but results are not significantly
different if we use the OIS rate instead of the target federal funds rate.


4. Money Market Instruments Before and During the Crisis


To what extent are the different money market instruments “money”? A simple way to look at this is to
examine the spreads on money market instruments. Intuitively, money market instrument spreads
should be low. But, they need not be the same if the degree of “moneyness” differs to some extent.


In examining spreads one issue that we must contend with is the presence of “seasonal effects” noted
by previous researchers in some money market instruments and in commercial bank balance sheets.
Allen and Saunders (1992) found window dressing behavior by banks. In particular, they found that
money market instruments were the important liabilities facilitating temporary upward movements in
total assets. Kotomin and Winters (2006) found associated spikes in federal funds rates and federal fund
rate standard deviations. Also, see Griffiths and Winters (2005) and Musto (1997).


In this paper we are not focusing on these seasonal effects.28 In Appendix B we examine money market
spreads during normal times with regressions that include calendar dummies for “seasonals,” that is
quarter-end dummies, first, 15th and last day of month dummies, and Monday and Friday dummies.
Appendix B Table B1 presents regression results of money market spreads on different calendar
dummies.29 The results in Table B1 show that “seasonals” are very important in the money markets.
Spreads increase quite significantly at various calendar dates.


Table 2 presents the intercepts from the regressions of the spreads on the calendar dummies, for
different subsamples: prior to the crisis, during the crisis, and for three different stages of the crisis
(corresponding to subsequently estimated breakpoints in the series). Table 2 allows us to see the
28
  This is an area for future research.
29
  The appendix does not present all the regressions behind the results in Table 2 for the sake of space. Only the
results for the period prior to the crisis are presented.
                                                                                                               15


relative ability of the private sector to produce “money.” (Figure 1 shows these deseasonalized spreads
before and during the crisis.)


Focusing first on the period prior to the crisis, the following is clear. All spreads are less than 11 bps.
Also, note that the spreads on GC repo, A1/P1 financial CP, A1/P1 nonfinancial CP, and repo backed by
the highest rated corporate bonds are significantly negative, that is they are below the target federal
funds rate. Federal funds are unsecured, but banks are overseen by the Fed. GC repo is collateralized
by U.S. Treasuries, so it is better collateral than federal funds, which is backed by a bank’s portfolio.
And, banks are examined, that is, screened. By screening issuers, the spreads on the highest quality CP
are negative. Similarly, repo backed by the highest quality corporate bonds shows negative spreads.


Relative to federal funds, it is hard for the private sector to replicate the moneyness of the best
instruments. The other money market instruments are of lower quality in that the collateral is of lower
quality or the issuers are of lower quality. Spreads on these categories are all positive, relative to the
federal funds target rate. Finally, note that LIBOR is significantly higher than federal funds. Perhaps
global banks are not screened as well as U.S. banks.


The categories with the highest spreads are repo backed by asset-backed securities with lower ratings
and A2/P2 nonfinancial commercial paper. A2/P2 is the lowest (worst) rating for commercial paper and
it had an average spread of 8.97 basis points. Also, repo which uses asset-backed securities (ABS),
residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), or commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS),
which have a rating below AA, had an average spread of 10.16 basis points.30 After these two categories
comes LIBOR with a spread of 5.33 basis points. Prior to the crisis LIBOR was widely believed to
correspond to AA risk. Next is repo with the same collateral, but rated AA or higher, at 5.16 basis points,
and collateralized loan obligations rated AA or higher which has the same spread.


The spreads intuitively correspond to the quality of the money. There are clearly degrees of
“moneyness” reflected in the spreads. It is apparent that not all privately-created money is the same.
We do not know how much money of each category was being used before or during the crisis, but in


30
  The largest nonmortgage asset types in ABS are student loans, car loans, and credit card receivables.
Subsequently, we use ABS to indicate all types of securitizations. See Gorton and Metrick (2011) for details about
securitization.
                                                                                                                   16


order for there to be spread data, there must have been some significant amount.31 The picture that
emerges is one in which the private sector creates money of different qualities, that is, some types of
money have spreads which include a risk premium.32


What happened to the money markets in the crisis? We take as the crisis period the period following
the first breakpoint in repo (discussed below). This is the column called “During the Crisis” in Table 2.33
Note that money market instruments that are “high quality” show reduced spreads. These include
federal funds, general collateral repo, and A1/P1 commercial paper, both financial and nonfinancial.34
This is the flight to quality, where some instruments are perceived as better money. But, all the other
money market instruments’ spreads show very large increases. Figure 1 displays the spreads (intercepts)
before and during the crisis.

The other instruments, all privately-produced, show large spikes in their spreads; see Figure 1. For
example, repo backed by residential mortgage-backed securities or commercial mortgage-backed
securities, rated lower than AA, increase from 10.16 to an average of 98.59 basis points during the crisis.
A1/P1 asset-backed CP rises from an average of 1.5 basis points in normal times to 40.28 basis points
during the crisis.

In Table 2 it is clear that during the crisis it became harder for the Federal Reserve System to keep the
fed funds rate close to the target. (The spread for fed funds is the average difference between the
effective fed funds rate and the target rate.) Before the crisis the spread is less than half a basis point,
at 0.32 basis points, very close. But, in contrast, during the crisis this spread rises to 8.06 basis points.
And, in particular, during the period labeled “Crisis: Lehman,” it reaches a high of an average of 37 basis
points. This is consistent with the results of Bech, Klee, and Stebunovs (2012) who show that the relation
between the GC repo rate and the federal funds rate weakens during the crisis (in an error-correction
model).

The table also shows the results for subperiods corresponding to the other breakpoints. The subperiods
are (1) Pre-Crisis: prior to the crisis onset (the first breakpoint in repo discussed below, which is July 23,


31
   This statement comes from the traders who provided the data.
32
   This is similar to the Free Banking Era when private bank notes traded at different discounts at distant locations.
See, e.g., Gorton (1999, 1996).
33
  As before, the table shows spreads calculated with regressions including the calendar dummies, like the previous
results in Appendix Table B1. To save space though these results are not included.
34
   The spread for fed funds is the average difference between the effective fed funds rate and the target rate.
                                                                                                          17


2007). During the crisis, there are three subperiods: (2) Pre-Lehman: the crisis from the onset to Lehman
(the second breakpoint in repo discussed below); (3) Lehman: the aftermath of Lehman until December
2008; and (4) After December 2008. The middle period of the crisis, which brackets the failure of
Lehman Brothers, was the height of the crisis in terms of spreads. After December 2008, spreads are
lower than in the Lehman period, except for all categories of repo using asset-backed securities as
collateral. The spreads on repo backed by ABS just kept rising. ABS (including RMBS and CMBS)
becomes “information-sensitive” (in the nomenclature of Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2011)) and
can’t be used as collateral. See Gorton and Metrick (2012).

Figure 5 conveys a sense of what happened in the crisis. Figure 5 shows the spreads adjusted for the
seasonal effects. The two vertical lines in the figure correspond to two of the breaks in the set of repo
spreads (that we discuss shortly). Before the first break in repo, early in 2007, the spreads are tightly
bunched, with the occasional uptick. There are two crisis regimes visible: the Crisis and Run phases. The
first occurs around August 2007 and last until the second repo break. The second starts with the Lehman
bankruptcy. As we saw before, in Table 2, not all spreads widen. Spreads diverge as some instruments
lose their moneyness (become risky) and others become a safe haven.


5. Understanding the Dynamics of the Crisis: A Chronology

In order to understand the dynamics of the crisis, we turn, in this section, to a formal statistical
chronology of the recent financial crisis. We produce this chronology by locating structural breaks in
panel data sets. We focus on the dating of the subprime shock, subsequent events in the money
markets, the financial intermediaries at the center of the crisis, and the real economy. In this way, we
identify the phases of the events and build a narrative of the crisis. In a way, this is a test the sequence
of events predicted by the model.

A. Breakpoints Methodology

To produce a chronology of the financial crisis we need to find random but common breakpoints in a
number of series. We estimate breakpoints in different panel data sets, where each panel has a
recognizable economic meaning.

Most studies of breakpoints focus on a single series, treating series separately. There is a large literature
on change point estimation for univariate series and only a small but emerging literature on estimating
                                                                                                              18


common breakpoints in panel data.35 For our study, basing the breakpoints on panel data offers several
important advantages.

First, and most importantly, it is quite natural that a financial crisis would result in common breakpoints.
The concept of a crisis means, at least intuitively, that a number of series show a common breakpoint,
though the date of the breakpoint is not known. In fact, a definition of a financial crisis is that it is a
common breakpoint in many money and banking time series. And a crisis is then followed by real
effects. We seek to formalize this and, in the process, understand crises.

Second, it is possible to consistently estimate breakpoints using a panel, while there may be little or no
power to looking at individual time series when there is not much data covering the crisis regime. In
other words, in a univariate setting there may be little hope of detecting a regime switch when a single
observation that may be an outlier can have a large effect on the estimate, or when one regime consists
of only a few observations in time. In our setting the crisis period is relatively short and comes at the
end of the sample.

We follow the estimation approach of Bai (2010). Briefly, the idea is to consider a panel of N series, as
follows:

           Yit = μi1 + σi1ηit, t = 1,2, . . . , k0

           Yit = μi2 + σi1ηit,, t = k0+1, . . . T

           i = 1,2, . . . , N

where E(ηit)=0 and var(ηit)=1, and for each i, ηit is a linear process; there are other assumptions as well;
see Bai (2010). The breakpoint, k0 in means and variances is unknown. Consistent estimation requires
that there are breakpoints in either the means or the variances (or both). Assuming a common
breakpoint is more restrictive than assuming random breakpoints in the different series in the panel.
But, the assumption results in more precise estimation. The basic idea of Bai’s approach is to exploit the
cross-section information, sort of “borrowed power” relative to the non-panel approach.

The breakpoint is estimated with quasi-maximum likelihood (QML). Let



35
  On breakpoint estimation in general, see Perron (2005) and Hansen (2001). Bai (2010) provides the references to
the other papers on the estimation of breakpoints in panels.
                                                                                                        19


        ̂ ( )       ∑       (   ̅ ) , ̂ ( )           ∑    (        ̅ ) .


The QML objective function for series i is:

                ̂ ( )       (   )     ̂ ( )

multiplied by one half. Analogously, for N series:

            ( )         ∑       ̂ ( )      (     )∑            ̂ ( ).

The breakpoint estimator is ̂                  ( ) Bai (2010) Theorem 5.1 shows that the breakpoint in
this case can be consistently estimated.

Our approach is to group the data series into five different panels with recognizable economic content:
(1) the real sector of the economy; (2) the subprime housing sector; (3) financial firms; (4) the unsecured
money markets; and (5) the secured money markets. We further divide the financial firms to consider
including and excluding Lehman. We also consider subsets of the real sector and subprime.

The real sector is represented by the S&P 500 index return, the VIX index (the Chicago Board Options
Exchange Market Volatility Index), the JP Morgan High Yield Bond Index, and the Dow Jones CDX.IG
index of investment grade credit derivative premia. The subprime sector is represented by the spreads
on tranches of the ABX index (an index of derivative premia linked to subprime bonds), and two series of
subprime bond spreads. The financial sector is represented by the CDS premia on ten banks, including
Lehman Brothers (see Table 1). Finally, there are the returns on thirteen money market instruments,
including four categories of commercial paper, fed funds, LIBOR, and the rates on seven categories of
repo, including general collateral. The returns on the money market instruments are annualized
overnight returns. We split the money market instruments into secured (repo), unsecured, and GC repo.
Later, we also look at some individual money market series.

In terms of the number of series in a panel, precision is improved with a larger number of series. Clearly,
the confidence intervals depend on N. But, as a practical matter N can also be small. Bai (2010) provides
a sense of the precision with Monte Carlo experiments where the number of series, N, in the panel
ranges from one to 100. It is also worth emphasizing what we saw above with spreads, namely, that
during the crisis spreads do not become more highly correlated.             Just the opposite, as market
participants distinguish different degrees of moneyness among the different instruments.
                                                                                                               20


After the first breakpoint is found, the subsequent breakpoints in each panel are (almost always) during
the crisis period. But, these breakpoints are not necessarily chronologically ordered. So, chronologically
the second breakpoint may come after the third breakpoint. Appendix C provides more information on
the ordering of the breakpoints using the Bai procedure versus the chronological ordering. In what
follows we show the breakpoints chronologically. The issue of the order in which the breakpoints are
found and the chronological ordering not matching is discussed later and in Appendix C.

After finding a breakpoint in a panel, the individual series can be examined with a standard Chow test on
each series. In unreported results, we find that all the individual series show breaks at the date of the
break in the panel.

Finally, note that we are not testing sudden breaks against the alternative hypothesis of gradual or
smooth structural changes. Chen and Hong (2012), for example, propose a test for smooth structural
changes in time series, but not panels. The Bai procedure and the tests for smooth changes both test
against the alternative of no change, and we cannot test to determine whether the change is sudden or
gradual.

B. The Initial Crisis Breakpoint Chronology based on Spreads

We first focus on spreads and ask how the crisis evolved. Table 3 addresses this question. Table 3, Panel
A, provides the breakpoints located for the different panel data sets shown in the table. The table also
provides 99 percent confidence intervals for the breakpoints in terms of dates.36 The main results are as
follows.

The subprime shock occurs in the first quarter of 2007, on January 4, 2007. This is the “shock,”
corresponding to entering the Anxious state in the model. If we look only at the ABX tranches then the
break occurs on January 25, 2007. If we only look at the two subprime series, the break is March 22,
2007.      This timing is consistent with the failures of a number of subprime originators and the
downgrades of subprime bonds by the rating agencies. See the chronology in Gorton (2010).

The next breakpoint occurs in the repo market on July 23, 2007. This is also when the breakpoint for the
dealer banks’ CDS occurs, whether we include Lehman or not. This is the start of the financial crisis,
although as we will see subsequently haircuts do not rise until later. The breakpoints here confirm the
36
 Bai (2010) does not explain how to construct confidence intervals in the case of possible breaks in the means and
variances of series. But, Professor Bai very kindly provided this as a private communication, which we appreciate
very much.
                                                                                                                  21


start in the sense that the breakpoint for the repo spreads and for the dealer bank CDS premia is the
same date. This is not surprising as the rise in repo spreads suggests that this form of financing is
becoming riskier, raising the possibility of a run.

In unreported results, we also looked at thirteen categories of non-mortgage ABS. These spreads show
a first break on July 19, 2007, with the 95% confidence interval of July 19, 2007-July 26, 2007. We also
looked at the CDS premia of thirteen European banks; these show a first break on July 25, 2007.37 The
standard error shows a lower bound of July 23, 2007. In other words, there was no “contagion” from
subprime to other securitization asset classes. And, there was no contagion to European banks later.
This is consistent with the idea that a crisis is an information event corresponding to a shift from
information-insensitive     to    information-sensitive     for   broad     categories    of   asset    classes—all
securitizations! Since European banks were also involved in securitization, as holders of these bonds,
they too were affected. (On a crisis as an information event, see Gorton (1985a), Dang, Gorton, and
Holmström (2011) and Gorton and Ordonez (2014).)

The unsecured money market instruments, CP, fed funds, and LIBOR, show a breakpoint on August 8,
2007. Note that the 99 percent confidence intervals for the secured and unsecured money market
instruments statistically distinguish the two dates for the repo markets and the unsecured money
markets. There is a difference between the secured and unsecured markets. Repo is collateralized by a
single bond, whereas unsecured instruments are backed by portfolios.38

The crisis, starting in the third quarter of 2007, only begins to affect the real sector later. The real
sector, measured by the VIX, and the returns on the S&P500, the JPM HY Index, and the DJ CDX.IG,
shows a break on January 3, 2008. The NBER dates the start of the recession in December 2007. If we
separate the equity-related series from the bond-related series and only look at the VIX and the S&P,
then the break is September 12, 2008 –nine months later. Lehman Brothers’ failed on September 15,
2008, within the 99 percent confidence interval for the break in this latter case. The Troubled Asset
Relief Program (TARP) became law on October 3, 2008.

In Table 4 we look at two single series, as one might expect that ABCP and GC repo spreads to behave
differently. Indeed, ABCP by itself shows a break July 27, 2007, and the 99 percent confidence interval

37
   The banks included were Credit Agricole Group, BNP Paribas, Deutsche Bank, Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland,
Societe Generale, Banco Santander, Lloyds, UBS, UnitCredit, Credit Suisse and Rabobank.
38
   Keep in mind also that if a counterparty goes bankrupt, this does not affect ownership of the repo collateral, but
CP holders must go into the bankruptcy process to try to recover their loan.
                                                                                                                 22


overlaps with the first break for repo. This is consistent with the run on ABCP, which resulted in banks
taking conduit assets back via liquidity facilities, and then financing this at least in part via repo. Also,
note that when looking at GC repo as a single series, there is a break on August 13, 2007.

We next build on the chronology by looking at subsequent break points.39

C. Dynamics of the Crisis: Subsequent Breakpoints

As mentioned above, the Bai (2010) procedure can be applied again to the two subperiods determined
by the first break, to determine the next break in a given panel.40 We first focus on the money market
spreads. Table 3, Panel B, shows the second and third breakpoints in the money market spread panel
data sets. The main findings are as follows.

There is a second breakpoint in the repo markets on August 14, 2008, a month before Lehman. The
unsecured money markets, i.e., CP, Fed Funds, LIBOR, show a second break with the Lehman failure on
Sept 12, 2008, but the Lehman failure of September 15th is within the 99 percent confidence interval.
Once again there is a difference between the secured and unsecured markets.

There is a third break for all money market instruments December 15, 2008. Detail is also provided in
Table 4. In this table we show the breaks for the single series of the GC repo spread and the single series
of the ABCP spread.

Our findings on money market spreads are summarized with the chronology shown in Figure 6. We can
relate this back to Figure 4. The Anxious state is realized in the first quarter of 2007. Figure 5 shows the
other phases: Crisis, Runs and Depression. The Crisis phase corresponds to the period July 2007 through
September 12, 2008, during which there are a number of breaks as fragility builds up. Repo breaks first,
then asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). Then the remaining unsecured money market instruments
and finally GC repo show breaks. There are more breakpoints in the month before Lehman’s failure,
when repo, ABCP, GC repo, and unsecured (except ABCP) all show breaks. Then, The Runs occur, on
Lehman September 15, 2008 going through December 2008.

This chronology reveals the importance of the Crisis phase, which is our focus. We turn to this next.


39
   Bai (2010): “Once the first break is obtained, we split the sample at the estimated break point, resulting in two
subsamples. We then estimate a single break point in each of the subsamples, but only one of them is retained as
our second estimator. The one that gives a larger reduction in the sum of squared residuals is kept.” (p. 86)
40
   See Appendix C for more detail on the Bai procedure.
                                                                                                                  23


6. The Flight from Maturity

In this section we examine the Crisis phase, in particular the shortening of maturity, or flight from
maturity. Fragility built up during the financial crisis because the maturities of money market
instruments were reduced. This build-up led to the Lehman collapse, as money market instruments
were then on a hair trigger. We can see this directly in the maturities of CP that was issued, which we
examine first in subsection A. And, we can see it indirectly by looking at the term structure of spreads,
which we examine in subsection B.

A. Commercial Paper: Issuance and Maturity Structure


Commercial paper is the only money market instrument where we can analyze the maturity structure of
the paper issued using daily issuance data, but this is problematic because the mix of issuers is changing,
as discussed below in Section 6.C.41 Even so, we saw in Figure 2 that the firms that could issue still had
to shorten their maturities.


The amounts of commercial paper issued by ABCP conduits and by financial firms dramatically declined
during the crisis. Commercial paper issued by nonfinancial firms was less affected but was never
quantitatively as important as ABCP and CP issued by financial firms. Issuance of commercial paper for
various types of issuers and for different maturities is shown in Table 5 and Figure 2. The table shows
the average daily issuance of commercial paper for the categories of issuer shown. The table also
divides the data by time period. There are five time periods shown: before 2007, 2007 before the crisis
(the Anxious phase), the Crisis before Lehman, the Run on Lehman, and the aftermath subsequent to
December 2008.


Looking at the average issuance it is clear that the two nonfinancial CP categories (A2/P2 and AA) are
the smallest issuers by far while ABCP is the largest and rises up until Lehman before collapsing. The
other important category is AA financial. This is much smaller than ABCP. AA financial issuance shrinks
during the crisis in the pre-Lehman period, recovers a bit, and then shrinks again.



41
  Krishnamurthy, Nagel and Orlov (2011) collected data on the maturity of repo used my money market mutual
funds. Unfortunately, the data are quarterly. Looking at value-weighted maturities for a panel of repo consisting
of collateral based on corporate debt securities, private label ABS/MBS, and agency debt, the first breakpoint is the
fourth quarter of 2007.
                                                                                                       24


Table 5 also shows the percentage of average issuance in each subperiod that has maturities in the
maturity buckets shown. For a given category of issuer, looking down the column shows the trend in
the maturity structure of the CP issued in that subperiod. The most important categories of issuer of CP
in terms of amounts are ABCP and AA financial firms. Figure 7 is a bar chart which summarizes the trend
in issuance of CP with maturities in the 1-4 day bucket, as a percentage of average issuance over the
subperiod. ABCP shows a rising trend, even before the crisis. In the pre-crisis period 60 percent of the
ABCP was 1-4 days maturity. During the crisis it rises in the pre-Lehman subperiod, and again during the
Lehman subperiod. It then subsides. AA financial firms’ issuance of 1-4 day CP declines over the first
three subperiods. Then it rises when Lehman collapses.


The figure is suggestive. But, we now turn to examining the breaks in the series. Table 6 shows the
results of testing for breakpoints with regard to the maturity structure of the outstanding paper. The
table examines the short/long ratio which is the ratio of the amount of CP issued with a maturity of less
than 20 days (over a 30 day window) divided by the amount of CP issued with a maturity of 20 days or
greater (over a 30 day window). The table shows that the first breakpoint occurs June 13, 2007 before
the break in repo rates. In other words, maturities are shortening as concerns build-up. This is
consistent with the model of Section 2. This is evidence of a build-up of fragility prior to our dating of
the onset of the crisis.

The second breakpoint occurs in the immediate aftermath of the Lehman bankruptcy (September 15,
2008) on September 26, 2008. Figure 8 shows a measure of interbank credit risk, the LIBOR minus
overnight index swap (OIS) rate spread, together with the 30-day rolling short/long ratio that we saw in
Figure 2. The LIBOR minus OIS spread is the most common measure of interbank counterparty risk. The
pattern is remarkable. The tendency for the ABCP maturity to shorten moves very closely with
counterparty risk, as bank counterparties become riskier, their conduits are kept on a much shorter
leash in terms of maturity in the CP market.

Table 7 provides more detailed information on the breakpoints for overnight CP issuance, one-month CP
issuance, and three-month CP issuance. Table 7 shows the first break in overnight issuance was on May
31, 2007, several months before breaks in money market spreads. This is consistent with anecdotal
evidence that maturities were shortening as lenders were becoming nervous in the spring and summer
of 2007. For one-month issuance the first breakpoint is September 24, 2007. And for three-month
                                                                                                          25


issuance the first breakpoint is March 8, 2007. Overnight issuance was increasing and three-month
issuance was decreasing.

Unfortunately, we do not have issuance data for other money markets instruments. So, next we turn to
examining the term structure of money market spreads for evidence of maturity shortening prior to and
during the crisis. We examine the prediction of the model given by Proposition 1, that the term
structure of spreads becomes positively sloped.

B. The Term Structure of Spreads

As discussed above, in Normal times the term structure of spreads is flat and near zero when the money
market instruments are backed by high collateral quality or because of screening out all but high quality
issuers in the unsecured money markets. Flat and low spreads are consistent with money market
instruments displaying “moneyness” as in Figure 1. Market participants determine the longest maturity
at which it is possible to maintain the moneyness of an instrument. At the acceptable maturities it is
then a matter of indifference to participants which instruments are used as money, and the term
structure of spreads should be flat. We find that in the pre-crisis period this was, in fact, the case.

The model predicts that the term structure of money market spreads should become positive
subsequent to a shock—the Anxious state. This reflects a desire by borrowers to borrower at longer
maturities and a desire by lenders to lend at shorter maturities. Lenders want to shorten maturity –the
flight from maturity—because they want to be in a position to get their cash on very short notice. An
upward sloping term structure of spreads is an indication of this concern on the part of the borrowers
and the lenders. During the financial crisis spreads widen and the term structures of spreads steepen
dramatically. The steepening of the term structure of spreads suggests an increase in fragility as lenders
position themselves to demand cash at very short notice. But, we do not have volume data by maturity
to confirm this for the other money market instruments.

Table 8 shows the spreads for overnight, one month, and three-month maturities for the different
money market instruments during different subperiods.42 Table 8 can be viewed by looking at the
spreads for different maturities across a specific subperiod, or by looking at a given maturity and looking
down across the subperiods.
42
  When the maturity is longer than one day, we use OIS rather than the federal funds target rate as the
benchmark to determine the spread.
                                                                                                         26


Some highlights from Table 8 are as follows. First, in the case of overnight federal funds, the actual
(average) federal funds rate deviates from the target by the most in the aftermath of Lehman. As noted
before, this is some evidence that it was becoming harder for the Fed to control money markets via
intervention in the federal funds market.

With regard to GC repo, note that because GC repo uses U.S. Treasuries as collateral, it is safer than
federal funds and so the GC repo spread is negative at all maturities prior to the crisis. In the pre-
Lehman crisis period, there appears to be a flight to GC repo as the spread becomes much more
negative, and is roughly flat across maturities. But, in the aftermath of Lehman note that the overnight
GC repo spread becomes very negative(-56.32 bps), and the spread for one-month and three-month GC
repo become positive, suggesting that lenders are scared of these maturities. This positive slope persists
after December 2008.

The LIBOR spread curve is slightly positive in the pre-crisis period, but steepens during the crisis, and
even more so after Lehman, shown in Figure 3. The commercial paper spread curves are near flat or
slightly upward sloping prior to the crisis, but then steepen. AA financial CP and AA nonfinancial CP have
larger negative overnight spreads which peak (at their highest negative values) after Lehman. These
curves become very steep.

In the case of repo backed by private collateral, Panel C, the repo term structure of spreads is essentially
flat in the pre-crisis period. During the crisis, the spreads are higher for longer maturities; the slope of
the term structure rises. Looking down a column, the overnight spread is monotonically increasing for
each repo category backed by private collateral, except for the cases where the collateral is corporate
bonds. In the cases of one-month and three-month maturities, the spreads peak during the Lehman
aftermath.

We now look directly at slopes of different points on the term structures of spreads. The slope measure
is the difference between the one-month and one-day spreads, the difference between the three-month
and one day spreads, and the difference between the three-month and one-month spread. The slope is,
e.g.:

        [Rate at one month – OIS rate for one month] minus [rate overnight – FF target overnight.
                                                                                                        27


For longer maturities where there is no federal funds (FF) target, we use the OIS rate for that maturity.
Table 9 shows different measures of the slope of the term structure of spreads at points on the term
structure for the different money market instruments during different subperiods.

Looking down a column for a given money market instrument shows how the spread difference changed
at that point on the term structure over the different subperiods. For example, in Panel A federal funds
at the one month minus one day point saw the difference increase dramatically in the pre-Lehman and
Lehman phases of the crisis. The same pattern appears for GC repo and LIBOR, also in Panel A. This
same pattern holds for CP (Panel B) and repo (Panel C). It also holds for the middle column, the
difference between the 3-month and overnight spreads, which also rise dramatically. Less dramatic is
the 3-month minus 1-month spread difference.

It is perhaps easier to see what is going on with figures. As with Figure 3 above, Figures 9-11 display the
term structure of spreads for LIBOR, federal funds, A2/P2 nonfinancial CP, and repo backed by
ABS/RMBS/CMBS collateral rated less than AA. The LIBOR spread term structure progressively steepens
during the crisis, as does the federal funds term structure of spreads. A2/P2 nonfinancial commercial
paper dramatically steepens by December 15, 2008. Repo backed by ABS/RMBS/CMBS collateral rated
less than AA shows the most dramatic increase in the term structure of spreads.

Figure 12 shows the 20-day moving average of the cross-sectional average for CP and repo, and the
single series for fed funds and Libor. Panel A is the graph for the one-month minus overnight spread,
and panel B is for the one-month minus overnight spread.

Table 10 shows the breakpoints for the slopes, where the slope is measured as the one-
month/overnight spread. The breakpoint for the repo slope is July 23, 2007, the same date as the
breakpoint in the repo spreads. Unsecured money market instruments’ slopes break on August 8, 2007,
also the same as the breakpoint for their spreads. The subsequent breakpoints are also the same, that
is, they are coincident with the breakpoints for their respective spreads.

Overall, the quantity and price data point in the same direction, namely, that maturity shortens during
the crisis.

C. CP Issuance and Screening

The unsecured money markets are based on screening. In addition to maturity shortening there may
have been tightened screening of issuers. We find some suggestive evidence on this. First, we look at
                                                                                                       28


the changes in S&P short-term credit ratings for 176 financial firms and report the results in Table 11.
During the crisis of 2007-2009, a considerable proportion of these firms were downgraded. For example,
39% of firms with A-1+, the highest short-term rating, before the crisis were downgraded to A-1. And
36% of the firms rates A-1 were downgraded by one or more notches. Correspondingly, financial firms
were forced to reduce their reliance on commercial paper. Figures 2 and 8 are then more remarkable,
as even the best firms increasingly issue at shorter maturities.

Table 12 presents the aggregated balance sheet for financial firms in 2007 and 2008. The total
commercial paper issued by financial firms was cut by $142 billion. In 2007, commercial paper
accounted for 8.6% of total liabilities. This percentage decreased to 7.4% in 2008. Table 5, above, shows
the maturities of the CP that continued to be issued.

D. Repo Haircuts


In this subsection we look at haircuts. With repo, lenders can ask for better collateral, and as we saw
above, there was a flight to Treasuries. We have no data on the quantities of the various types of
collateral used in the market. Another method for regaining the moneyness for repo when the
collateral is privately-produced bonds is to raise haircuts. There might be several rounds of haircut
increases, as well (not part of the model since it only had three dates). In the model, if this amount
exceeds then the bank is bankrupt.


As discussed in Gorton (2010) and Gorton and Metrick (2012), increasing repo haircuts corresponds to
withdrawing cash from the banking system. For example, suppose a lender in the repo market deposits
$100 million overnight at interest. To keep the deposit safe the bank provides $100 million of bonds
(valued at market prices). The depositor takes possession of these bonds. The next morning suppose
the borrower wants to renew or roll the repo. If the lender is nervous, he may offer to lend $90 million
but wants to keep the $100 million of bonds at collateral (getting $10 million dollars of cash back from
the borrower). This is called a 10 percent haircut. It corresponds to a withdrawal of $10 million from the
bank because now the bank has to finance this amount from other sources.


In the model market participants first reduce maturities (during the Crisis) and only finally may exit
(Run)—i.e., raise haircuts to 100 percent, withdrawing everything from the bank. Haircuts rise before
the Run phase finally culminating in 100 percent haircuts. Table 13 shows the breakpoints in the panel
                                                                                                               29


of the six categories of repo that use privately-produced collateral. Recall that the breakpoints in the
slopes of the term structure of spreads for the different money market instruments are coincident with
the breakpoints in spreads. With that in mind, the pattern of breakpoints in the haircuts is quite
remarkable. Looking at the money market chronology of Figure 5 for reference, the first repo haircut
breakpoint occurs on October 23, 2007, after the breaks in the spreads and slopes in the first cluster.
The second breakpoint occurs on February 6, 2008, right around the time that the real effects of the
crisis are felt. Not surprisingly, the third breakpoint is September 15, 2008, the day of Lehman’s failure.


E. The Lehman Collapse

The subprime shock seems to have led to the sequence of Crisis and Run. In particular, the Crisis was
happening though it was not noted by most observers. Prior to Lehman the overall maturity of money
market instruments declined. By September 2008, Lehman financed most of its balance sheet with
short-term repo financing, more than $200 billion a day.43 Fragility had built up so that an enormous
amount of debt was overnight, a hair trigger or exit option for lenders. The Lehman failure then occurs.
Lehman was short $4.5 billion in cash on September 15, 2008.44 There was no second shock—in the two
shock theory-- in the sense that the dynamics of the crisis had created such a fragile situation that it
seems that any event could well have caused a run.

F. Credit Derivative Premia


If fragility is building up, as we claim, then this buildup should be reflected in asset prices. If maturities
are shortening, then dealer banks were increasingly facing systemic risk, so their likelihood of failure
should be increasing. To examine this, the most relevant asset prices to look at are credit default swaps
(CDS) referencing the dealer banks. We find that, indeed, this was the case.


Table 14 shows the breakpoints for the five year CDS on the nine financial firms listed in Table 1, where
Lehman is excluded. As mentioned above, the first break in financial CDS is coincident with the first
break in repo spreads and the first break in the term structure of repo spreads. The second break occurs




43
   See In re Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., et al., Chapter 11 Case No. 09-13555, Report of Anton R. Valukas (“The
Valukas Report”), footnote 10, p. 3.
44
   The Valukas Report, footnote 48, p. 12.
                                                                                                          30


on February 8, 2008. This is a few days before President Bush signed the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008
on February 13, 2008, and before JP Morgan purchased Bear Stearns, on March 16, 2008.


The third break is on June 26, 2008 and the fourth break is September 11, 2008. Importantly, all of
these breaks are prior to the Lehman failure on September 15, 2008, consistent with the idea that
fragility is building up and this is reflected in the CDS spreads.


7. The Crisis Chronology

Our analysis provides a narrative of the crisis that is more precise than any that has been produced for
any crisis to date.45 And, the chronology is consistent with the predictions of the model. The findings
can be summarized by referring to the chronology shown in Figure 13. Figure 13 lists (almost) all of the
breakpoints discussed above, and also shows the major events that occurred.

The Anxious state occurs with the subprime shock on January 4, 2007. Then in the Crisis, the maturity of
newly issued commercial paper shows a breakpoint in maturity issuance on June 13, 2007, which is
when maturities started to shorten. Repo spreads and the term structures of repo slopes respond on
July 23, 2007, the same time that dealer banks are shocked. On August 8, 2007, the other money
market instruments are affected. Their spreads spike and their term structures of slopes increase.
Lastly, repo haircuts significantly increase on October 23, 2007. Consistent with the model, haircuts are
last. Finally, the real economy is affected starting on January 3, 2008. This is the end of phase one.

The crisis then evolves. Repo haircuts show a second breakpoint February 6, 2008, putting the financial
firms at greater risk; their CDS shows a second break two days later, on February 8, 2008, reflecting this.
JP Morgan buys Bear Stearns on March 16, 2008.

On June 26, 2008 there is a third break in the financial firms’ CDS.

August 14, 2008 is the start of the second phase, perhaps anticipated by the CDS market. On this date,
repo spreads and repo term structures of spreads have a break. September 11, 2008 there is another
break in the financial firms’ CDS. Unsecured money market instruments’ spreads and their term
structures of spreads have breaks on September 12, 2008.

45
  There are many narratives of crises. Well-known examples include Sprague (1910) and Andrew (1908 a, b) for
crises during the U.S. National Banking Era and Wessel (2010) for the crisis of 2007-2008. But, these are not
statistical narratives in the sense that we produce here.
                                                                                                          31


The buildup culminates in the Run on repo when haircuts go up again, coincident—not surprisingly—
with the collapse of Lehman on September 15, 2008. Repo haircuts going up in this case is the run on
Lehman. The break is the same day.

The chronology raises a number of questions, some of which we can answer and some of which we can
only speculate about. Here, we briefly discuss these questions.

First, if the subprime shock occurred in the first quarter of 2007, why did it not result in financial market
crisis until the third quarter of 2007? We can only speculate about the answer to this question. One
thing to keep in mind is that over-the-counter markets, like ABS/RMBS/CMBS markets and credit
derivative markets for example, do not work like stock markets. Stock markets have centralized trading
and readily observable prices. But over-the-counter markets have pairwise trading without centralized
pricing. The price is only observed by the two counterparties. So, the price does not aggregate the
information in the same way in OTC markets as in stock markets. It may simply take longer to percolate
through markets. This is an issue for future research.

A second question is: Why was repo the first money market instrument to show a break? In the repo
markets lenders became concerned about the quality of the bonds offered as collateral. Haircuts rose
and repo market spreads also rose. See Gorton and Metrick (2012). Asset-backed commercial paper
also faced runs but asset-backed commercial paper conduits were bailed out by their sponsors.
Commercial paper spreads only showed a break later. As we noted above, repo has a single bond as
collateral while ABCP was backed by a portfolio of ABS. The information implications of this are a
subject for future research.

In 2007 Q2-Q3 ABCP conduits could not roll their CP (see Liang et al (2012)). Instead, they drew on their
liquidity lines or financed via repo instead of CP. Liquidity lines were usually provided by the sponsoring
banks of the ABCP conduits, so “drawing on the liquidity line” meant that banks ended up with the ABCP
conduits’ assets on their balance sheet. For example, HBOS announced on August 21, 2007 that its
conduit Grampian would no longer issue CP, but that instead it would use liquidity facilities provided by
HBOS. See Fitch (August 23, 2007). Perhaps lenders expected that ABCP conduits would be failed out.

Draw-downs under liquidity facilities resulted in assets covered by the facility coming back on
intermediaries’ balance sheets where they had to be funded. Much of this turns out to be funded in
repo markets. Financial intermediaries financed the ABCP conduit assets in the repo market. In
particular, money market funds (MMFs) increased their repo deposits/lending in 2008. MMFs became
                                                                                                          32


emboldened after many of them were bailed out by their sponsors in the fourth quarter of 2007. MMFs
were exposed to the ABCP market turmoil in the third and fourth quarters of 2007 and faced the
prospect of losses during the fourth quarter of 2007. But, these losses were borne by the MMF
sponsors; see McCabe (2010). So, risk is building up in MMFs because they become one place where
former ABCP assets end up residing. Commercial banks are another apparent location, as they expand
their balance sheets in 2008 (see He, Khang and Krishnamurthy (2010)).

8. Conclusion

The common view of a financial crisis is that it is the result of a “shock.” And, the crisis of 2007-2008, in
the standard view, really was the result of a second, larger, “shock,” namely the failure of Lehman
Brothers. Why was Lehman a much bigger “shock”? The standard view is that it was unexpected and
was informative about the Fed’s intentions to let a large bank fail, suggesting that other banks might be
allowed to fail. In the two shock view, the second “shock” was independent of the first. We argue that a
financial crisis is more than a “shock” and that the two shock view is wrong. That a large crisis is due to
a large shock is not a very satisfying “explanation” and does not lead to policy recommendations. We
argue that fragility builds up in the financial system, creating conditions for what might otherwise be a
small shock to have a large impact. This is the Crisis phase. The maturities of money market instruments
started declining in July 2007, and anecdotally started declining much earlier for Bear Stearns and
Lehman Brothers. Whatever the information content of the Lehman collapse, market participants had
to be in a position to respond by, in effect, withdrawing from the bank. Lenders were in that position
because maturities had shortened prior to the Lehman collapse.

The importance of the Crisis phase is also discussed by Ó Gráda and White (2003) who study the panics
of 1854 and 1857 based on the detailed records of the Emigrant Savings Bank in New York City. They
show that these events were not characterized by immediate mass panic withdrawals from the bank.
Depositors withdrew some, but not all of their money—akin to haircuts rising but not going to 100
percent. Later they withdrew more. Also see Iyer and Puri (2012). It is also the case that some crises do
not progress to runs, as in the U.S. panics of 1884 and 1890. In these cases, the New York Clearing
House issued loan certificates (allowing banks to conserve cash to meet withdrawals) and the economy
                                                                                                        33


returned to the Normal state.46 See Sprague (1910). In some cases, economies can arguably be said to
have gotten stuck in the Crisis phase, as in Europe or Japan.

The financial crisis of 2007-2008 was started by a decline in home prices that followed a credit boom
(the Anxious state). The Crisis began in July 2007 there was a run on ABCP and on repo. Money market
instruments were suspect, and to recreate there moneyness market participants shortened maturities,
fleeing from maturity, putting the financial system on a shorter and shorter leash. This is the build-up of
systemic risk. Ultimately, this did not work, and then there are withdrawals from the banking system in
the form of refusals to continue funding or increases in repo haircuts. This process is one of building
fragility during the crisis which itself has already started. Lehman was a result of this build-up of
fragility. In this sense systemic risk is endogenous. A crisis is a dynamic process.




46
     On clearing house loan certificates see Gorton (1984, 1985b) and Gorton and Mullineaux (1987).
                                                                                                           34


                                                 Appendix A

In this appendix the model of Section II is solved and the proof for Proposition 1 is shown.

For Proposition 1, we show that both lenders and borrowers desire (as shown by their first order
conditions (FOCs)) an upward sloping term structure of repo rates.

Recall that at each date t the bank’s loan portfolio, L, must be financed by one- and two-period repo:

                                                                                       (A1)

where        and     are chosen now, at date t, and             was chosen last period, t-1. As long as the

bank is solvent, an equilibrium is a path of one- and two-period interest rates, {              }   such that

the market clears, i.e., (A1) holds, and banks and lenders maximize their profits and utilities,
respectively. All agents are risk neutral and there is no discounting.

Recall that we assume that             and             . For simplicity we assume these are strict equalities.
So, in state N both borrowers and lenders behave as if the Normal state will continue forever, and so at
any date the repo rates for one- and two-period loans are equal to R. We focus on the case where the
economy has just entered state A and we ignore state N. Upon entering state A, either the economy will
recover or it may end if AA occurs and there is a run, and surely ends with the bank’s insolvency if the
path is AAA. This structure simplifies the decision problem. Also, to simplify matters, we assume that,
in fact, the outcome at date t, unbeknownst to the lenders, is              ̂ , but that lenders neglect this

possibility (as in Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2012)).

Starting in state A at date t, we simply focus on the next two dates, t+1 and t+2. Let        be consumption
at date i. Recall that lenders neglect the risk of a run. Then the representative lender chooses          and
    to:


                                                       ∑




Note that:

             (          )(                         )                                 (A2)
                                                                                                                            35


             (                            )(                                     )                       (A3)

Note that                         and that                       is predetermined, having been chosen at t-1. Recall that
                                               is the value of the collateral at date t.

The FOCs for          and         are, respectively:

                                                         (               )

                                      (                          )                         |

Since                       ,              . Note that                                                since       . So,

                  |             . Therefore,                             . I.e., the term structure is upward sloping. The

reason is that the lender is bearing the risk of the bank becoming insolvent, in the case of AA.

The bank also neglects the risk of a run. The bank chooses                           and        to:

                                 (             )(                    )       (             )(                 )




                                                                             ̂

Let     be the LaGrange multiplier on the liquidity risk management constraint. The FOCs for                          and
are, respectively:

                                  (            )(            )                                    (A4)

                                  (                 )(           )                                (A5)

which results in                      , due to the bank wanting to attract lenders to the two-period loans to avoid
liquidity risk.

So, both borrowers and lenders prefer an upward-sloping term structure in the Anxious state. This is
Proposition 1.
                                                                                                              36


                              Appendix B: Seasonals in Money Market Spreads

In this appendix we briefly discuss the calendar effects or “seasonals” in money market spreads.

Appendix Table B1 shows regressions of the money markets spreads on calendar dummies, and shows
that “seasonals” are important in money market spreads. There are spikes in many of the spreads at
certain calendar dates. Just before the quarter end (five days before to the day before) and the date of
the quarter-end and day after, show the largest increases. But, note that the largest increases on those
dates are in the repo markets. Repo using all categories of private securities as collateral show
significant spikes in spreads around the quarter-end. For example, repo that uses collateralized loan
obligation tranches rates AA-AAA spikes by 77 basis points the day of the quarter-end and the next day.
Repo backed by asset-backed securities composed of auto loans, credit card receivables, or student
loans rated AA-AAA also spikes by 71 basis points on those days. Unsecured money market instruments
show much lower increases on those dates. For example, LIBOR goes up 4 basis points, A1/P1 Financial
CP goes up by 8 basis points, and A1/P1 asset-backed commercial paper goes up by 9 basis points.

There is more seasonal pressure on repo markets. A seasonal increase in the spread in repo suggests
that borrowers are willing to pay more for cash at these seasonal dates than at other dates to finance
the collateral. But, the depositors/lenders, on the other hand, appear to want their cash (and not the
collateral) at these dates.

Why is there a large demand for cash at these dates? Large movements of cash which go from one
party to another, especially if one party is the government so cash leaves the economy, could cause
these spikes in spreads. In the period before the Federal Reserve System there were seasonal spikes in
interest rates when cash had to move from cities to rural areas for planting season and then later for
harvesting season. Indeed, such spikes were viewed as creating fragility in the system and were a major
motivation for the founding of the Federal Reserve System.47

In the modern era since the founding of the Federal Reserve System there are several possible
candidates for explaining seasonals. One candidate for large cash movements is the payment of
estimated taxes by corporations. Another possibility is quarter-end “window dressing,” which might
show up for example in the excess reserves of banks, if they are engaged in window dressing.

47
  On seasonals in the money markets prior to the Fed see Kemmerer (1911). On seasonals and fragility prior to the
Fed see Miron (1986). And, on the elimination of some of the seasonals in interest rates once the Fed comes into
existence, see Mankiw, Miron and Weil (1987).
                                                                                                      37


We examine these issues in Table B2. The table contains the intercepts on each money market
instrument with no controls, in the first column, and also with the date dummies from Table B1, in the
second column. The next two columns show the change in the intercept when two tax variables are
(separately) used in the panel regression. The two variables are the same. In both columns, we report
the fitted values. We first estimate the parameters for tax flow process. Then we use the average tax
flow to replace the actual tax flow and calculate the fitted value. For the variable “Tax, all days
average”, we assume tax flow equals the average tax flow across all days. For the variable “Tax, Normal
days”, we assume that tax flow equals the average tax flow across normal days, excluding quarter-end,
beginning, middle and end of each month. The second average tax flow is smaller than the first one.

The last column includes U.S. commercial banks’ excess reserves. The intercept is adjusted for these
variables by estimating the coefficient on the variable and then adding or subtracting the coefficient
times the average of that variable. So, for example, in column 3 the coefficient times the average inflow
of taxes to the government, averaged over all (business) days, shows no effect, as the intercepts change
very little. When the middle of the month is excluded, the intercept does go down in most cases, but
not by much.

Inclusion of the excess reserves variable does reduce the intercept for repo categories, but not by as
much as the calendar dummies that we started with.

These calendar effects are a subject for future research.
                                                                                                        38


                                   Appendix C: Chronology Breakpoints

In this appendix we briefly discuss the ordering of breakpoints.

As explained briefly in the main text, the Bai procedure finds a breakpoint for the given panel. The
second breakpoint looks at the two subperiods defined by the first breakpoint and minimizes the sum of
squared residuals over the whole sample using QML. The second breakpoint we find is usually after the
date of the first breakpoint, but need not be. This means that we do not condition on the first
breakpoint. In other words, the second breakpoint could be before the first breakpoint. Similarly, the
third breakpoint is determined by looking at the ALL the subperiods determined by the first and second
breakpoints.

The issues are illustrated by Figure C1, which shows two possible Bai orderings. The first breakpoint in
both panels, A and B, is the crisis date. This is true in the data. In Panel A, the first three breakpoints
occur at the crisis date and then chronologically in order. But, breakpoint four is before the crisis date.
In general we are only interested in the first three breakpoints. However, we always calculate the
fourth breakpoint because sometimes the ordering looks more like what is shown in Panel B.

In Panel B, the fourth breakpoint occurs during the crisis, and comes before the second breakpoint. But,
the third breakpoint is before the crisis onset.

In order to understand the sensitivity of the procedure, particularly given the seasonals, we show the
ordering according to the Bai algorithm and the chronological ordering. Table B1 provides examples for
the most important panels. It illustrates the differences between the breakpoints found by the Bai
algorithm and the chronological ordering of the breakpoints. In the table “Algorithm Order” equal 1
means that is the first breakpoint fund by the Bai procedure. “Chronological Order” means that after we
found four breakpoints we sorted them chronologically and labeled them 1 through 4.

These issues are shown in Table C1.
                                                                                                       39


                                                References

Acharya, Viral, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez (2011), “Securitization without Risk Transfer,”
       Journal of Financial Economics 107, 515-536.

Allen, Linda and Anthony Saunders (1992), “Bank Window Dressing: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
         Banking and Finance 16, 585-623.

Andrew, A. Piatt (1908a), “Substitutes for Cash in the Panic of 1907,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 22,
      290–99.

Andrew, A. Piatt (1908b), “Hoarding in the Panic of 1907.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 22, 497–516.

Bai, Jushan (2010), “Common Breaks in Means and Variances for Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics
        157, 78-92.

Bech, Morten L., Elizabeth Klee, and Viktors Stebunovs (2012), “Arbitrage, Liquidity and Exit,” Finance
       and Economics Discussion Series 2012-21, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Bernanke, Ben (2010), “Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis,” Statement by Ben S.
        Bernanke, Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, before the Financial
        Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington D.C. (September 2, 2010); see
        http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100902a.htm .

Bernanke, Ben (2009), “Reflections on a Year in Crisis.” Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
       City’s Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 21, 2009.

Blinder, Alan (2009), “Six Errors on the Path to the Financial Crisis”, New York Times January 25.

Boyd, John, Gianni De Nicolò, and Elena Loukoianova (2011), “Banking Crises and Crisis Dating: Theory
        and Evidence,” International Monetary Fund, working paper.

Brunnermeier, Markus and Martin Oehmke (2013), “The Maturity Rat Race,” Journal of Finance 68, 483-
       521.

Calomiris, C.W., (1994), “Is the Discount Window Necessary: A Penn-Central Perspective,” Federal
        Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 76, 31-56.

Calomiris, C.W., (1989), “The Motivations for Loan Commitments Backing Commercial Paper,” Journal of
        Banking and Finance 1, 271-77.

Calomiris, Charles, Charles Himmelberg, and Paul Wachtel (1995), “Commercial Paper, Corporate
        Finance, and the Business Cycle: A Microeconomic Perspective,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
        Series on Public Policy 42, 203-250.
                                                                                                        40


Chen, Bin and Yongmiao Hong (2012), “Testing for Smooth Structural Changes in Time Series Models via
        Nonparametric Regression,” Econometrica 80, 1157-1183.

Covitz, Daniel M., Nellie Liang, and Gustavo A. Suarez (Forthcoming), "The Evolution of a Financial Crisis:
        Collapse of the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market," Journal of Finance 68, 815-848.

Crabbe, Leland and Mitchell Post (1994), “The Effect of a Rating Downgrade on Outstanding Commercial
       Paper,” Journal of Finance 49, 39-56.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton and Bengt Holmström (2011), “Financial Crises and the Optimality of Debt for
       Liquidity Provision.”

Diamond, Douglas (1991), “Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      56, 709-738.

Fender, Ingo and Martin Scheicher (2008), “The ABX: How Do the Markets Price Subprime Mortgage
       Risk?,” BIS Quarterly Review (September), 67-81.

Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011), Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the
        Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States (Public Affairs).

Fitch Ratings (2007), “Asset-Backed Commercial Paper & Global Banks Exposure—10 Key Questions,”
        Special Report (September 12, 2007).

Fons, Jerome and Andrew Kimball (1991), “Defaults and Orderly Exits of Commercial Paper Issuers,
        1972-1990,” Moody’s Special Report (January).

Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos (2008), “Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy,” American
        Economic Review 98(4), 1211-1244.

Gorton, Gary (2010), Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007 (Oxford University Press).

Gorton, Gary (1999), "Pricing Free Bank Notes," Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (1999): 33-64.

Gorton, Gary (1996), "Reputation Formation in Early Bank Note Markets," Journal of Political Economy,
        Vol. 104, No. 2, 346-397.

Gorton, Gary (1985a), “Bank Suspension of Convertibility,” Journal of Monetary Economics 15: 177-193.

Gorton, Gary (1985b), “Clearinghouses and the Origin of Central Banking in the United States,” Journal
       of Economic History 45 (2): 277–83.

Gorton, Gary. 1984. “Private Bank Clearinghouses and the Origins of Central Banking.” Business
       Review—Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, January/February, 3–12.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2012), “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of
       Financial Economics 104, 425-451.
                                                                                                       41


Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2011), “Securitization,” chapter in the Handbook of the Economics of
        Finance, volume 2, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz, Elsevier,
        forthcoming.

Gorton, Gary, and Don Mullineaux. 1987. “The Joint Production of Confidence: Endogenous Regulation
       and Nineteenth Century Commercial Bank Clearinghouses.” Journal of Money, Credit, and
       Banking 19 (4): 458–68.

Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2012), “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review, 104, 343-
       378.

Griffiths, Mark and Drew Winters (2005), “The Turn of the Year Money Markets: Tests of the Risk-Shifting
         Window Dressing and Preferred Habitat Hypothesis,” Journal of Business 78, 1337-1363.

Hansen, Bruce (2001), “The New Econometrics of Structural Change: Dating Breaks in U.S. Labor
       Productivity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 117-128.

He, Zhiguo, Ingu Khang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2010), “Balance Sheet Adjustment in the 2008 Crisis,”
        IMF Economic Review 58, 118-156.

Kemmerer, E. W. (1911), “Seasonal Variation in the New York Money Market,” American Economic Review
      1, 33-49.

Komotin, Vladimir and Drew Winters (2006), “Quarter-End Effects in Banks: Preferred Habitat or Window
       Dressing?,” Journal of Financial Services Research 29, 61-82.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov (2011), “Sizing Up Repo,” working paper.

Lucas, Robert (2009), “In Defense of the Dismal Science,” The Economist, August 8:67.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Jeffrey Miron, and David Weil (1987), “The Adjustment of Expectations to a Change in
      Regime: A Study of the Founding of the Federal Reserve,” American Economic Review 77, 358-
      374.

McCabe, Patrick (2010), “The Cross Section of Money Market Fund Risks and Financial Crises,” Federal
      Reserve Board, working paper no. 2010-51.

Meltzer, Allan (2009), “What Happened to the ‘Depression’?,” Wall Street Journal, April 31, 2009.

Miron, Jeffrey (1986), “Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate and the Founding of
        the Fed,” American Economic Review 76, 125-140.

Moody’s Investors Services (2007), “Moody’s Update on Bank-Sponsored ABCP Programs: A Review of
      Credit and Liquidity Issues,” International Structured Finance, Special Report (September 12,
      2007).
                                                                                                          42


Moody’s Investors Services (2003), “The Fundamentals of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper,” Structured
      Finance, Special Report (February 3, 2003).

Musto, David (1997), “Portfolio Disclosures and Year-End Price Shifts,” Journal of Finance 52, 1861-82.

Nayar, Nandkumar, and Michael S. Rozeff (1994), “Ratings, Commercial Paper, and Equity Returns,”
       Journal of Finance 49, 1431-1449.

Ó Gráda, Cormac, and Eugene White (2003), “The Panics of 1854 and 1857: A View from the Emigrant
       Industrial Savings Bank,” Journal of Economic History 63 (1), 213–40.

Perron, Pierre (2006), “Dealing with Structural Breaks,” chapter in Palgrave Handbook of Econometrics,
        Volume 1, edited by Terence Mills and Kerry Patterson (Palgrave Macmillan), 278-352.

Sprague, O. M. W. (1910), History of Crises under the National Banking System, Senate Document 538
       (Washington DC: Government Printing Office).

Stein, Jeremy (2012), “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,” quarterly Journal of Economics
         127, 57-09.

Wessel, David (2010), In Fed We Trust: Ben Bernanke’s War on the Great Panic (Crown Business).
                                                              Table 1: Data Sources and Sample Periods

       This table summarizes the data used in the paper. Their sources, sample periods and short descriptions are presented.

                                                     Sample Periods
        Variable                Source                                                                                      Description
                                               Beginning          End
VIX                        CBOE                 1/1/2000       4/30/2009    CBOE Volatility Index
S&P 500                    Standard & Poor's    1/1/2000       4/30/2009    Standard & Poor's 500 Index return
JPM HY Index               Dealer Bank         4/10/2003       4/30/2009    J.P. Morgan High Yield Index
 DJ CDX.IG                 Dealer Bank         4/10/2003       4/30/2009    Dow Jones CDX Index (Investment grade)
ABX                        Dealer Bank         1/19/2006       4/30/2009    Markit ABX.HE Index, 2006-1. AAA, BBB and BBB-
HEL                        Dealer Bank         1/19/2006        1/3/2008    Home Equity Loan ABS spreads, AAA and BBB ratings
                                                                            5 Year CDS for Bank of America, JP Morgan, Citigroup, Wells Fargo, Wachovia, Goldman Sachs, Merrill
Financial CDS              Bloomberg           11/6/2002      4/30/2009
                                                                            Lynch, Morgan Stanley, Lehman Brother and Bear Stearns.
Interbank Money Markets
Fed Fund                   Bloomberg           12/20/2001     4/30/2009     Effective Federal Fund rate
LIBOR                      Bloomberg           12/20/2001     4/30/2009     LIBOR
OIS                        Bloomberg           12/20/2001     4/30/2009     Overnight indexed swap
Commercial Paper
A2/P2 Nonfinancial         Federal Reserve     12/20/2001     4/30/2009     SIC code: 100-5999, 7000-9999. Programs with at least one "2" rating but no ratings other than "2"
AA Asset-backed            Federal Reserve     12/20/2001     4/30/2009     SIC code: 6189. Programs with at least one "1" or "1+" rating but no ratings other than "1"
                                                                            SIC code: 6000-6999, excluding 6189. Programs with at least one "1" or "1+" rating but no ratings other
AA Financial               Federal Reserve     12/20/2001     4/30/2009
                                                                            than "1"
AA Nonfinancial            Federal Reserve     12/20/2001     4/30/2009     SIC code: 100-5999, 7000-9999. Programs with at least one "1" or "1+" rating but no ratings other than "1"
Repo Categories
GC                         Bloomberg           12/20/2001     4/30/2009     General collateral repo rate
                                                                            Residential mortgage-backed security (RMBS) or commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS) with
<AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS        Dealer Bank         10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                                                                            ratings less than AA
                                                                            Asset-backed securities (ABS) comprised of auto loans, credit-card receivables, or student loans, with
A-AAA ABS-Auto / CC / SL   Dealer Bank         10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                                                                            ratings between A and AAA, inclusive.
AA-AAA ABS-RMBS /                                                           Residential mortgage-backed security (RMBS) or commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS) with
                           Dealer Bank         10/3/2005      4/30/2009
CMBS                                                                        ratings between AA and AAA, inclusive.
AA-AAA CLO                 Dealer Bank         10/3/2005      4/30/2009     Collateralized loan obligations (CDO) with ratings between AA and AAA, inclusive.
AA-AAA Corporates          Dealer Bank         10/3/2005      4/30/2009     Corporate bonds rated between AA and AAA, inclusive.
BBB+ / A Corporates        Dealer Bank         10/3/2005      4/30/2009     Corporate bonds rated between BBB+ and A, inclusive.
                                                                                                            44


                                Table 2: Overnight Spreads Comparison

This table presents overnight spreads for different money market instruments. The spread is defined as
the difference between the promised contractual rate paid on the money market instrument and the
federal funds target rate. All spreads are adjusted for seasonal effects by regressing them on the calendar
dummies and then using the intercepts. For more details about the regression please refer to Table B1.
We first divide the sample into two periods. Before the crisis is from Jan. 1, 2001 to Jul. 22, 2007 (the first
breakpoint in repo) and during the crisis, for Jul. 23, 2007 to Apr. 29, 2009. The crisis period is further
divided into three subperiods: (1) Pre-Lehman: Jul. 23, 2007 to Aug. 14, Aug 2008; (2) Lehman: Aug. 15,
2008 to Dec. 14, 2008; (3) After Dec 2008: Dec. 15, 2008 to Apr. 29, 2009. t-statistics for the null
hypothesis spread=0 are reported in parentheses.

                                                                                                 Crisis:
                                    Before the     During the    Crisis: Pre-      Crisis:     After Dec
                                        Crisis        Crisis       Lehman         Lehman          2008
                                     Intercept     Intercept      Intercept      Intercept     Intercept
    Federal Funds                       -0.32         -8.06          -3.32         -37.04         6.97
                                       (-1.54)       (-4.30)        (-2.44)        (-6.00)       (5.46)
    GC Repo                             -3.83        -22.49         -23.27         -56.32        11.02
                                      (-14.38)       (-7.70)        (-6.96)        (-7.53)       (6.76)
    LIBOR                                5.33         15.46          16.76          13.85        13.37
                                      (33.06)        (4.65)        (10.76)         (1.03)        (7.55)
    A2/P2 Nonfinancial CP                8.97         80.03          47.52         172.89        87.34
                                      (24.46)       (15.66)        (28.27)        (11.53)       (17.33)
    AA Asset-backed CP                   1.47         40.28          37.52          50.78        38.40
                                       (8.34)       (12.98)        (27.49)         (5.05)       (16.13)
    AA Financial CP                     -1.51         -9.11          -5.90         -35.51         7.30
                                       (-8.65)       (-5.30)        (-6.59)        (-6.10)       (4.83)
    AA Nonfinancial CP                  -1.90         -7.47          -3.01         -36.53         7.73
                                      (-10.98)       (-3.89)        (-3.33)        (-5.44)       (4.75)
    <AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS                 10.16         98.59          49.12         136.94       207.36
                                       (8.36)       (17.18)        (13.07)         (8.90)       (74.21)
    A-AAA ABS-Auto / CC / SL             3.23         56.70          30.07          83.06       108.90
                                      (3.070)       (12.90)         (8.51)         (5.09)       (34.65)
    AA-AAA ABS-RMBS /
    CMBS                                5.16         79.75          37.96         110.39        173.64
                                      (4.24)        (15.13)        (10.65)        (7.01)        (70.07)
    AA-AAA CLO                          5.16         93.18          45.75         125.99        202.31
                                      (4.24)        (16.45)        (11.80)        (8.38)        (74.11)
    AA-AAA Corporates                  -0.82         15.16          11.58          19.18         21.65
                                      (-0.92)        (3.71)         (3.71)        (1.02)         (8.73)
    BBB+ / A Corporates                 1.91         25.71          18.45          35.82         37.11
                                      (2.04)         (6.27)         (5.67)        (1.94)        (13.14)
                                                                                                                                                         45



                                                               Table 3: Crisis Chronology

This table presents the common breakpoints following Bai’s (2010) procedure for different groups of data. Panel A shows the first breakpoints and the lower
and upper bound of their 99% confidence intervals. The number of securities, the data frequency and the sample period for each group are also reported.
Panel B shows the second and third breakpoints in the money market spreads data. Financial CDS include the 5-year credit default swaps (CDS) on 10 top U.S.
financial institutions, including commercial banks and dealer banks. The list of banks is in Table 1. CP includes four categories of commercial paper: A2/P2
nonfinancial, A1/P1 asset-backed commercial paper, A1/P1 financial, and A1/P1 nonfinancial. Repo include six categories of repo, which differ by the type of
privately-produced collateral used as backing: AAA/Aaa-AA/Aa asset-backed securities (ABS), including residential mortgage-backed (RMBS) and commercial
mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), RMBS and CMBS with ratings between AA and AAA , AAA/Aaa-A/A auto loan-backed, credit card receivables-backed and
student loan-backed ABS, AAA/Aaa-AA/Aa collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), AAA/Aaa-AA/Aa corporate bonds, and A/A-Baa/BBB+ corporate bonds.

                                                            Panel A: Common Break Points
                                                          Num. of       Break     Lower               Upper
Description                                               Securities     Point    bound               bound       Frequency      Beginning         End
Real Sector: VIX and S&P 500                                  2       2008/9/12 2008/9/12           2008/9/15        Daily       2000/1/1       2009/4/30
Real Sector: VIX, S&P 500, JPM HY Index, DJ CDX.IG            6        2008/1/3 2008/1/3            2008/1/10       Weekly       2003/4/10      2009/4/30
Subprime: ABX only                                            3       2007/1/25 2007/1/24           2007/1/29        Daily       2006/1/19      2009/4/30
Subprime: HEL only                                            2       2007/3/22 2007/3/22           2007/3/29       Weekly       2006/1/19      2008/1/3
Subprime: ABX & HEL                                           5        2007/1/4 2007/1/4            2007/1/11       Weekly       2006/1/19      2008/1/3
Financial CDS: Include Lehman                                10       2007/7/23 2007/7/23           2007/7/24        Daily       2002/11/6      2008/9/12
Financial CDS: Exclude Lehman                                 9       2007/7/25 2007/7/25           2007/7/26        Daily       2002/11/6      2009/4/30
Money Market: CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo                  13       2007/7/23 2007/7/23           2007/7/24        Daily       2005/10/3      2009/4/30
Money Market: Repo                                            6       2007/7/23 2007/7/20           2007/7/25        Daily       2005/10/3      2009/4/30
Money Market: CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR                         7        2007/8/8 2007/8/8            2007/8/9         Daily       2005/10/3      2009/4/30
                                                                                                                                    46




                                                      Panel B: Multiple Break Points
                                         Number of                       Lower           Upper
Description                     Breaks                  Break Point                                 Frequency   Beginning     End
                                         Securities                      bound           bound
                                First        13          7/23/2007      7/23/2007       7/24/2007     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo   Second       13          8/14/2008      8/14/2008       8/15/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                Third        13         12/15/2008     12/15/2008      12/16/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                First         7          8/8/2007       8/8/2007        8/9/2007      Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR         Second        7          9/12/2008      9/12/2008       9/16/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                Third         7         12/15/2008     12/15/2008      12/16/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                First         6          7/23/2007      7/20/2007       7/25/2007     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
Repo                            Second        6          8/14/2008      8/14/2008       8/15/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                Third         6         12/15/2008     12/12/2008      12/17/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                First        13          7/27/2007      7/26/2007       7/31/2007     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
All CP                          Second       13          9/12/2008      9/11/2008       9/17/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                Third        13         12/15/2008     12/15/2008      12/16/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                First         7          8/6/2007       8/3/2007        8/8/2007      Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
Unsecured (Excluding ABCP)      Second        7          9/12/2008      9/11/2008       9/17/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                Third         7         12/15/2008     12/15/2008      12/16/2008     Daily     10/3/2005   4/30/2009
                                                                                                                                                       47



                                                             Table 4: Spread Break Detail

This table presents the common breakpoints for two single series, overnight ABCP spread and overnight GC spread. Three breakpoints and the lower and upper
bound of their 99% confidence intervals, as well as the number of securities, the data frequency and the sample period for each series are reported.

                                         Number of                        Lower          Upper
         Description        Breaks                      Break Point                                   Frequency       Beginning         End
                                         Securities                       bound          bound
                             First            1         7/27/2007 7/20/2007    8/6/2007                  Daily       10/3/2005       4/30/2009
         ABCP               Second            1         9/12/2008   9/5/2008  10/3/2008                  Daily       10/3/2005       4/30/2009
                             Third            1         10/16/2008 10/16/2008 10/17/2008                 Daily       10/3/2005       4/30/2009
                             First            1         8/13/2007   8/1/2007  8/24/2007                  Daily       10/3/2005       4/30/2009
         GC                 Second            1         9/12/2008   9/4/2008  10/6/2008                  Daily       10/3/2005       4/30/2009
                             Third            1         12/15/2008 12/1/2008 1/12/2009                   Daily       10/3/2005       4/30/2009
                                                                                                                48


                                         Table 5: Commercial Paper Issuance

       This table presents the issuance of commercial paper for various types of issuers and for different
       maturities. The first column shows average total issuance per day and the following columns shows the
       percentage of issuance for different maturities. The subperiods are as follows: Before 2007: Jan. 1, 2001
       to Jan. 1, 2007; Pre-crisis：Jan. 1, 2007 to Jul. 22, 2007; Crisis: Pre-Lehman: Jul. 23, 2007 to Aug. 14, Aug
       2008; Crisis: Lehman: Aug. 15, 2008 to Dec. 14, 2008; Crisis: After Dec. 15, 2008 to Apr. 29, 2009. The data
       is from Federal Reserve H.15 Release, Historical Data.

                                        Avg. Issuance                          10-20       21-40        41-80         >=80
                       Period            $ millions     1-4 days   5-9 days    days        days         days          days
               Before 2007                4,276.5        65%         8%         7%          13%          4%           1%
               Pre-crisis                 6,045.7        77%         7%         5%           8%          3%           1%
  A2/P2
               Crisis: Pre-Lehman         7,635.8        78%         7%         6%           6%          2%           1%
Nonfinancial
               Crisis: Lehman             5,660.3        70%         11%        10%          7%          2%           1%
               Crisis: After Dec 2008     3,222.9        69%         10%        9%           8%          2%           1%
               Before 2007                38,107.2       49%         5%         5%          25%          8%           7%
               Pre-crisis                 60,945.9       61%         4%         4%          20%          5%           6%
 AA Asset-
               Crisis: Pre-Lehman         70,064.8       67%         6%         5%          13%          4%           5%
  backed
               Crisis: Lehman             71,613.5       74%         5%         3%           8%          3%           6%
               Crisis: After Dec 2008     27,303.6       61%         8%         3%          16%          4%           8%
               Before 2007                18,080.0       77%         6%         4%           6%          4%           3%
               Pre-crisis                 16,017.1       67%         7%         5%           7%          4%           9%
AA Financial   Crisis: Pre-Lehman         9,712.8        55%         7%         6%          11%          6%           14%
               Crisis: Lehman             12,403.5       74%         6%         4%           5%          2%           10%
               Crisis: After Dec 2008     8,563.6        75%         5%         3%           7%          3%           8%
               Before 2007                3,165.4        63%         8%         8%          12%          7%           2%
               Pre-crisis                 1,475.2        53%         9%         9%          10%         11%           7%
    AA
               Crisis: Pre-Lehman         1,452.5        44%         9%         11%         17%         11%           7%
Nonfinancial
               Crisis: Lehman             1,945.8        38%         6%         10%         21%         18%           8%
               Crisis: After Dec 2008     4,749.0        70%         7%         7%           8%          5%           3%
               Before 2007               122,613.1       62%         6%         5%          14%          6%           6%
               Pre-crisis                167,143.0       68%         5%         4%          13%          4%           6%
  Total CP     Crisis: Pre-Lehman        161,196.9       68%         7%         5%          10%          4%           6%
               Crisis: Lehman            158,015.5       71%         6%         4%           8%          4%           7%
               Crisis: After Dec 2008     91,499.4       65%         8%         4%          11%          4%           8%
               Before 2007                63,629.1       59%         6%         5%          18%          7%           5%
               Pre-crisis                 84,483.8       63%         5%         4%          16%          5%           6%
Total CP(4)    Crisis: Pre-Lehman         88,866.0       66%         7%         5%          12%          4%           6%
               Crisis: Lehman             91,623.0       73%         6%         4%           8%          4%           6%
               Crisis: After Dec 2008     43,839.1       65%         7%         4%          13%          4%           7%
                                                                                                                                                            49



                                  Table 6: Multiple Break Points for CP Issuance, Short/Long Ratio (30 day Rolling)

This table presents the common breakpoints for the short/long ratio of CP Issuance, which is defined as the ratio of the amount of CP issued with a maturity of
less than 20 days (over a 30 day window) divided by the amount of CP issued with a maturity of 20 days or greater (over a 30 day window). The short/long
ratios hown are for four CP categories used to detect common breakpoints. Three breakpoints and the lower and upper bound of their 99% confidence
intervals, as well as the number of securities, the data frequency and the sample period are reported.

                                 Number of                          Lower           Upper
              Description                        Break Point                                      Frequency        Beginning           End
                                 Securities                         bound           bound
              First Break             4          6/13/2007       6/12/2007        6/15/2007          Daily         10/3/2005       4/30/2009
              Second Break            4          9/26/2008       9/26/2008        9/29/2008          Daily         10/3/2005       4/30/2009
              Third Break             4          1/26/2009       1/23/2009        1/28/2009          Daily         10/3/2005       4/30/2009
                                                                                                                                                  50



                                               Table 7: Multiple Break Points for CP Issuance Level

This table presents the common breakpoints for the issuance level of four CP categories. Three breakpoints and the lower and upper bound of their 99%
confidence intervals, as well as the number of securities, the data frequency and the sample period for each maturity are reported.

                                           Number of                        Lower          Upper
           Description        Breaks                      Break Point                                  Frequency      Beginning          End
                                           Securities                       bound          bound
                               First            4          5/31/2007      5/30/2007      6/4/2007         Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
           Overnight          Second            4          9/19/2008      9/18/2008      9/23/2008        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                               Third            4         12/31/2008     12/31/2008      1/2/2009         Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                               First            4          9/24/2007      9/14/2007      10/3/2007        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
           One-month          Second            4         12/31/2007      12/6/2007      1/25/2008        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                               Third            4          9/12/2008      9/5/2008       9/22/2008        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                               First            4          3/8/2007       2/28/2007      3/19/2007        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
          Three-month         Second            4          12/4/2007     11/16/2007     12/20/2007        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                               Third            4          9/16/2008      9/11/2008      9/22/2008        Daily       10/3/2005      4/30/2009
                                                                                                          51


                       Table 8: Summary of the Spreads by Term to Maturity

This table reports the spreads for overnight, one month, and three-month maturities for the different
money market instruments during different subperiods. The spread is defined as the difference between
the promised contractual rate and the federal funds target rate. All spreads are adjusted for the seasonal
effects by regressing spreads on the calendar dummies. Panel A shows spreads for Fed Funds, GC repo
and LIBOR. Panel B presents spreads for four categories of commercial paper. Panel C reports spreads for
six categories of repo. The subperiods are as follows: Pre-crisis：Jan. 1, 2007 to Jul. 22, 2007; Crisis: Pre-
Lehman: Jul. 23, 2007 to Aug. 14, Aug 2008; Crisis: Lehman: Aug. 15, 2008 to Dec. 14, 2008; Crisis: After
Dec 2008: Dec. 15, 2008 to Apr. 29, 2009. T-statistics for the null hypothesis spread=0 are reported in
parentheses.


                              Panel A: Fed Funds, General Collateral Repo, LIBOR
       Series               Periods             Overnight           One-month            Three-month
                                                  -0.32                4.15                  5.97
                           Pre-crisis
                                                  (-1.54)             (37.44)              (49.51)
                                                  -3.32                45.59                66.09
                      Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                  (-2.44)             (22.37)              (33.17)
      Fed Fund
                                                  -37.04              163.31               225.91
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (-6.00)             (10.13)              (14.44)
                                                   6.97                38.39               105.95
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (5.46)              (26.00)              (34.75)
                                                  -3.83                -6.69                -6.80
                           Pre-crisis
                                                 (-14.38)             (-27.59)              (-25.9)
                                                  -23.27              -17.46                -17.38
                      Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                  (-6.96)             (-8.86)              (-10.39)
         GC
                                                  -56.32               2.06                  9.57
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (-7.53)              (0.87)               (4.34)
                                                  11.02                6.78                  8.83
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (6.76)               (9.36)              (14.00)
                                                   5.33                8.66                 10.81
                           Pre-crisis
                                                 (33.06)              (72.33)              (80.18)
                                                  16.76                47.39                65.27
                      Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                 (10.76)              (24.13)              (39.43)
       LIBOR
                                                  13.85               138.70               181.02
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (1.03)              (10.64)              (14.69)
                                                  13.37                23.75                97.43
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (7.55)              (22.39)              (50.67)
                                                                                       52


                              Panel B: Commercial Paper
       Series                  Periods           Overnight   One-month   Three-month
                                                   8.97        16.41        18.54
                              Pre-crisis
                                                  (24.46)     (36.20)      (28.27)
                                                  47.52        77.10        89.60
                         Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                  (28.27)     (31.11)      (36.19)
A2/P2 Nonfinancial CP
                                                  172.89      351.97       361.65
                           Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (11.53)     (13.12)       (8.94)
                                                  87.34       122.49       144.01
                        Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (17.33)      (6.44)       (7.68)
                                                   1.47        3.27         2.86
                              Pre-crisis
                                                  (8.34)      (21.99)      (13.60)
                                                  37.52        67.37        74.87
                         Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                  (27.49)     (20.65)      (27.64)
 AA Asset-backed CP
                                                  50.78       139.06       176.49
                           Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (5.05)       (9.85)      (13.35)
                                                  38.40        40.08        66.32
                        Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (16.13)     (21.98)       (8.84)
                                                   -1.51       -0.57        0.13
                              Pre-crisis
                                                  (-8.65)     (-4.21)       (0.69)
                                                   -5.90       26.27        51.52
                         Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                  (-6.59)     (17.95)      (27.71)
   AA Financial CP
                                                  -35.51       88.39       135.27
                           Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (-6.10)     (10.58)      (11.01)
                                                   7.30        17.58        46.38
                        Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (4.83)      (14.03)       (6.81)
                                                   -1.90       -2.85        -0.08
                              Pre-crisis
                                                 (-10.98)     (-15.72)     (-0.26)
                                                   -3.01       7.01         11.71
                         Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                  (-3.33)      (7.89)       (7.13)
 AA Nonfinancial CP
                                                  -36.53       16.94        76.08
                           Crisis: Lehman
                                                  (-5.44)      (6.01)       (9.95)
                                                   7.73        1.46         12.25
                        Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                  (4.75)       (1.72)       (7.32)
                                                                                      53


                                  Panel C: Repo
         Series                   Periods           Overnight   One-month   Three-month
                                                      10.16        10.80         9.26
                                 Pre-crisis
                                                      (8.36)      (33.33)      (68.28)
                                                      49.12        92.06       111.52
                            Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                     (13.07)      (30.53)      (34.84)
 <AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS
                                                     136.94       303.66       346.80
                              Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (8.9)      (16.92)      (19.21)
                                                     207.36       238.79       312.30
                           Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                     (74.21)     (147.24)     (172.87)
                                                       3.23         4.82         4.26
                                 Pre-crisis
                                                      (3.07)      (15.87)      (31.35)
                                                      30.07        73.58        91.23
                            Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (8.51)      (27.47)      (34.20)
A-AAA ABS-Auto / CC / SL
                                                      83.06       219.67       266.07
                              Crisis: Lehman
                                                      (5.09)      (13.34)      (16.50)
                                                     108.90       118.17       192.13
                           Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                     (34.65)      (65.71)      (81.12)
                                                       5.16         6.80         6.26
                                 Pre-crisis
                                                      (4.24)      (20.99)      (46.16)
                                                      37.96        81.95       102.20
                            Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                     (10.65)      (29.26)      (35.29)
AA-AAA ABS-RMBS / CMBS
                                                     110.39       277.03       320.17
                              Crisis: Lehman
                                                      (7.01)      (15.91)      (18.31)
                                                     173.64       205.10       278.62
                           Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                     (70.07)     (148.22)     (153.48)
                                                       5.16         6.80         6.26
                                 Pre-crisis
                                                      (4.24)      (20.99)      (46.16)
                                                      45.75        89.22       113.12
                            Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.8)      (27.21)      (33.84)
      AA-AAA CLO
                                                     125.99       292.47       335.23
                              Crisis: Lehman
                                                      (8.38)      (15.83)      (17.99)
                                                     202.31       233.76       307.28
                           Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                     (74.11)     (144.43)     (170.74)
                                                      -0.82        -2.70        -2.24
                                 Pre-crisis
                                                     (-0.92)     (-11.39)     (-18.62)
                                                      11.58        54.40        72.15
                            Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (3.71)      (25.36)      (35.25)
   AA-AAA Corporates
                                                      19.18       155.36       202.09
                              Crisis: Lehman
                                                      (1.02)      (10.62)      (14.65)
                                                      21.65        31.09       105.05
                           Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                      (8.73)      (23.48)      (51.83)
                                                       1.91         0.64         1.47
                                 Pre-crisis
                                                      (2.04)       (1.89)      (10.17)
                                                      18.45        61.58        79.64
                            Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (5.67)      (26.05)      (35.58)
  BBB+ / A Corporates
                                                      35.82       172.07       218.79
                              Crisis: Lehman
                                                      (1.94)      (11.54)      (15.49)
                                                      37.11        46.40       120.36
                           Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                     (13.14)      (35.63)       (53.5)
                                                                                                       54


                              Table 9: The Term Structures of Spreads

This table presents different measures of the slope of the term structure of spreads at points on the term
structure for the different money market instruments during different subperiods. 1m/1d is the difference
between one-month and overnight spread. 3m/1d is the difference between three-month and overnight
spread. 3m/1m is the difference between three-month and overnight spread. All slopes are adjusted for
seasonal effects. Panel A shows slopes for Fed Funds, GC repo and LIBOR. Panel B presents slopes for four
categories of commercial paper. Panel C reports slopes for six categories of repo. The subperiods are as
follows: Pre-crisis：Jan. 1, 2007 to Jul. 22, 2007; Crisis: Pre-Lehman: Jul. 23, 2007 to Aug. 14, Aug 2008;
Crisis: Lehman: Aug. 15, 2008 to Dec. 14, 2008; Crisis: After Dec 2008: Dec. 15, 2008 to Apr. 29, 2009. T-
statistics for the null hypothesis slope=0 are reported in parentheses.

                             Panel A: Fed Funds, General Collateral Repo, LIBOR
        Series                       Periods                       1m/1d          3m/1d      3m/1m
                                                                    4.46           6.28       1.82
                                    Pre-crisis
                                                                   (18.45)        (25.30)    (23.81)
                                                                    48.91         69.41       20.50
                                Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                                   (19.53)        (29.39)    (19.72)
      Fed Fund
                                                                   200.36         262.96      62.60
                                  Crisis: Lehman
                                                                   (10.87)        (13.82)    (10.77)
                                                                    31.22         98.97       67.57
                              Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                                   (12.27)        (25.49)    (23.65)
                                                                    -2.87         -2.99       -0.12
                                    Pre-crisis
                                                                   (-10.14)       (-9.97)    (-0.76)
                                                                    5.81           5.89       0.07
                                Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                                    (2.71)        (2.30)      (0.09)
         GC
                                                                    59.33          64.9       6.12
                                  Crisis: Lehman
                                                                    (8.62)        (8.74)      (5.26)
                                                                    -4.23         -2.19       2.04
                              Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                                   (-2.67)        (-1.43)     (4.72)
                                                                    3.31           5.45       2.14
                                    Pre-crisis
                                                                   (17.23)        (27.19)    (28.61)
                                                                    30.65         48.42       17.87
                                Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                                   (13.19)        (23.24)    (18.62)
        LIBOR
                                                                   124.80         167.00      42.31
                                  Crisis: Lehman
                                                                    (8.25)        (10.75)    (15.26)
                                                                    10.45         84.10       73.68
                              Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                                    (4.53)        (25.48)    (47.45)
                                                                               55


                     Panel B: Commercial Paper
      Series                Periods              1m/1d     3m/1d     3m/1m
                                                  7.42      9.37      1.92
                           Pre-crisis
                                                 (23.53)   (18.21)   (5.23)
                                                 29.57     41.36     12.94
                       Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                 (12.72)   (18.5)    (9.04)
A2/P2 Nonfinancial
                                                 179.08    200.91    35.16
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                 (9.31)    (7.31)    (3.20)
                                                 35.14     50.39      9.76
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                 (2.26)    (3.16)    (0.78)
                                                  1.79      1.38     -0.40
                           Pre-crisis
                                                 (9.10)    (5.54)    (-3.13)
                                                 29.85     37.40      7.40
                       Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                 (10.35)   (16.26)   (5.41)
 AA Asset-backed
                                                 88.27     125.70    37.42
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                 (8.14)    (10.58)   (5.07)
                                                  2.15     28.39     26.24
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                 (0.92)    (4.19)    (3.52)
                                                  0.94      1.67      0.70
                           Pre-crisis
                                                 (4.64)    (7.04)    (5.54)
                                                 32.18     57.43     25.24
                       Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                 (17.69)   (26.67)   (19.44)
   AA Financial
                                                 122.77    154.72    39.58
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                 (11.64)   (10.38)   (5.56)
                                                 10.27     40.05     29.41
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                 (5.84)    (5.90)    (4.25)
                                                 -0.96      1.71      1.31
                           Pre-crisis
                                                 (-4.12)   (4.72)    (6.55)
                                                 10.05     15.27      3.50
                       Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                 (7.59)    (6.91)    (2.99)
 AA Nonfinancial
                                                 52.27     113.83    56.95
                        Crisis: Lehman
                                                 (6.34)    (7.82)    (8.39)
                                                 -5.11      6.54     12.45
                     Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                 (-4.58)   (4.00)    (6.84)
                                                                                    56


                           Panel C: Repo
         Series                      Periods          1m/1d     3m/1d     3m/1m
                                                        0.63     -0.90     -1.54
                                   Pre-crisis
                                                       (0.63)   (-0.76)   (-5.70)
                                                       42.84     62.23     19.45
                               Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.57)   (17.20)   (14.65)
 <AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS
                                                      165.75    209.16     43.14
                                 Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (5.51)    (6.89)   (15.98)
                                                       31.51    104.99     73.51
                             Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                      (13.12)   (33.18)   (51.18)
                                                        1.57      1.02     -0.55
                                   Pre-crisis
                                                       (1.78)    (0.99)   (-2.24)
                                                       43.53     61.01     17.65
                               Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.73)   (16.83)   (16.33)
A-AAA ABS-Auto / CC / SL
                                                       136.2    182.73     46.39
                                 Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (4.75)    (6.30)   (14.90)
                                                        9.35     83.26     73.96
                             Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                       (3.04)    (23.5)   (41.92)
                                                        1.63      1.09     -0.54
                                   Pre-crisis
                                                       (1.62)    (0.92)   (-2.00)
                                                       43.92     64.10     20.25
                               Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.83)   (17.77)   (15.78)
AA-AAA ABS-RMBS / CMBS
                                                      165.75    209.16     43.14
                                 Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (5.51)    (6.89)   (15.98)
                                                       31.53    105.02     73.51
                             Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                      (13.40)   (33.30)   (50.53)
                                                        1.63      1.09     -0.54
                                   Pre-crisis
                                                       (1.62)    (0.92)   (-2.00)
                                                       43.27     67.11     23.89
                               Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.56)   (18.23)   (16.46)
      AA-AAA CLO
                                                      165.37    208.40     42.76
                                 Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (5.53)    (6.90)   (15.73)
                                                       31.53    105.02     73.51
                             Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                      (13.40)   (33.30)   (50.53)
                                                       -1.87     -1.42      0.45
                                   Pre-crisis
                                                      (-2.34)   (-1.67)    (2.49)
                                                       42.81     60.41     17.75
                               Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.65)   (16.83)   (17.14)
   AA-AAA Corporates
                                                       136.2    183.06     46.72
                                 Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (4.75)    (6.33)   (15.04)
                                                        9.49     83.40     73.95
                             Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                       (3.30)   (24.62)   (39.02)
                                                       -1.27     -0.44      0.83
                                   Pre-crisis
                                                      (-1.52)   (-0.48)    (2.97)
                                                       43.14     61.02     18.05
                               Crisis: Pre-Lehman
                                                      (11.70)   (16.99)   (17.34)
  BBB+ / A Corporates
                                                       136.2    183.06     46.72
                                 Crisis: Lehman
                                                       (4.75)    (6.33)   (15.04)
                                                        9.35     83.26     73.96
                             Crisis: After Dec 2008
                                                       (3.04)   (23.50)   (41.92)
                                                      Table 10: Multiple Break Points for Slopes

This table presents the common breakpoints for the slope of the term structure of spreads. Slopes are the difference between one-month and overnight
spread. Three breakpoints and the lower and upper bound of their 99% confidence intervals, as well as the number of securities, the data frequency and the
sample period for each group are reported.

                                                   Number of                         Lower          Upper
Description                            Breaks                      Break Point                                    Frequency      Beginning        End
                                                   Securities                        bound          bound
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo           First         13           7/23/2007       7/23/2007      7/24/2007          Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo          Second         13           8/14/2008       8/14/2008      8/15/2008          Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo           Third         13           12/15/2008     12/15/2008      12/16/2008         Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR                 First          7            8/8/2007       8/8/2007        8/9/2007          Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR                Second          7           9/12/2008       9/12/2008      9/16/2008          Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR                 Third          7           12/15/2008     12/15/2008      12/16/2008         Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
Repo                                    First          6           7/23/2007       7/20/2007      7/25/2007          Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
Repo                                   Second          6           8/14/2008       8/14/2008      8/15/2008          Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
Repo                                    Third          6           12/15/2008     12/12/2008      12/17/2008         Daily       10/3/2005     4/30/2009
                   Table 11: Changes in Short-term Ratings for Financial Firms during the Crisis

      This table reports the changes in S&P short-term credit ratings for financial firms during the crisis of 2007-
      2009. Financial firms are defined as the firms with SIC code from 6000 to 6999. To be included in the
      sample, the firms must have an S&P short-term credit rating before June 30th 2007. The first two columns
      present the number of firms for different ratings on June 30th 2007. The third to eighth column shows the
      number of firms for different ratings on June 30th 2009. The transition probabilities are presented in
      parentheses.

            Total        A-1+        A-1         A-2        A-3          B           C          D          No Rating
A-1+          48           29         19
                         (0.60)     (0.39)
A-1           60           4          36         14          1           3                                     2
                         (0.06)     (0.60)     (0.23)      (0.01)      (0.05)                                (0.03)
A-2           46                       3         30          4           5                                     4
                                    (0.06)     (0.65)      (0.08)      (0.10)                                (0.08)
A-3           13                                  1          8           3                                     1
                                               (0.07)      (0.61)      (0.23)                                (0.07)
 B            8                                              1           3           2                         2
                                                           (0.12)      (0.37)      (0.25)                    (0.25)
 D            1                                                                                1
                                                                                             (1.00)
                                                                                                         59


                 Table 12: The Liability Structure of Financial Firms: 2007 to 2008

This table reports the aggregated debt structure for financial commercial paper issuers from 2007 to
2008. To identify the financial commercial paper issuers, we first get the list of firms which have received
short-term credit ratings from Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s before 2007. Then we restrict our attention
only to financial firms and identify 229 financial firms that have short-term ratings. The debt data is from
Capital IQ. We are able to find the debt data for 77 of these 229 financial firms. And 13 of the 77 firms
have never issued any commercial paper since 2001. So the final sample includes 64 financial firms, which
cover most important commercial banks, investment banks and insurance firms in U.S.

       (in millions)                                 2007                       2008
       Total Debts                                 6,558,396 100.00% 5,670,953 100.00%
       Total Commercial Paper                        564,364 8.60%     421,032 7.40%
       Total Revolving Credit                         65,221 1.00%     138,133 2.40%
       Total Senior Bonds and Notes                2,818,906 43.00% 2,551,541 45.00%
       Total Subordinated Bonds and Notes            225,657 3.40%     271,893 4.80%
       Total Term Loans                              212,892 3.20%     400,264 7.10%
       Total Trust Preferred                         102,538 1.60%     119,890 2.10%
       Total Capital Leases                            2,582 0.00%       2,611 0.00%
       Other Borrowings                            2,577,771 39.30% 1,772,505 31.30%
                                                                                              60


                               Table 13: Breaks in Repo Haircuts

This table presents the common breakpoints for repo haircuts. Three breakpoints and the lower and
upper bound of their 99% confidence intervals are reported.

                                   Break point      Lower bound       Upper bound
           First Break             2007/10/23        2007/10/23        2007/10/24
           Second Break             2008/2/6          2008/2/6          2008/2/7
           Third Break             2008/9/15          2008/9/15        2008/9/16
                                                                                                    61


                                 Table 14: Breaks in Financial CDS

This table presents the common breakpoints for financial CDS. Four breakpoints and the lower and upper
bound of their 99% confidence intervals are reported. The data used is daily data on the nine financial
firms listed in Table 1; Lehman is excluded. The data series start January 1, 2007-December 31, 2009.

                                  Break point         Lower bound           Upper bound
          First Break             7/16/2007            7/16/2007             7/17/2007
          Second Break             2/8/2008             2/8/2008             2/13/2008
          Third Break             6/26/2008            6/26/2008             6/27/2008
          Fourth Break            9/11/2008            9/11/2008             9/12/2008
                                                             Table B1: Overnight Spreads, Before the Crisis

        This table presents the seasonal effects of overnight spreads for money market instruments before the crisis. The coefficients of regressions of spreads on
        calendar dummies are presented. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.

                                            Quarter-      Quarter-      Quarter-     Quarter-   Quarter-                              Calendar
                                           end, Day (-   end, Day (-   end, Day (-   end, Day   end, Day    Calendar     Calendar     Day, 30th
                              Intercept     15,-11)         10,-6)         5,-1)        (0,1)      (2,5)    Day, 1st     Day, 15th     or 31th     Monday        Friday
Fed Fund                         -0.32        0.64          -0.02          1.76         6.56       0.19        2.75         5.88         4.99        2.48          0.16
                                (-1.54)      (0.99)        (-0.03)        (2.83)       (5.88)     (0.27)      (3.09)       (7.20)       (6.06)      (6.46)        (0.44)
GC                               -3.83        0.84          -2.42         -1.58        -2.10       0.24        4.30         6.83         4.69        2.20         -0.61
                               (-14.38)      (1.02)        (-2.97)       (-1.98)      (-1.48)     (0.27)      (3.80)       (6.59)       (4.49)      (4.52)       (-1.29)
LIBOR                             5.33        0.53          -0.36          4.16        12.76       1.22        1.19         5.92         6.61        1.57         -0.17
                                (33.06)      (1.06)        (-0.72)        (8.26)      (14.73)     (2.19)      (1.71)       (9.46)      (10.25)      (5.13)       (-0.60)
A2/P2 Nonfinancial                8.97        1.24          -0.26          6.11        10.63       2.56        1.91         6.99         6.31        2.50          0.92
                                (24.46)      (1.10)        (-0.23)        (5.60)       (5.45)     (2.04)      (1.22)       (4.90)       (4.34)      (3.68)        (1.42)
AA Asset-backed                   1.47        1.07          -0.32          4.80         9.34       1.70        2.95         7.31         6.65        2.37          0.33
                                 (8.34)      (1.97)        (-0.60)        (9.15)       (9.84)     (2.82)      (3.92)      (10.65)       (9.50)      (7.25)        (1.06)
AA Financial                     -1.51        0.56          -1.61          3.42         8.07       1.73        3.15         6.96         6.46        2.51         -0.25
                                (-8.65)      (1.03)        (-3.01)        (6.57)       (8.66)     (2.88)      (4.23)      (10.20)       (9.29)      (7.72)       (-0.82)
AA Nonfinancial                  -1.90        1.12          -0.27          4.67         6.99       1.64        3.33         7.09         6.55        2.53          0.34
                               (-10.98)      (2.10)        (-0.50)        (9.10)       (7.62)     (2.77)      (4.55)      (10.56)       (9.57)      (7.93)        (1.13)
<AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS              10.16        1.30          13.52         67.80        77.07      -1.12       -2.64        -0.29         2.28       -1.96          5.88
                                 (8.36)      (0.32)         (3.45)      (19.80)        (6.11)    (-0.31)     (-0.52)      (-0.06)       (0.51)     (-0.85)        (2.71)
A-AAA ABS-Auto / CC / SL          3.23        0.63          10.97         54.64        71.28      -1.28       -2.53        -0.09         2.06       -1.43          5.10
                                 (3.07)      (0.18)         (3.24)      (18.46)        (6.54)    (-0.41)     (-0.58)      (-0.02)       (0.54)     (-0.72)        (2.72)
AA-AAA ABS-RMBS / CMBS            5.16        1.30          13.52         67.80        77.07      -1.12       -2.64        -0.29         2.28       -1.96          5.88
                                 (4.24)      (0.32)         (3.45)        (19.8)       (6.11)    (-0.31)     (-0.52)      (-0.06)       (0.51)     (-0.85)        (2.71)
AA-AAA CLO                        5.16        1.30          13.52         67.80        77.07      -1.12       -2.64        -0.29         2.28       -1.96          5.88
                                 (4.24)      (0.32)         (3.45)      (19.80)        (6.11)    (-0.31)     (-0.52)      (-0.06)       (0.51)     (-0.85)        (2.71)
AA-AAA Corporates                -0.82        1.57           8.56         37.64        25.98      -1.66       -2.24         0.16         1.55       -1.08          2.46
                                (-0.92)      (0.53)         (2.96)      (14.88)        (2.79)    (-0.62)     (-0.60)       (0.04)       (0.47)     (-0.63)        (1.54)
BBB+ / A Corporates               1.91        2.00          10.78         56.46        48.69      -1.46       -2.65         0.20         2.17       -1.92          4.02
                                 (2.04)      (0.64)         (3.58)      (21.43)        (5.02)    (-0.52)     (-0.68)       (0.05)       (0.64)     (-1.09)        (2.41)
                                                                                                              63


                                         Table B2: Intercept Comparison

     This table presents the spreads money market instruments controlling for different effects. The first
     column reports the results without any control. The second column reports the intercept from a
     regression of spreads on date dummies. For the following three columns, the intercept is adjusted for
     these variables by estimating the coefficient on the variable and then adding or subtracting the coefficient
     times the average of that variable. The third columns uses the average tax flow of all days, and the fourth
     columns uses the average tax flow of normal days, excluding quarter-end, beginning, middle and end of
     each month. The second average tax flow is smaller than the first one. The last column includes U.S.
     commercial banks’ excess reserves. The sample period is from Jan. 1, 2001 to Jul. 22, 2007, the first
     breakpoint in repo.


                                                                                                             Excess
                                                                            Tax, all          Tax,          Reserve,
                                                            Date             days           Normal          Normal
                                         No Control       Dummies           average          days             days
Fed Fund                                    0.89            -0.32             0.89            0.66             0.80
GC                                         -3.24            -3.83            -3.22           -3.43            -3.03
LIBOR                                       6.56            5.33              6.56            6.34             6.32
A2/P2 Nonfinancial                         10.86            8.97             10.84           10.60           10.53
AA Asset-backed                             3.10            1.47              3.09            2.80             2.84
AA Financial                               -0.20            -1.51            -0.22           -0.48            -0.41
AA Nonfinancial                            -0.28            -1.90            -0.30           -0.58            -0.52
<AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS                        16.44           10.16             16.49           16.53           13.88
A-AAA ABS-Auto / CC / SL                    8.40            3.23              8.44            8.45             6.41
AA-AAA ABS-RMBS / CMBS                     11.44            5.16             11.49           11.53             8.88
AA-AAA CLO                                 11.44            5.16             11.49           11.53             8.88
AA-AAA Corporates                           2.45            -0.82             2.51            2.62             1.01
BBB+ / A Corporates                         6.84            1.91              6.92            6.99             4.73
                                                                                                    64


                                   Table C1: Breakpoint Ordering

This table presents the order of break points obtaining from Bai’s (2010) procedure. Algorithm Order is
the order of breakpoints identified using Bai’s procedure. They are not necessarily consistent with the
breakpoints’ chronological order. The lower and upper bound of breakpoints’ 99% confidence intervals
are also reported.

                                         Panel A: Spreads
                                 CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order     Breakpoint Lower Bound             Upper Bound
            1                     1               7/23/2007    7/23/2007              7/24/2007
            2                     2               8/14/2008    8/14/2008              8/15/2008
            3                     4               12/15/2008 12/15/2008              12/16/2008
                                     CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order    Breakpoint        Lower Bound       Upper Bound
            1                     1               8/8/2007           8/8/2007         8/9/2007
            2                     2              9/12/2008           9/12/2008        9/16/2008
            3                     4             12/15/2008          12/15/2008       12/16/2008
                                              Repo
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order   Breakpoint         Lower Bound       Upper Bound
            1                     2              7/23/2007           7/20/2007        7/25/2007
            4                     3              8/14/2008           8/14/2008        8/15/2008
            3                     4             12/15/2008          12/12/2008       12/17/2008
                                                All CP
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order       Breakpoint     Lower Bound       Upper Bound
            1                     1                 7/27/2007        7/26/2007        7/31/2007
            2                     2                 9/12/2008        9/11/2008        9/17/2008
            3                     4                 12/15/2008      12/15/2008       12/16/2008
                                  Unsecured (Excluding ABCP)
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order  Breakpoint Lower Bound                Upper Bound
            1                     1             8/6/2007     8/3/2007                 8/8/2007
            2                     2            9/12/2008     9/11/2008                9/17/2008
            3                     4            12/15/2008 12/15/2008                 12/16/2008
                                              ABCP
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order   Breakpoint         Lower Bound       Upper Bound
            1                     1              7/27/2007           7/20/2007        8/6/2007
            2                     2              9/12/2008           9/5/2008         10/3/2008
            3                     4             10/16/2008          10/16/2008       10/17/2008
                                              GC
    Algorithm Order       Chronological Order  Breakpoint          Lower Bound       Upper Bound
            1                     2            8/13/2007             8/1/2007         8/24/2007
            4                     3            9/12/2008             9/4/2008         10/6/2008
            2                     4            12/15/2008           12/1/2008         1/12/2009
                                                                                 65




                                Panel B: Haircuts
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order   Breakpoint   Lower Bound   Upper Bound
      1                   1             2007/10/23   2007/10/23    2007/10/24
      3                   2              2008/2/6     2008/2/6      2008/2/7
      4                   3             2008/6/30    2008/6/30      2008/7/1
      2                   4             2008/9/15    2008/9/15     2008/9/16
                                                                                     66


                   Panel C: 1 Month/ Overnight Spread Slopes
                                 Panel A: Spreads
                         CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR, Repo
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order     Breakpoint Lower Bound       Upper Bound
        1                  1              7/23/2007    7/24/2007        7/23/2007
        2                  2              8/15/2008    8/18/2008        8/15/2008
        3                  4              12/19/2008    1/2/2009       12/19/2008
                             CP, Fed Fund, GC, LIBOR
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order    Breakpoint      Lower Bound   Upper Bound
        1                 1               8/8/2007         8/9/2007     8/8/2007
        2                 2              9/12/2008        9/16/2008     9/12/2008
        3                 4             12/19/2008         1/2/2009    12/19/2008
                                      Repo
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order   Breakpoint       Lower Bound   Upper Bound
        1                 1              7/23/2007        7/25/2007     7/20/2007
        3                 2              8/14/2008        8/15/2008     8/14/2008
        2                 4             12/17/2008         1/5/2009    12/11/2008
                                        All CP
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order       Breakpoint   Lower Bound   Upper Bound
        1                 1                  8/8/2007     8/10/2007     8/7/2007
        2                 2                 9/12/2008     9/17/2008     9/11/2008
        3                 4                 12/19/2008     1/2/2009    12/19/2008
                          Unsecured (Excluding ABCP)
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order  Breakpoint Lower Bound          Upper Bound
        1                 1             8/8/2007     8/10/2007          8/7/2007
        2                 2            9/12/2008     9/16/2008          9/12/2008
        3                 4            12/19/2008    1/2/2009          12/19/2008
                                        ABCP
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order     Breakpoint     Lower Bound   Upper Bound
        1                 1                8/9/2007       8/20/2007     8/1/2007
        3                 2                9/12/2008      9/18/2008     9/10/2008
        2                 4                1/2/2009       1/27/2009    11/25/2008
                                      GC
Algorithm Order   Chronological Order  Breakpoint        Lower Bound   Upper Bound
        1                 1            8/10/2007          8/23/2007     7/31/2007
        3                 2            9/12/2008          9/17/2008     9/11/2008
        2                 4            12/18/2008         1/27/2009    11/19/2008
                                                                                                                                                           67



                                         Figure 1: Money Market Spreads Before and During the Crisis (bps)

This figure shows average seasonal adjusted overnight spreads for money market spreads for two periods. Before and during the crisis are distinguished by July
23, 2007, the first break we find in the repo spreads.

     120


     100


      80


      60


      40


      20


        0


      -20


      -40


                                                             Before the Crisis    During the Crisis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                68



                                                                               Figure 2: Short/Long Issuance Ratio, AA Asset-backed

This figure shows the short/long issuance ratio for AA asset-backed commerical paper. The ratio is defined as the ratio of the amount of CP issued with a
maturity of less than 20 days (over a 30 day window) divided by the amount of CP issued with a maturity of 20 days or greater (over a 30 day window).




                 14

                 12

                 10

                  8

                  6

                  4

                  2

                  0
                      2005/10/3

                                  2005/12/3




                                                                                          2006/10/3
                                                                                                      2006/12/3




                                                                                                                                                              2007/10/3
                                                                                                                                                                          2007/12/3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008/10/3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2008/12/3
                                                                                                                                        2007/6/3
                                                                                                                                                   2007/8/3
                                              2006/2/3
                                                         2006/4/3

                                                                    2006/6/3
                                                                               2006/8/3




                                                                                                                  2007/2/3
                                                                                                                             2007/4/3




                                                                                                                                                                                      2008/2/3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008/4/3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2008/6/3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008/8/3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009/2/3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2009/4/3
                                                                                                                                 69



                                                       Figure 3: LIBOR Spread Term Structures (bps)

This figure shows the term structure of LIBOR spreads at three different points in time during the crsis.




                  180

                  160

                  140

                  120

                  100

                   80

                   60

                   40

                   20

                    0
                                       Overnight                             One-month                             Three-month
                  -20
                                                       2007/7/23              2008/8/14               2008/12/15
                                                      70




            Figure 4: Crisis Phases




N   N   N      N        N         N

                                          •   •   •
              A        A              A
            Crisis    Runs      Depression
                                                                                                                                                        71




                                                           Figure 5: Money Market Spreads

This figure shows the spreads adjusted for the seasonal effects for money market instruments. The two vertical lines in the figure correspond to two of the
breaks in the set of repo spreads.

        600


        500
                                                                                                   Second repo break
                                           First repo break

        400


        300


        200


        100


          0


       -100


       -200


       -300
                    A2_P2_Nonfinancial              AA_Asset_backed                 AA_Financial                    AA_Nonfinancial
                    Fed_Fund                        GC                              LIBOR                           _AA__ABS_RMBS___CMBS
                    A_AAA_ABS_Auto___CC___SL        AA_AAA_ABS_RMBS___CMBS          AA_AAA_CLO                      AA_AAA_Corporates
                    BBB____A_Corporates
                                                                                  72


                   Figure 6: Money Markets Crisis Chronology for Spreads


              Repo1        ABCP1              Unsec1            GC Repo1

2007

           July 23, 2007                  Aug. 6, 2007       Aug. 13, 2007


                     July 27, 2007


                     GC Repo2                                           Repo3
                      ABCP2                                            GC Repo3
                                        Lehman
                      Unsec2                                            Unsec3
          Repo2                           Fails           ABCP3

2008

       Aug. 14, 2008                                   Oct. 16, 2008


                  Sept. 12, 2008     Sept. 15, 2008               Dec. 15, 2008
Figure 7: CP 1-4 Day Maturity Issuance by ABCP Conduits and AA Financial Firms, as a percentage of
average issuance

This figure shows short-term (1-4 day) AA asset-backed and AA financial commercial paper issuance as a
percentage of their total issuance


 100%


  80%


  60%

                                                                                    AA ABCP
  40%                                                                               AA Financial


  20%


    0%
         Before 2007 Pre-crisis       Crisis: Pre-    Crisis:    Crisis: After
                                       Lehman        Lehman       Dec 2008
                                                                                                                74


                            Figure 8: Counterparty Risk (bps) and CP Maturities

This figure plots the LIBIR minus overnight index swap three month spread and the short/long issuance ratio for AA
asset-backed commerical paper. The ratio is defined as the ratio of the amount of CP issued with a maturity of less
than 20 days (over a 30 day window) divided by the amount of CP issued with a maturity of 20 days or greater
(over a 30 day window)

       400                                                                                                14

       350                                                                                                12

       300
                                                                                                          10

       250
                                                                                                          8
       200
                                                                                                          6
       150

                                                                                                          4
       100

        50                                                                                                2


         0                                                                                                0




                         LIBOIS Three-month Spread               Short-long Ratio, 30 Day Rolling
                                                           75




      Figure 9: Fed Funds Spread Term Structures
                         (bps)
250

200

150

100

 50

  0
         Overnight          One-month        Three-month

                2007/7/23   2008/8/14   2008/12/15



        Figure 10: A2/P2 Nonfinancial CP Spread
                  Term Strutures (bps)
600

500

400

300

200

100

  0
         Overnight          One-month       Three-month

               2007/7/23    2008/8/14   2008/12/15
                                                       76



      Figure 11: <AA ABS-RMBS / CMBS Repo
           Spread Term Structures (bps)
400

350

300

250

200

150

100

 50

  0
       Overnight         One-month       Three-month

             2007/7/23   2008/8/14   2008/12/15
                                                        77



       Figure 12: Panel A: 1m/1d slope series, 20 day
                      moving-average

600

400

200

  0

-200

-400

-600
                Fed_Fund    LIBOR    cp     repo



       Panel B: 1m/1d slope series, 20 day moving-
                         average
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
 50
  0
 -50
-100
-150
                Fed_Fund    LIBOR    cp     repo
                                                                          78


                Figure 13: Crisis Chronology



Subprime Shock (ABX, HEL), Jan. 4, 2007




CP Issuance, Short/Long Ratio, June 13, 2007




 Repo Shock, July 23, 2007
 Repo term structure of spreads, July 23, 2007
 Financial CDS Shock, July 23, 2007



Unsecured Money Market Shock (CP, fed funds, LIBOR), August 8, 2007
Term structure of unsecured MM instruments, August 8, 2007




Repo Haircuts, October 23, 2007

                                                 Fed announces the Term
                                                 Auction Facility, Dec. 12, 2007



Real Effects, January 3, 2008




Second break in repo haircuts,
Feb. 6, 2008




Second break in Financial Firm CDS,
Feb. 8, 2008
                                                                            79


          Figure 13: Crisis Chronology continued

                                                  Bush signs Economic Stimulus
                                                  Act of 2008, Feb. 13, 2008



                                                  JP Morgan buys Bear
                                                  Stearns, March 16, 2008



 Third break in financial firms CDS,
 June 26, 2008

                                                  Run on IndyMac, July 8, 2008
                                                  OTS closes IndyMac, July 11, 2008

Repo, August 14, 2008
Repo term structure slope, August 14, 2008


Repo, August 14, 2008
Repo term structure slope, August 14, 2008

                                                  Govt. takeover of Freddie
                                                  and Fannie, Sept. 7, 2008

Fourth break in financial firms CDS,
Sept. 11, 2008



Unsecured money market spreads (CP, fed
funds, LIBOR), and the term structures of their
spreads, September 12, 2008


Repo Haircuts, September 15, 2008
Lehman Bankruptcy, September, 15, 2008

                                                  TARP becomes law,
                                                  Oct. 3, 2008
Figure B1: Bai Algorithm Ordering and Chronological Order

                                     Panel A


                                                                 Time       Chronological
                                                                            Order: 4, 1, 2, 3

                     First Breakpoint
 Fourth Breakpoint
                           Crisis     Second Breakpoint


                                                  Third Breakpoint

                                  Panel B



                                                                     Time   Chronological
                                                                            Order: 3, 1, 4, 2
                     First Breakpoint
 Third Breakpoint
                           Crisis     Fourth Breakpoint


                                                  Second Breakpoint
