                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                   SAVINGS IN TRANSNATIONAL HOUSEHOLDS:
           A FIELD EXPERIMENT AMONG MIGRANTS FROM EL SALVADOR

                                             Nava Ashraf
                                           Diego Aycinena
                                         Claudia Martínez A.
                                             Dean Yang

                                        Working Paper 20024
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20024


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014

This paper was previously titled “Remittances and the Problem of Control.” We thank the core members
of the project team at ESSMF (Angela Gonzalez, Michelle Guevara, Ronald Luna, Amaris Rodriguez,
and Eric Rubin), at FUSADES (Margarita Sanfeliu and Mauricio Shi), and at Banco Agricola (Hector
Aguiar, Gustavo Denys, Carla de Espinoza, Mauricio Gallardo, Oscar Hernandez, Sabina Lopez, Ernesto
Magana, Katya O’Byrne, and Paul Ponce). We greatly appreciate the collaboration of Enilson Solano
and the El Salvador embassy in Washington DC. We received valuable feedback and suggestions from
Manuel Agosin, Natasha Bajuk, Catia Batista, Charlie Brown, Michael Clemens, Angus Deaton, Esther
Duflo, Suzanne Duryea, Jon Guryan, Ricardo Hausmann, Gabriela Inchauste, Takatoshi Kamezawa,
Michael Kremer, Steve Levitt, John List, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Ernesto Lopez-Cordova, Osmel Manzano,
Doug Massey, Margarita Mooney, Hugo Ñopo, Chris Paxson, Alejandro Portes, Jesse Rothstein, Jesse
Shapiro, Ernesto Stein, Bryce Millett Steinberg, Mel Stephens, Don Terry, Steve Wilson, Viviana
Zelizer, and participants in several seminars. Alejandra Aponte, Fernando Balzaretti, Sebastian Calonico,
Carly Farver, Andres Shahidinejad, and Cristian Sanchez provided excellent research assistance. This
research was made possible by financial support from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation,
the Inter-American Development Bank, the National Science Foundation, the Multilateral Investment
Fund, the Empowerment Lab at Harvard University’s Center for International Development, and the
University of Michigan’s International Policy Center. Dean Yang acknowledges research support from
National Science Foundation award SES-0851570. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Nava Ashraf, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martínez A., and Dean Yang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Savings in Transnational Households: A Field Experiment among Migrants from El Salvador
Nava Ashraf, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martínez A., and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20024
March 2014
JEL No. F22,O16

                                               ABSTRACT

We implemented a randomized field experiment that tested ways to stimulate savings by international
migrants in their origin country. We find that migrants value and take advantage of opportunities to
exert greater control over financial activities in their home countries. In partnership with a Salvadoran
bank, we offered U.S.-based migrants bank accounts in El Salvador. We randomly varied migrant
control over El Salvador-based savings by offering different types of accounts across treatment groups.
Migrants offered the greatest degree of control accumulated the most savings at the partner bank, compared
to others offered less or no control over savings. Impacts are likely to represent increases in total savings:
there is no evidence that savings increases were simply reallocated from other savings mechanisms.
Enhanced control over home-country savings does not affect remittances sent home by migrants.


Nava Ashraf                                           Claudia Martínez A.
Harvard Business School                               Diagonal Paraguay 257
Baker Library 443                                     Oficina 1503-D
Soldiers Field                                        Departamento de Economía
Boston, MA 02163                                      Facultad de Economía y Negocios
and NBER                                              Universidad de Chile
nashraf@hbs.edu                                       Santiago
                                                      Chile
Diego Aycinena                                        cmartineza@econ.uchile.cl
Universidad Francisco Marroquín
6a calle final zona 10                                Dean Yang
Edificio Académico, Oficina E-503                     University of Michigan
Ciudad de Guatemala                                   Department of Economics and
Guatemala                                             Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
diegoaa@ufm.edu.gt                                    735 S. State Street, Room 3316
                                                      Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                                      and NBER
                                                      deanyang@umich.edu
I. Introduction
        Attempts to understand the extent and nature of conflict between household members are
central to research on the economics of the family. Many empirical studies have cast serious
doubt on the “unitary model” of the household, the proposition that the joint actions of a
household comprised of separate optimizing individuals can be represented as the actions of a
single utility-maximizing agent.1 Models that take explicit account of potential preference
differences among household members include Manser and Brown (1980), McElroy and Horney
(1981), and Lundberg and Pollak (1993). Browning and Chiappori (1998) provide empirical
evidence rejecting the unitary model, but in favor of household efficiency in resource allocation.
On the other hand, evidence of productive inefficiencies in intra-household allocation has been
found in a variety of contexts.2
        A leading candidate explanation for observed inefficiencies is asymmetry of information
in the household, which reduces the ability of household members to enforce mutually-beneficial
cooperative agreements among themselves.3 This idea has motivated new research that focuses
on transnational households, or households with members who have migrated to other countries.
Due to the absence of the migrant member, these are households where information asymmetries
should be particularly pronounced. If migrants do not share the same financial objectives as
family members remaining back home, information asymmetries may prevent migrants from
achieving objectives that require the assistance or participation of relatives remaining in the
home country.4
        An improved understanding of financial decision-making within transnational households
is important because flows of resources within such households are large in magnitude, and
therefore may have important aggregate impacts. In 2011, migrant remittances sent to developing
countries amounted to US$353 billion. In comparison, in that year developing country receipts of
foreign direct investment (the largest type of international financial flow going to the developing


1
  See the review in Strauss and Thomas (1995), as well as Duflo (2003), Rangel (2006), and Martinez (2013).
2
  See Udry (1996), Dercon and Krishnan (2000), Goldstein, de Janvry, and Sadoulet (2005), and Dubois and Ligon
(2005), among others.
3
  Ashraf (2009) shows that individual saving decisions change when observed by one’s spouse. Recent work on the
savings and risk-sharing consequences of intra-household preference differences and asymmetric information
includes Schaner (2011), Kinnan (2011), and Hertzberg (2011).
4
  In analyses of observational data, Chen (2006) and De Laat (2008) find empirical patterns consistent asymmetric
information in migrant households, as evidenced by migrant monitoring of spouses in home areas (among domestic
migrants in Kenya and China, respectively).

                                                                                                                1
world) were not quite double that figure ($646 billion), while receipts of official development
assistance (foreign aid) came in a poor third to remittances and FDI, amounting to just $141
billion.5 International financial institutions and developing country governments are keenly
interested in identifying policies that can enhance the development impacts of international
migration and the accompanying resource flows.6
        The substantial policy interest in remittances stands in stark contrast to the limited
empirical evidence that can help guide policy.7 A number of questions related to decision-
making in transnational households are of general economic interest, and policy-relevant. To
what extent do migrants seek to monitor and control financial decision-making by household
members remaining in the home country? What kinds of financial product innovations might
enhance migrant ability to exert such monitoring and control? If given the opportunity to do so,
would migrants seek to exert greater control over such decisions, and what would be the
resulting impacts on financial decision-making in the transnational household?
        To shed light on these questions, we conducted a randomized controlled trial among
U.S.-based migrants from El Salvador. We randomized offers to migrants of financial products
that varied the degree to which they could monitor and control savings in bank accounts in their
home country.8 In survey data we collected, Salvadoran migrants report that they would like
recipient households to save 21.2% of remittance receipts, while recipients prefer to save only
2.6% of receipts. Migrants often intend savings to be for future use by the recipient household,
but such savings also can be intended for the migrants themselves. In the latter case, migrants
may send their own funds to be saved in El Salvador because they perceive savings held in the
U.S. to be relatively insecure (particularly for undocumented migrants who fear deportation and
loss of their assets).
        Migrants in the study were randomly assigned to a control group or to one of three
treatment conditions that offered financial products with varying levels of monitoring and control
over savings in El Salvador. We examine the effect on our outcomes of interest: take-up and


5
  Data on remittances, FDI, and ODA are from World Development Indicators 2013.
6
  Recent reports on remittances funded by the Inter-American Development Bank include Pew Hispanic Center
(2002) and Terry and Wilson (2005). World Bank publications include World Bank (2006) and World Bank (2007).
7
  See Yang (2011) for a review of the state of research on the economics of migrant remittances.
8
  Chin, Wilcox, and Karkoviata (2010) conduct an experiment on savings among Mexican immigrants in Texas,
finding that immigrants are more likely to open U.S. savings accounts, accumulate more savings in the U.S., and
remit less to Mexico when they are helped obtain an I.D. that facilitates opening U.S. bank accounts.

                                                                                                              2
balances in savings accounts of various types. Our comparison group is referred to as Treatment
0, and received no offer of any new financial products. In Treatment 1, migrants were offered the
opportunity to open a new account in the name of someone in El Salvador, into which the
migrant could remit funds. This account allows the migrant to deposit but not to withdraw, nor to
observe withdrawals. Treatment 2 offered the migrant the opportunity to open an account to be
held jointly by the migrant and someone in El Salvador. This new joint account allows joint
observability of account balances as well as joint withdrawals (both the migrant and the El
Salvador person are given an ATM card for the account). Finally, in Treatment 3 migrants were
offered, in addition to the accounts offered in Treatments 1 and 2, the option to open an account
in the migrant’s name only.9 Thus, each treatment nests the one prior to it so that the effect of
offering additional products can be understood. Project staff delivered a marketing pitch for
each product, according to its features.10 Data on financial transactions at our partner bank come
from the bank’s administrative records. Baseline and follow-up surveys administered to migrants
in the U.S. provide data on other outcomes.
        Our results provide evidence that migrants do value and take advantage of opportunities
to exert control over savings in their home country. Migrants were much more likely to open
savings accounts at the partner bank in El Salvador, and accumulated more savings at the partner
bank, if they were assigned to the treatment condition offering the greatest degree of monitoring
and control (Treatment 3). Migrants desire savings that are jointly held with family members, as
well as savings only for themselves: we observe substantial increases in savings in both the joint
accounts shared between migrants and someone in El Salvador (offered in Treatments 2 and 3),
and in the accounts for migrants alone (offered only in Treatment 3).11 This increase in savings
in the new accounts we offered is likely to be a true increase in savings; we find no evidence that
these funds were simply shifted over from other types of savings (either from other accounts at
the partner bank, or from other types of savings reported in the follow-up survey).
        Strikingly, the impact of Treatment 1 (where we offered accounts in the name only of
someone in El Salvador) on savings was much smaller in magnitude and not statistically
9
  In Treatments 2 and 3, upon request migrants would also have been allowed to open an account for someone in El
Salvador only (the account offered in Treatment 1). No migrants made such a request.
10
   Moving from Treatments 0 to 3, marketing pitch content was only added (never subtracted), so the marketing
pitches were “nested” in the same way that the product offers were.
11
   These impacts are large in economic magnitude. For example, Treatment 3 leads to an increase of $285 in average
account balances (across all accounts at the partner bank) in the 12 months post-treatment. By comparison, average
balances at the partner bank were just $183 in the comparison group (Treatment 0) over the same period.

                                                                                                                3
significantly different from zero. This result is also important, as it reveals that the frequently-
made policy recommendation to foster savings in migrants’ home countries by encouraging
migrants to remit directly into savings accounts of remittance recipients would be much less
effective, compared to interventions that also improved and encouraged migrant monitoring and
control over home-country savings.
       We also provide additional evidence suggestive that the increases in savings due to
Treatment 3 are due to improvements in migrant ability to control recipient savings in El
Salvador. We show that savings increases in joint accounts at the partner bank (shared by
migrants and someone in El Salvador) are concentrated among migrants who revealed a demand
for control over remittance uses in the baseline (pre-treatment) survey (for example, among
migrants who had previously sent funds to El Salvador for others to administer, or who were
aware of disagreements between migrants and recipients over the use of remittances).
       In addition, although both Treatments 2 and 3 offered joint accounts shared by migrants
and someone in El Salvador, take-up of these accounts was statistically significantly higher in
Treatment 3, when migrant-only accounts were also offered. This pattern is suggestive of decoy
effects (Laran et al 2011, Chatterjee and Rose 2012). Offering migrant-only accounts as part of
the menu of products may have drawn attention to the control features of accounts offered. The
joint account, while not allowing the same degree of full control as the migrant-only account,
provided greater control than most accounts that migrants remit into: it provided the migrant the
opportunity to check balances and an ATM card with which to withdraw from the account.
Offering the migrant-only account alongside the joint account in Treatment 3 may have
encouraged migrants to pay more attention to the control features of the joint account.
       We also provide evidence suggesting that our treatment effects do not derive from the
marketing pitches alone. Joint account savings at other banks (aside from our partner bank) are
not affected by the treatments. We interpret this as evidence that our offer of accounts at our
partner bank were necessary to produce the effects on savings we observe.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides details on the
study design. Section 3 describes the characteristics of the sample. Section 4 presents the main
empirical results. Section 5 provides discussion and additional analyses. Section 6 concludes.
II. Study Design
Sampling Protocol and Baseline Survey

                                                                                                       4
       Study participants are immigrants in the greater Washington D.C. area. To be eligible for
inclusion in the sample, individuals had to have: 1) been born in El Salvador, 2) entered the U.S.
for the first time within the last 15 years, and 3) sent a remittance to someone in El Salvador
within the last 12 months.
       Migrants were recruited as follows. We stationed our survey team at the two Salvadoran
consulates in the Washington DC area (in DC and in Woodbridge, Virginia). The main services
sought by study participants at the consulate were passport renewals, civil registration (of births,
deaths, and marriages), and assistance with processing of Temporary Protected Status (a special
provision allowing temporary legal work for Salvadorans and other nationalities who entered the
U.S. after natural disasters or civil strife in the home country). The consulate of El Salvador
serves Salvadorans regardless of their legal status, and so the sample likely includes both
documented and undocumented migrants (we intentionally did not ask any questions related to
immigration status.) The El Salvador consulate endorsed our study; intermittently, a consular
staffer would make an announcement in the waiting area endorsing participation in the study.
       Survey team members were mostly of Salvadoran origin, and mostly female. Survey team
members approached individuals in the waiting area of the consulate, inviting them to participate
in the study. The DC baseline survey fieldwork ran from June 2007 to January 2008. Individuals
were told the name of the study, the academic institutions involved, and that the survey was
about “Salvadorans who send remittances and their family who receive them in El Salvador.”
Individuals were asked the three screening questions (above), and if eligible were invited to
participate. Those who agreed and signed consent forms were administered the baseline survey at
the consulate. Of 5,288 people approached at the consulate, 3,611 passed the screening
questions, and 1,986 agreed to participate and completed the baseline survey.
       After completion of a migrant baseline survey in the DC area, a separate survey team
attempted to survey the individual in El Salvador whom the migrant identified as his or her
primary remittance recipient (or “PRR”). The survey team successfully completed 1,338 El
Salvador household surveys between November 2007 and June 2008. After attempting a survey
of an El Salvador household (whether successfully completed or not), a project staff member (a
“marketer”) in DC then attempted to schedule (by phone) and carry out (in person) a marketing
visit with the corresponding migrant, at which the treatments were administered. Many migrants
were reluctant to make time for these visits, and we were unable to re-contact some respondents

                                                                                                   5
due to invalid or changed phone numbers. Marketers made appointments for 1,054 marketing
visits. (Due to no-shows at the scheduled visits, our final sample size is slightly lower.)
       Marketers carried out marketing visits at locations chosen by migrants. Random
assignment to Treatment 0, 1, 2, or 3 occurred only after a marketing visit with the migrant had
been scheduled, but before the actual visit was carried out. Study participants did not learn their
treatment assignment prior to the actual face-to-face marketing visit. Visits took from 1-2 hours.
Marketers were paid a flat fee for each completed visit that was the same for all treatment
conditions (to avoid any differential incentive to complete visits of different types). The
marketing visits were carried out between December 2007 and July 2008. The four treatments
are described below, and details of marketing scripts are in Online Appendix A.
       Our sample for analysis in this paper is 898 migrants with whom a face-to-face marketing
visit was successfully carried out (along with their associated primary-remittance-recipient
household in El Salvador). While attrition from the baseline survey to completed marketing visits
is certainly detrimental to our sample size, it should not affect the internal validity of the study,
because at no stage prior to the in-person marketing visit did study participants know their
treatment assignment.
       The resulting migrant sample comprises a reasonable cross-section of Salvadoran
migrants in the Washington, D.C. area. Online Appendix Table 1 presents means of several key
baseline variables for observations in our baseline data (column 1), in comparison with
corresponding means for Salvadoran-born and Hispanic individuals in the US Census 2000 in the
Washington DC metro area, separately for males and females. While differences are not
dramatic, there are some key differences between our sample and US Census Salvadorans in the
DC metro area. Focus for the moment on the comparison with column 2, for all Salvadoran-born
individuals regardless of US citizenship. Our sample is more male, at 71% vs. 57%. Our sample
has also arrived somewhat more recently in the US, with 49% and 51% of males and females,
respectively, having been in the US for 5 years or less at the time of survey, compared to
corresponding figures of 33% and 29% for US Census Salvadorans. Our sample is slightly more
educated: 30% and 36% of our sample males and females, respectively, have a high school
degree or more, compared to 27% and 30% of US Census Salvadoran males and females,
respectively. Our sample is less likely to have US citizenship, at 0-1%, compared to 10-12% for
US Census Salvadorans. Finally, our sample is more likely to be married or partnered, at 53%

                                                                                                        6
and 73% of males and females respectively, compared to 45% and 57% for male and female US
Census Salvadorans, respectively. These differences vis-à-vis our baseline sample are quite
similar when restricting the sample of US Census Salvadorans to those without US citizenship
(column 3), and when examining Hispanics without US citizenship (column 4).
Experimental Design
       In conjunction with our partner bank in El Salvador, Banco Agricola, we designed the
savings facilities offered in this project, “Cuenta Unidos” and “Ahorro Directo” (described
further below). Neither of these savings products existed previously. Our study only offered the
new products to study participants randomized into certain treatment conditions. That said,
anyone asking for these new products (say, if they heard about them from study participants)
were allowed to open them by partner bank staff. To reduce contamination of our treatment
effect estimates from spillovers to the comparison group (Treatment 0), our partner bank agreed
not to market or advertise the new products designed for this study in any fashion until the
follow-up survey was implemented (roughly a year after treatment).
       Migrants were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups or a comparison
group, each with equal (25%) probability. We randomized after stratifying migrants into 48 cells
representing unique combinations four baseline categorical variables: gender (male, female), US
bank account ownership (yes, no), primary remittance recipient’s relationship to migrant (parent,
spouse, child, other), and years in US category (0-5, 6-10, 11-15). Stratified randomization was
carried out between the completion of the baseline survey and the marketing visit attempt;
because not all marketing visits were successful, it is not guaranteed that treatment conditions are
precisely balanced on the stratification variables.
       Treatments were administered in the marketing visits mentioned above. Migrants in the
comparison group (labeled Treatment 0) were not offered any new products. (Because this study
investigates control over savings, to avoid confusion we refer to Treatment 0 as the “comparison
group”, not the “control group.”) The three treatment groups were labeled 1, 2, and 3. The
presence of the comparison group allows us to observe outcomes for a comparable sample where
none of the products were offered.
       To help track migrants’ remittance behavior after the visit, all visited migrants were given
a special card (called a “VIP card”) that provided a discount for sending remittances via
Banagricola remittance locations in the DC area. Banco Agricola’s normal remittance charge is

                                                                                                   7
$10 for a remittance up to $1,500, and the VIP card allowed the migrant to send a remittance for
a randomly-determined price of either $4, $5, $6, $7, $8, or $9 (once randomly assigned at the
outset, the price was fixed for the validity period of the card).12 Eligibility for the card was
conditional on the migrant presenting an identification document of some sort (usually a
Salvadoran passport). Migrants were told to bring an identification document in the initial phone
call making the appointment for the marketing visit.
Treatment Groups
Treatment 0 (comparison group): Encouragement to remit into bank account of someone in El
Salvador
         Migrants assigned to Treatment 0 were visited by a marketer who encouraged them to
remit into El Salvador bank accounts. Marketers emphasized the benefits of remitting funds
directly into accounts and of remittance-recipient access to funds via ATM/debit cards (rather
than having to wait in a teller line to receive a remittance). Migrants were offered the VIP card,
but were not offered any new savings facilities.
         This generic pitch to remit into bank accounts was included in the control condition to
ensure that any increases in savings seen in Treatments 1, 2, or 3 (vs. corresponding changes in
Treatment 0) was not due simply to the encouragement provided by the marketers to remit into
bank accounts in El Salvador.
Treatment 1: Offer of account for someone in El Salvador
         In Treatment 1, marketers also emphasized the same benefits of remitting into bank
accounts (as in Treatment 0), and provided the VIP card. But unlike in Treatment 0, in Treatment
1 this was combined with an offer of assistance in setting up an account in the name of someone
in El Salvador, into which the migrant could remit. While the migrant would be able to make
deposits into this account, the migrant would not be able to observe the balance of and
withdrawals from this account. Relative to Treatment 0, the Treatment 1 marketing pitch also
added a brief comment that “savings for your remittance recipient in El Salvador” was a benefit
of the Treatment 1 offer (but with no other elaboration on the general benefits of bank accounts).
To equalize account-opening costs across Treatments 1 and 2, this remittance-recipient-only

12
   This remittance price randomization was independent of the randomization into Treatments 0, 1, 2, or 3, and so
does not confound interpretation of any differences across treatments. In addition, migrants did not learn the actual
discounted VIP price until after the marketing visit had concluded. The remittance price randomization was
implemented for a separate study within the same study population on the impact of remittance prices on the
frequency and amount of remittances (Aycinena, Martinez, and Yang 2010).

                                                                                                                        8
account offered in Treatment 1 was exactly the same product (Cuenta Unidos) offered in
Treatment 2. The difference was that in Treatment 1 we did not facilitate making the migrant a
joint account-holder on the Cuenta Unidos account.
        Migrants could identify anyone in El Salvador as the account holder (not just the
“primary remittance recipient” or PRR to whom the baseline survey was administered.) If
migrants were interested, they filled out forms to provide the name, address, and phone number
of the individual in El Salvador for whom the account was intended. The marketer offered to let
the migrant use a project cell phone to call the person in El Salvador during the visit to inform
them of the new account.13 Within the next few days, project staff arranged by phone for the
individual in El Salvador to meet with the branch manager of the nearest Banco Agricola branch
in El Salvador to complete the final account-opening procedures in person.
        Effects of Treatment 1 on take-up and savings accumulation (vis-à-vis Treatment 0)
would reflect the impact of offering assistance with account-opening procedures. In addition,
relative to Treatment 0, Treatment 1 potentially improves what one might call the “identity
precision” of remittances and savings: the migrant’s ability to channel remittances towards a
particular person’s savings account. Because the account offered in Treatment 1 is in the name of
someone in El Salvador, any impacts found could not be due to changes in the migrant’s ability
to monitor or control savings balances. Even if it failed to offer migrants greater monitoring or
control, migrants might have found the account offered in Treatment 1 attractive if they thought
that a savings account would be beneficial for the recipient, or if they wanted to use a recipient’s
savings account as a safe and convenient destination for remittances to that recipient.
Treatment 2: Offer of joint account for migrant and someone in El Salvador
        In Treatment 2, we offered migrants the “Cuenta Unidos” account which was newly
designed for this project. This savings facility allows joint ownership by both an individual in El
Salvador and the migrant in the US. Joint account owners in both the US and El Salvador had
ATM cards and full access to account information. Migrants could deposit funds into the account
via remittances, withdraw with their ATM card via US ATMs, and check the balance on the
account by calling a toll-free U.S. telephone number. Joint account owners in El Salvador could
deposit and withdraw using their ATM cards or via bank tellers.

13
  To mitigate any possibility that talking to the primary recipient might have an effect on outcomes of interest,
migrants assigned to Treatment 0 were also offered a complimentary phone call to the primary recipient from the
project cell phone.

                                                                                                                    9
         The substantive content conveyed by the marketing pitch in Treatment 1 was also
conveyed in Treatment 2, but in addition, the Treatment 2 marketing pitch also noted that both
the migrant and the El Salvador account holder could verify the balance on the Cuenta Unidos
account, and that the migrant could withdraw funds from the account from the US.
         If migrants were interested in Cuenta Unidos, they filled out account-opening forms. As
in Treatment 1, migrants provided contact information for the joint account holder in El
Salvador, and marketers and other project staff facilitated the account opening process on the El
Salvador side (by offering the migrant a free call on their project cell phone and arranging the
account opening appointment in El Salvador). Migrants could identify anyone in El Salvador as
the joint account holder. Migrants had the option to not have joint ownership of the new account
(in other words, they could replicate the account offered in Treatment 1).14 Compared to
Treatment 1, Treatment 2 offered migrants the ability to monitor the savings of family members,
but did not provide full control over the funds. The joint account holder in El Salvador had
complete freedom to withdraw the entire savings balance from the account.
Treatment 3: Offer of joint account for migrant and someone in El Salvador, plus migrant-only
account
         Treatment 3 nests Treatment 2, while adding an additional savings facility: an account
exclusively in the migrant’s name, known as “Ahorro Directo” (also newly designed for the
project). This is an account only in the name of the migrant. The migrant could deposit into the
account by remitting into it, and received an ATM card for withdrawals at US ATMs.15
         In this marketing visit, Cuenta Unidos and Ahorro Directo were offered to the migrant in
sequence. Cuenta Unidos was offered first, using a marketing script identical to the one used for
Treatment 2. The marketing script for Ahorro Directo, which followed, emphasized its
usefulness for exclusive control over funds, since the account would not be shared with anyone
else. The script noted that no one other than the client would be able to check account balances,
have access to the account, or even know of the existence of the account. The script also noted
that no intermediaries (e.g., family members) would be needed for the client to save in El
14
   However, all accounts we assisted in opening in Treatment 2 were joint accounts. Not once did a migrant request
to forego joint ownership of Cuenta Unidos in Treatment 2.
15
   A question that arises is why migrants would not have opened their own bank accounts in El Salvador prior to
being offered them by our project. Our results will indeed show that the marketing and account-opening assistance
offered by our project led to opening of these accounts. While our study is not designed to shed light on these
barriers directly, it is likely that the reduction in transaction costs of account opening due to our account-opening
assistance was non-trivial.

                                                                                                                   10
Salvador. In addition, the script noted the benefit of improved security if visiting El Salvador by
reducing the need to carry large amounts of cash.16
         For the purpose of the study, it is important to be able to rule out that any differences
across Treatments 2 and 3 are due to differences in transaction costs. Therefore, in Treatment 3,
if migrants wanted to open an Ahorro Directo account, we required them to also open a Cuenta
Unidos account, ensuring that account opening transaction costs were identical across
Treatments 2 and 3.17 In addition, migrants were allowed to open an account only in the name of
a beneficiary in El Salvador (as in Treatment 1) if they requested it.18
         In sum, Treatment 3 offered the migrant the greatest ability to control funds in savings
accounts in El Salvador, unlike Treatment 2 where ownership had to be joint with someone else.
The difference in takeup and savings between Treatments 2 and 3 therefore reveals the
incremental impact of offering migrants the ability to exclusively control their El Salvador
savings balances.
Other important notes on the treatment conditions
         It is important to be clear that the pitch for each product did not vary across treatment
conditions. However, because treatments differed in the products offered, treatments did involve
different pitches that were delivered alongside their associated products. In particular, the joint
account, Cuenta Unidos, was offered in both Treatments 2 and 3, but the pitch that accompanied
that product offer was identical across those two treatments. In Treatment 3, Ahorro Directo was
also offered, with its own additional pitch. Online Appendix A provides details on these product-
specific pitches.

16
   Notwithstanding the way Ahorro Directo was marketed, one might imagine that migrants could still have used
these accounts for joint savings with El Salvador persons, for example if migrants sent their Ahorro Directo ATM
cards to individuals in El Salvador to provide them account access. There is no evidence that this occurred, however.
Analysis of withdrawal data from these accounts shows that transactions on these accounts (both deposits and
withdrawals) occurred exclusively on the US side over the period analyzed in this paper. Not a single deposit into or
withdrawal from an Ahorro Directo account occurred in El Salvador through the end of 2009.
17
   By requiring that migrants wanting an Ahorro Directo also open a Cuenta Unidos, the migrant had to get an
individual in El Salvador to physically visit a Banco Agricola branch there to fill out account-opening documents. If
we had not instituted this requirement, then the transaction cost for opening an Ahorro Directo would have been
much lower than for opening a Cuenta Unidos, because the former would not have required a trip by someone in El
Salvador to a Banco Agricola branch. The upshot of this design is that take-up of Ahorro Directo in Treatment 3 will
be a lower bound of what take-up would have been had we not instituted this requirement. We judged that
improving clarity of interpretation was worth the sacrifice of potentially lower take-up in Treatment 3. Note that in
Treatment 1, the individual in whose name the account was opened also had to go to a branch in El Salvador, so
transaction costs are also equalized with Treatment 1.
18
   Again, as in Treatment 2, no migrant assigned to Treatment 3 who chose to open a Cuenta Unidos account opted
to forego joint ownership.

                                                                                                                  11
Outcome variables
         The primary outcome variables we examine are savings balances of various types at the
partner bank, which we obtained from the partner bank’s administrative databases. We focus on
savings balances over the 12 post-treatment months (after the study participant’s marketing
visit), but we also provide estimates of treatment effects up to 48 months post-treatment. To
obtain these data, both the migrant and his or her primary remittance recipient (PRR) were
located in the partner bank’s administrative data via a search on the basis of matching variables
(given name, surname, address, phone number, and age) that were obtained from study
participants before treatment assignment. The search was performed by bank staff on the basis
our instructions. We provided bank staff with the matching variables, to ensure that no additional
identifying data (such as improved addresses and phone numbers) that might have been obtained
from individuals taking up products in the treatment groups would be used in the matching
process. Had we not done so, our treatment effects on bank balances would be biased upwards
because more individuals might have been successfully found in the treatment groups that
involved take-up of bank products.19
         It should be noted that this matching procedure locates only accounts owned by either the
migrant or PRR (or both). In other words, it locates joint accounts shared by migrants and PRRs,
joint accounts shared by migrants and individuals other than the PRR, accounts held only by the
PRR (without migrant co-ownership), and accounts held only by the migrant (without PRR co-
ownership). However, the procedure fails to locate accounts that migrants might have opened in
the name of non-PRRs alone (without migrant co-ownership), because we do not have a pre-
treatment list of potential non-PRR account holders to search for in the database. To the extent
that migrants did open accounts in the name of non-PRRs alone, our results here will understate
the impacts of the interventions on account-opening and savings.
         In addition, we fielded migrant follow-up surveys roughly one year after the initial
product offer (from March to June 2009) to measure impacts on savings outside of the partner
bank. Follow-up surveys of DC-based migrants were conducted via phone by a survey team
calling from El Salvador.
Estimation strategy

19
  We have confirmed that the data quality of the matching variables are not differential by treatment status. Further
confirmation that the quality of the matching did not vary by treatment status is that prior to treatment, savings
balances at the partner bank are balanced across treatment conditions (see Appendix Table 2).

                                                                                                                   12
         Dependent variables of interest in this paper are take-up rates of and balances in savings
accounts at the partner bank. Let Yi be the dependent variable of interest (say, total savings at the
partner bank). Let Z1i be an indicator variable for assignment to Treatment 1, Z2i be an indicator
variable for assignment to Treatment 2, and Z3i be an indicator variable for assignment to
Treatment 3. We estimate treatment effects using the following regression equation:
         Yi =  + α1Z1i + α2Z2i + α3Z3i + Xi’ + μi                                                  (1)
         Coefficients α1, α2, and α3 are the impact on the dependent variable of Treatments 1, 2,
and 3, respectively. We focus on intent to treat (ITT) effects, and so are estimating the effect of
offering (rather than opening) the various accounts.
         The difference (α3- α2) represents the difference in the impact of Treatment 3 vis-à-vis
Treatment 2, and the difference (α2- α1) represents the difference in the impact of Treatment 2
vis-à-vis Treatment 1. Xi is a vector of control variables which include fixed effects (for
marketer, stratification cell, and month of marketing visit when treatments were administered)
and an indicator variable for the individual expressing demand for control over financial
decision-making of primary remittance recipients in the baseline survey (described further
below). μi is a mean-zero error term. For all coefficient estimates, we report robust
(Huber/White) standard errors that account for survey design.20
         One of our key dependent variables is savings balances, which potentially have large
outliers that could have disproportionate influence on the estimates. Therefore, in all results
tables for impacts on savings balances, we focus on impacts on the quartic root of savings
balances, a specification which reduces the influence of outliers (these will be presented in Panel
A of the relevant tables). We also report impacts on the dollar amount of savings balances (in
Panel B), but will consider this specification secondary to the quartic root specification.
III. Sample Characteristics
         Our primary sample for analysis, which we use to analyze impacts on savings at the
partner bank, consists of the 898 DC-area migrants who completed a baseline survey as well as a
marketing visit some months later.
Characteristics of migrants and remittance-receiving households



20
   Specifically, regressions are run with Stata’s “svy” option, where data are “svyset” to account for survey strata
(the stratification cells).

                                                                                                                       13
        Summary statistics are presented in Table 1. Several measures of demand for control are
available in the baseline survey administered to migrants. We construct five separate indicator
variables equal to one (and zero otherwise) from migrant reports of the following: a) the migrant
had ever paid directly for expenditures of remittance recipients in El Salvador, rather than
sending cash (7.7% of migrants did so); b) the migrant had sent funds home for others to
administer on his/her behalf (23.7% of migrants did so); c) the migrant was interested in direct
payments to improve control over remittance uses (20.7% of migrants said yes); d) the migrant
knew anyone who had had conflict with recipients over remittance uses (14.6% of migrants said
yes); e) the migrant has had conflict with his/her own remittance recipients over remittance uses
(4.9% of migrants said yes). We construct an overall indicator of “demand for control” that takes
on the value of 1 if the migrant answers affirmatively to any of the five abovementioned
indicator variables, and 0 otherwise. 51% of migrants answered “yes” to at least one of these
questions.
        The baseline survey also included three questions assessing financial literacy that have
been included in surveys of financial literacy worldwide (Lusardi and Mitchell 2006).21 66%,
64%, and 37% of migrants responded correctly to the questions on (respectively) compound
interest, inflation, and mutual funds. We also asked whether migrants tracked spending and
budgeted expenses. 46% of migrants reported “always” or “almost always” doing so.
Balance and attrition across treatment groups
        It is important to check whether randomization across treatments achieved the goal of
balance in terms of pre-treatment characteristics of study participants. Online Appendix Table 2
presents the means of a number of baseline variables for each treatment group as reported prior
to treatment. The first column of reported p-values is for F-tests of equality of means across the
treatment groups, for each variable separately. The other three columns of p-values are for F-
tests of the pairwise equality of means between observations in Treatment 0 and (respectively)
Treatments 1, 2, and 3. The table also examines account ownership and average savings balances


21
  The questions are: 1) “Suppose that you have $100 in a savings account with a 2% annual interest rate. If you do
not touch the money in this account, how much do you think you will have in five years?” (Options are “less than
$102”, “exactly $102”, and “more than $102”; correct answer is “more than $102”.); 2) “Imagine that the interest
rate in the savings account where you have $100 is 1%, and that inflation is 2% per year. A year from now, would
you be able to buy more, the same, or less than today with the money in the account?” (correct answer is “buy
less”); and 3) “Do you think that the following statement is true or false? To buy stocks in only one company is
more secure than to invest in a mutual fund” (correct answer is “false”).

                                                                                                                 14
of study participants at the partner bank, during 12 months prior to the month of the marketing
visit (specified as the quartic root and in dollars, in parallel to the regression results to come).
         The first 9 variables listed in the table are the stratification variables (gender, US bank
account, relationship to remittance recipient, and years in US category). The p-values on the F-
test of the joint equality of means across all treatments are all far from conventional significance
levels. In only one out of 27 pairwise comparisons with the Treatment 0 mean is there a
statistically significant difference in means (the comparison between Treatments 2 and 0 for
“recipient is migrant’s other relative”).22 This one rejection of equality is not worrisome,
however, as the regression estimates to come will control for stratification cell fixed effects
(estimates will take advantage only of variation in treatment within stratification cell), and all
results are robust to inclusion or exclusion of the stratification cell fixed effects.
         The remaining variables in the table are other variables for which observations were not
stratified prior to treatment assignment. For all these remaining variables, the p-values in
essentially all cases are also large and we cannot reject the hypothesis that the means are
identical across treatment groups.23
         Follow-up attrition rates across treatments are presented in the bottom row of Online
Appendix Table 2.24 The follow-up survey contains 508 observations with valid migrant-reported
savings data, for an overall attrition rate of 43.4%. Attrition rates between Treatment 1 and
Treatment 0 are not statistically significantly different from one another (45% and 49%
respectively). However, observations in Treatment 2 have statistically significantly lower
attrition rates than Treatment 0 (amounting to 10 percentage points lower attrition). In addition,
Treatment 3 has about 7 percentage points lower attrition than does Treatment 0 (and this
difference is marginally statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.13).
         This pattern of treatment-related attrition raises concerns about selection bias in estimates
of treatment effects on outcomes measured in the follow-up survey. In Online Appendix Table 3,


22
   As mentioned earlier, stratification was carried out prior to the marketing visit, and so failure to complete the
marketing visit could have led to imbalance on the stratification variables. In addition, some of the stratification cells
had small numbers of migrants. When the number of migrants in a cell was not a multiple of 4, it was not possible to
assign exactly 25% of migrants within cell to each treatment.
23
   The three exceptions are the pairwise comparison between Treatments 2 and 0 for “migrant’s annual remittances
sent”, “migrant is US citizen”, and “migrant is married or partnered”, in which cases the means are significantly
different at the 10% level. This small number of significant differences can be expected to arise by chance even with
randomization.
24
   Attrition can be due to non-completion of the follow-up survey as well as missing savings data in that survey.

                                                                                                                      15
we investigate balance of baseline characteristics across treatment conditions in the follow-up
sample (N=508), analogous to those examined in Online Appendix Table 2. While across most
variables there does not seem to be dramatic evidence of differences across treatment conditions
in the follow-up sample, there does seem to be worrying imbalance in pre-treatment savings at
the partner bank. An F-test rejects equality of the quartic root of savings at the partner bank prior
to treatment across all treatment groups at the 10% level, and the difference in this variable
between Treatments 3 and 0 is statistically significant at the 5% level.25
         Due to these patterns of differential survey attrition and imbalance in the follow-up
survey sample, care must be taken in interpretation of any treatment effects estimated using this
sample. Our focus, therefore, will be on the outcomes observed in the administrative data from
the partner bank, which are not subject to such concerns.26
IV. Impact of Treatments on Savings
         In this section we examine the impact of the treatments. We first discuss impacts on
account opening and on savings in accounts at the partner bank. We then discuss whether
treatment effects are likely to reflect shifting of funds across savings mechanisms, and in that
context examine treatment effects on savings reported in the follow-up survey.
Impact on account opening at partner bank
         We first estimate equation (1) examining the impact of the various treatment conditions
on take-up of savings accounts at the partner bank. We regress an indicator for the existence of a
certain type of account in the first through 12th month post-treatment on indicators for being
assigned to each of treatment conditions 1 through 3.27 We examine three categories of accounts
separately, distinguishing between the two types of new accounts designed for this research
project (“project accounts”) and other accounts at the partner bank:
         1) Cuenta Unidos accounts. Recall that in Treatments 2 and 3, we offered Cuenta Unidos
         accounts as joint accounts between migrants and someone in El Salvador. In Treatment 1,


25
   It is also the case that, among observations assigned to Treatments 2 and 3, attrition from the follow-up survey is
statistically significantly lower for those with higher post-treatment savings at the partner bank (as observed in the
partner bank’s internal data).
26
   We also implemented follow-up surveys of households of the primary remittance recipient in El Salvador. This
survey suffered from even higher attrition, and similar problems with baseline imbalance in partner bank savings.
We do not present here treatment impacts on outcomes measured in these El Salvador household surveys. That said,
impacts on savings in this sample are consistent with those found in the migrant follow-up sample.
27
   The indicator is equal to 1 if such an account exists at any time during months 1-12 post-treatment (including
accounts that may have been open for only part of this period), and 0 otherwise.

                                                                                                                   16
         the accounts we offered were also Cuenta Unidos accounts, but in that case we did not
         offer migrants the opportunity to be joint account holders – the accounts were offered as
         accounts for individuals in El Salvador alone.28
         2) Ahorro Directo accounts. These accounts were in the name of migrants only.
         3) Other accounts in the name of the migrant or the PRR, excluding those (Cuenta
         Unidos and Ahorro Directo) offered by our project.29
         Coefficient estimates for regression equation (1) where the dependent variable is
existence of a Cuenta Unidos account are regressions labeled (a) in Table 2 (without and with,
control variables, respectively). The coefficient on the constant term in the first column of (a)
indicates that for 5.9% of migrant-PRR pairs assigned to the comparison group (Treatment 0), a
Cuenta Unidos account existed during the 12 months post-treatment. (Individuals in Treatment 0
could have obtained one of these accounts if they learned about their existence independently of
our marketing team, and could have obtained the account opening documents by calling the
partner bank’s toll-free number in the US.)
         The coefficients in the first column of (a) on Treatments 1, 2, and 3 are all positive in
sign, and are each statistically significantly different from zero at the 1% level. The coefficients
indicate that Treatments 1, 2, and 3 led, respectively, to 15.0, 14.1, and 22.1 percentage points
higher likelihood of owning a Cuenta Unidos account. These coefficients are very similar when
control variables included in the regression.
         Regressions (b) of the table are similar, except that the dependent variable is an indicator
for the existence of an Ahorro Directo (migrant-only) account. The constant term in the first
column of (b) indicates that 4.1% of migrants in the comparison group opened such accounts
(independently of the assistance of our project). The proportion is similar among migrants in
Treatments 1 and 2: the coefficients on the indicators for those treatments are small and not


28
   Due to restrictions on how the partner bank was willing to share data with us, we cannot actually differentiate in
the partner bank administrative data between Cuenta Unidos accounts held by both migrants and someone in El
Salvador, and Cuenta Unidos accounts held by only someone in El Salvador (without migrant co-ownership).
However, we know from our project marketing records that in Treatments 2 and 3, not a single migrant who opened
an account for someone in El Salvador in Treatments 2 or 3 opted to forego joint ownership of the account. In
Treatment 1, all accounts opened with the assistance of our project staff were in the name of a person in El Salvador
alone (consistent with instructions for that treatment). In all treatments, migrants could have found other ways of
opening Cuenta Unidos accounts without our assistance, and if they did so the accounts would be either joint
accounts with the migrant or accounts in the name of an El Salvador person alone.
29
   These “other” accounts would have already existed prior to treatment or, if new, would have been opened without
the assistance of our project staff.

                                                                                                                  17
statistically different from zero. The coefficient on Treatment 3, on the other hand, is large and
statistically significant at the 1% level, indicating that migrants in that treatment condition were
23 to 24 percentage points more likely to open an Ahorro Directo account than those in the
comparison group.
         Finally, regressions (c) replace the dependent variable with an indicator for the migrant
owning some other account at the partner bank. The coefficient on the constant in the first
column of (c) indicates that in 26.5 percent of migrant-PRR pairs, either migrant or PRR has
some other account at the partner bank. It appears that none of the treatments led to increased
ownership of these other accounts: there is no large or statistically significant effect of any of the
treatments on this outcome variable in either regression for this dependent variable.
         The bottom rows of the table present p-values of F-tests of the difference between pairs
of treatment coefficients. For opening of Cuenta Unidos accounts, the impact of Treatment 3 is
statistically significantly different from the impact of Treatment 2 at the 5% level, and is
statistically significantly different from the impact of Treatment 1 at the 10% level. This pattern
is also exhibited (at 1% significance levels) in regressions (b) (for opening of Ahorro Directo
accounts). The impact of Treatment 2 is not statistically significantly different from the impact of
Treatment 1 at conventional significance levels in any of the regressions in the table.
Impact on savings at the partner bank
         We estimate equation (1) to examine the impact of the treatments on savings balances at
the partner bank. In Table 3, the dependent variables are average savings balances over the 12
months after treatment for the various categories of accounts. Regressions where dependent
variables are expressed as the quartic root of savings are presented in Panel A of each table, with
corresponding results for savings in dollars in Panel B.
         In the first two columns of Table 3, the dependent variable is savings in Cuenta Unidos
accounts.30 The first column reports coefficient estimates for regressions without control
variables, while the second column provides corresponding estimates but where control variables
are included in the regression (this format is repeated for other dependent variables in subsequent

30
  As mentioned above, due to the ambiguity in the partner bank’s database, we cannot distinguish between Cuenta
Unidos savings in joint accounts from Cuenta Unidos savings in accounts in the name of someone in El Salvador
alone. However, due to the assistance we provided in account opening in Treatments 1, 2, and 3, it is most likely that
in Treatments 2 and 3 accounts opened via this project are joint accounts, while in Treatment 1 they are most likely
not joint accounts. In Treatment 0, the few observed Cuenta Unidos accounts were opened without our staff’s
assistance so we do not know whether these are joint accounts or not.

                                                                                                                   18
columns). All treatments have positive impacts on Cuenta Unidos savings balances. Estimates in
Panel A indicate that each treatment has a positive effect on the quartic root of savings, all at
conventional levels of statistical significance. In Panel B, coefficient estimates of the impact on
the dollar value of savings are also positive, but are mostly not statistically significantly different
from zero at conventional levels.
         Results in the 3rd and 4th columns of the table reveal positive impacts of Treatment 3 on
savings in Ahorro Directo accounts. These effects are statistically significant at the 1% level for
the quartic root of savings, and at the 10% level for savings in dollars.31
         In the 5th and 6th columns, where the dependent variables refer to savings in other partner
bank accounts, point estimates of the effects of Treatment 3 are large in magnitude, but with one
exception (in the first regression in Panel B) they are not statistically significantly different from
zero. Estimated effects of Treatments 2 and 1 are mostly small in magnitude, inconsistent in sign
across specifications, and not statistically significantly different from zero.
         In the last two columns of the table, dependent variables refer to total savings at the
partner bank. Impacts of Treatment 3 are all large, positive, and statistically significantly
different from zero (at the 1% level in Panel A, and the 5% level in Panel B). Point estimates of
the effects of Treatments 2 and 1 are all also positive, but are all smaller in magnitude and are
not statistically significantly different from zero. In Panel A, we can reject that the effect of
Treatment 3 is equal to the effect of either Treatments 2 or 1 at conventional significance levels
(5% or better). In Panel B, the effect of Treatment 3 cannot be distinguished from that of
Treatment 2 at conventional levels, but is statistically significantly larger than the effect of
Treatment 1 at the 10% level.
         The result in the last column (with control variables), Panel B, indicates that Treatment 3
led total savings at the partner bank to be larger by $282. This is a large increase over mean
partner bank savings in the comparison group ($186).
         To provide a sense of the percentiles of the savings distribution that are contributing to
these treatment effects, Figure 1 presents the cumulative distribution function of the quartic root
of total savings in all project accounts (the dependent variable of the last two columns of Table 3,

31
   Interestingly, coefficients are actually negative for Treatments 2 and 1 in these regressions. This may reflect the
fact that marketing Treatments 2 and 1 focused on encouraging savings in accounts of remittance recipients, and did
not encourage migrant-only accounts. However, we do not highlight these results, since these impacts are mostly not
statistically significantly different from zero (and the statistically significant Treatment 2 coefficient in column 3 is
not robust to inclusion of control variables).

                                                                                                                      19
Panel A). The CDF is truncated on the vertical axis at the 50th percentile to enhance visibility.32
The CDF for Treatment 3 is clearly shifted to the right compared to the CDFs of the other
treatments. While treatment effects show up relatively high in the savings distribution, it is far
from the case that the estimated impacts of Treatment 3 are driven solely by the very topmost
percentiles of the savings distribution.
Exploring shifting across savings mechanisms
        A question that naturally arises at this point is whether the treatments led to increases in
savings overall, or whether increases in savings seen at the partner bank were simply shifted
from other savings mechanisms (e.g., cash, or other banks). That said, even if all increases we
find in partner bank savings were simply reallocations of existing savings held elsewhere, our
results so far would still be revealing of migrant demand for control over home-country savings.
Reallocation of savings across savings mechanisms is in itself a consequential financial behavior
that individuals are not likely to take lightly.
        The most natural type of savings reallocation to examine, which we turn to first, is
shifting of funds from other partner bank accounts to the project accounts. This is an important
type of shifting to examine, since if study participants do shift, it should be easiest to do so from
type of one account to another within the partner bank. The results in Table 3 allow us to easily
check for evidence of shifting of funds within the partner bank. A pattern that would be
consistent with shifting would be negative coefficients on treatment coefficients in columns (c)
where the dependent variable is savings in other (non-project) accounts. In addition, if such
shifting was large enough, we could find no statistically significant impact on total savings at the
partner bank (columns d).
        It turns out that neither pattern emerges. Coefficients in both column (c) regressions are
mostly positive (across Panels A and B), and when negative are small in magnitude and not
statistically significantly different from zero. Indeed, the coefficients on Treatment 3 in column
(c), in both Panels, are positive, large in magnitude, and hover around the threshold of statistical
significance, indicating if anything a positive spillover towards “other” saving (rather than
shifting). In addition, column (d) indicates that, overall, total savings at the partner bank did
increase in response to Treatment 3, an effect that is statistically significant at conventional

32
  Recall from Table 2 that at most (in Treatment 3), only 55% of observations had any account at the partner bank,
so it is expected that there are many zeros in the data. The percentage of observations with zero savings at the
partner bank in Treatments 3, 2, 1, and 0 is, respectively, 55%, 66%, 64%, and 68%.

                                                                                                                20
levels in both Panels. The results in Table 3, in sum, provide no evidence that treatment effects
are driven by shifting of funds within the partner bank.
         Of course, shifting could also occur from funds held outside the partner bank. It is
therefore also useful to examine impacts of the treatments on the stock of savings more broadly,
as reported by respondents in the follow-up survey (administered roughly one year after the
intervention). Negative impacts on certain types of savings would be revealing of shifting, while
there is of course the possibility of positive spillovers on other types of savings, perhaps due to
the marketing pitch delivered with the new account offers.33
         Table 4 presents regression estimates of the impact of each treatment on savings reported
by migrants (the dependent variables are expressed as the quartic root of savings in Panel A and
in dollars in Panel B). The four columns present impacts on savings reported by the DC-based
migrant, (a) in banks in El Salvador, (b) in banks in the U.S., (c) in cash, and (d) in total across
the previous three categories. In both panels, effects of Treatment 3 are positive and large in
magnitude for savings in El Salvador banks, in US banks, and in total, but most of these
coefficients are not statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels. The
exception is the impact of Treatment 3 on the quartic root of savings in the U.S. (Panel A,
column b) which is statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level. It also appears
that the treatment shifted savings away from cash: the Treatment 3 coefficient in column (c) is
negative and significant at the 5% level in both Panels A and B.
         It appears that Treatment 3 had a positive and statistically significant impact on migrant
savings in the US. We note that the point estimates of impacts of Treatment 3 on the dollar value
of El Salvador bank savings and on total savings (Panel B of Table 4) are positive and larger in
magnitude than the impacts on total savings at the partner bank (see Online Appendix Table 4).
If the impacts on total savings at the partner bank were simply due to shifting of funds from other
savings vehicles, then treatment effects in Table 4 should have been smaller in magnitude than
those in Online Appendix Table 4. There is therefore no indication that the impacts on total
savings at the partner bank are simply due to shifting from other savings vehicles.


33
  The qualitative results of Table 3 (that were from regressions with the full 898-observation sample) carry through
in the smaller (N=508) follow-up survey sample. Impacts of the treatments on partner bank savings in this
subsample are presented in Online Appendix Table 4. The pattern of impacts on partner bank savings in the 12
months post-treatment (as well as statistical significance levels) in the smaller follow-up samples correspond to
those in the full sample, and in many cases point estimates are even larger in magnitude.

                                                                                                                  21
         However, recall that (as discussed in Section 3 above) this follow-up sample suffers from
differential attrition related to treatment, as well as imbalance in baseline pre-treatment savings
at the partner bank across treatment conditions. These estimates from the follow-up survey data
should therefore be interpreted with caution, as they may reflect selection bias.34
V. Discussion and Additional Analyses
         We now present additional analyses and discussion to help interpret our results, explore
impacts beyond the first 12 months, and examine impacts on remittances.
Heterogeneity in treatment effects by baseline demand for control
         A central motivation of this study is the hypothesis that the accounts offered to migrants
(particularly those in Treatments 2 and 3) would lead to increased savings because they allowed
migrants to exert greater control over savings in the home country. To test this interpretation of
our results, we examine the extent to which our treatment effects are heterogeneous vis-à-vis the
extent to which migrants, in the baseline survey, expressed demand for control over financial
decision-making in El Salvador primary remittance recipient households.
         Estimates of treatment effect heterogeneity are presented in Table 5. The regressions are
analogous to those of Table 3 where the dependent variables are different types of savings at the
partner bank, but now the treatment indicators are each interacted with an indicator for the
migrant expressing demand for control at baseline (defined above in Section 3; 51% of migrants
have “demand for control”), and an indicator for “no demand for control” (simply one minus the
demand for control indicator). The regressions include all control variables (including the main
effect of the “demand for control” indicator). 35
         The coefficient on each interaction term is the effect of the given treatment on savings for
migrants with or without baseline demand for control. F-tests (with p-values reported at the
bottom of each panel) test the null that the treatment effect is the same across migrants with vs.
without demand for control.
         In column (a) of Panel A the dependent variable is the quartic root of savings in Cuenta
Unidos accounts. The coefficient on Treatment 3 * (Demand for control) is positive and
significant at the 1% level, while that on Treatment 3 * (No demand for control) is much smaller


34
   That said, including controls in the regression for baseline savings at the partner bank (the quartic root and in
dollars) has essentially no effect on the treatment coefficient point estimates or standard errors in Table 4.
35
   Main effects for each treatment do not need to be included because they are fully interacted with “demand for
control” and “no demand for control”.

                                                                                                                       22
in magnitude and is not significant at conventional levels. This pattern also holds for the
Treatment 2 interaction terms. In both these cases, an F-test rejects (at the 5% level) equality of
the treatment effects across migrants with and without demand for control. In column (a) of
Panel B, where the dependent variable is expressed in dollars, the qualitative pattern of results is
the same, but significance levels are lower and F-tests cannot reject equality of coefficients
across migrants with and without demand for control. This pattern of treatment effect
heterogeneity for Treatments 3 and 2 is consistent with migrants exerting control over
remittance-recipient savings in accounts jointly held by migrants and remittance recipients.
       Interestingly, unlike in column (a), in column (b) (where the dependent variable is
savings in migrant-only Ahorro Directo accounts) it is not the case that Treatment 3 has greater
impact on savings among migrants with demand for control. In fact, the pattern is reversed: in
both panels, only Treatment 3 * (No demand for control) is statistically significant at
conventional levels, it is substantially larger in magnitude than the coefficient on Treatment 3 *
(Demand for control). F-tests reject (at the 5% level) the equality of the coefficients.
       The contrasting results in columns (a) and (b) suggest that migrant desire to control
savings decision-making is associated with the objectives behind savings in the home country,
and therefore choice of savings product. Migrants with demand for control may desire savings to
be used to primarily for objectives of the remittance recipient, and seek to exert control to help
ensure the objectives are met. For example, migrants may seek control over savings to help El
Salvador households build up buffer stocks (precautionary savings) that can be accessed quickly
by the household in emergencies. This may be the reason behind the differentially large effect of
Treatment 3 on joint account savings (columns a and b) for migrants with demand for control.
       Migrants without demand for control, on the other hand, may be saving primarily to
achieve their own objectives (objectives not shared with the remittance recipient). For these
migrants, access to bank accounts by El Salvador individuals is immaterial, so they are not
attracted to joint accounts. For example, such migrants may simply want to keep some savings in
El Salvador for themselves, to provide easy access during visits home or as a safe place to keep
funds in case the migrant is deported and faces difficulty accessing US bank accounts. These
migrants therefore save only in the migrant-only accounts. This may explain the differentially
large effect of Treatment 3 for migrants without demand for control in column (b).



                                                                                                     23
         In columns (c) and (d), analogous results are presented for savings in other types of
accounts (not offered by the project) and for total savings at the partner bank. In Panel A’s
results for the quartic root of these savings variables, while the coefficient on the Treatment 3
interaction term is larger for migrants with than without demand for control, we cannot reject at
conventional levels that these coefficients are equal to one another. In Panel B, on the other hand
(savings in dollars), the Treatment 3* (Demand for control) coefficient is larger than that on
Treatment 3 * (No demand for control) at the 10% level in both columns.
Decoy effects
         One pattern in the results is that the impacts related to the joint account (Cuenta Unidos)
is higher in Treatment 3 than in Treatment 2. This pattern is most prominent in analysis of
impacts on account opening in Table 2, regressions (a): the coefficient on Treatment 3 is larger
than that on Treatment 2 (by about 8 percentage points), and the difference between the two is
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level. The same qualitative pattern also
arises for treatment effects on savings in joint accounts (first two columns of Table 3, Panel A):
the coefficient on Treatment 3 is larger than the coefficient on Treatment 2, although differences
are not statistically significant in this case.
         This pattern is a bit of a puzzle for standard models of economic decision-making, since
the Cuenta Unidos joint account was offered in both Treatment 3 and Treatment 2. One
explanation for this result is that the offer of the migrant-only Ahorro Directo account in
Treatment 3 had a “decoy effect” on demand for the joint account.36 Other research has
documented decoy effects, or shifts in preference for a certain option when presented with
another option that might be thought to be irrelevant. For example, Laran, Dalton and Andrade
(2011) find that priming brands such as Walmart increases consumers’ cost consciousness and
subsequently reduces their spending intentions—even on alternative products. Chatterjee and
Rose (2012) found that people primed with cash would then focus on the costs of products while
those primed with credit cards would focus on the benefits. Then they introduced “decoy
products”: in the cash option they introduced a decoy for the benefits choice, while in the credit
card option they introduced a decoy for the costs choice. This countered the initial priming,
reducing the salience of the benefits choice for the credit card prime and of the cost choice for


36
   Recall that the “pitch” for the joint account was the same in both Treatments 2 and 3. The difference between the
treatments was that Treatment 3 also offered the Ahorro Directo migrant-only account, with its own separate pitch.

                                                                                                                  24
the cash prime. In other words, the existence of an additional product with certain features
functions exactly as priming through other sources does: it focuses the attention of the individual
on those features in evaluating all the products.
       In our study, migrants who were offered both the joint account and the migrant-only
account (Treatment 3) were more likely to open the joint account than those who were offered
only the joint account (Treatment 2). That is, the presence of a third option changed the
migrants’ valuation of the joint account. We believe this likely represents a decoy effect in the
sense of the literature referenced above. A related concept in economics is a menu effect; both
are violations of the independence of irrelevant alternatives axiom.
       In our case, we think the effect of the option of a private savings account focused the
migrants on the control features of the joint account, increasing their valuation of the joint
account. Marketing of the migrant-only savings product emphasized the importance of control
over savings. It is likely that this caused migrants to consider the control aspects of the joint
account more so than when the joint account was offered in isolation. As in Laran et al (2011),
where the addition of Walmart to a choice set primed subjects to weight cost more, offering the
migrant-only account likely focused migrants on the control features of the joint account.
Ruling out that effects are due to marketing pitch alone
       One question that arises is whether treatment effects are due to the marketing pitch alone,
or whether it is crucial that the intervention offered the accounts and account-opening assistance
at the partner bank. The concern is that the set of marketing pitches implemented might have
been enough to encourage migrants to exert control over funds in joint accounts that already
existed or that they could easily set up on their own. Then the intervention’s offer of the joint
accounts at the partner bank (and account-opening help) may have been superfluous.
       To test this, we use the migrant follow-up survey data to check whether Treatment 3 led
to increases in savings held jointly by migrants and El Salvador individuals at other (non-partner)
banks. If the intervention’s offer of assistance opening joint accounts at the partner bank was
superfluous, and the marketing pitch was all that mattered, then we should also see Treatment 3
have positive effects on savings at other banks (many of whose branch locations may have been
more conveniently located for family members in El Salvador).
       Regression results are in Online Appendix Table 5. The dependent variables in the two
columns are savings reported by the migrant in joint accounts outside the partner bank shared

                                                                                                    25
with primary remittance recipients (column 1) and with other people, not including the primary
remittance recipient (column 2). Dependent variables are expressed as the quartic root in Panel
A, and in dollars in Panel B. There is no indication that Treatment 3 affects savings in joint
accounts with primary remittance recipients outside of the partner bank: Treatment 3 coefficients
in columns 1 or 2 are statistically significantly different from zero. (Interestingly, there does
seem to be an effect of Treatment 2 on joint savings with non-PRRs outside of the partner bank,
which is positive and statistically significant at the 10% level.)
       We conclude from this analysis that the marketing pitch alone cannot explain Treatment
3’s impact on savings at the partner bank, and that it was crucial that the treatment offered actual
bank accounts and assistance in opening them.
Longer-term impacts
       Our results so far refer to savings roughly one year after treatment. Outcomes in
administrative data are average savings balances over the 12 post-treatment months, while
outcomes in the follow-up survey refer to savings stocks at a point in time about 12 months post-
treatment. An important question is whether the effects of the treatment extended further in
time. Because we did not administer further follow-up surveys, this analysis is limited to savings
outcomes in the administrative data of our partner bank.
       It is important to note that our agreement with the partner bank was that general
marketing of the new products designed for the project (Cuenta Unidos and Ahorro Directo)
would be restricted until administration of the follow-up survey. During this period, the new
products were only offered by our project marketing staff on a face-to-face basis to study
participants, and there was no marketing of these products to customers more generally. This was
done to reduce the extent to which marketing spillovers across treatment and comparison groups
would contaminate (and attenuate) our treatment effect estimates. After the follow-up survey,
roughly one year after the treatments were administered, the partner bank did begin marketing
the Cuenta Unidos and Ahorro Directo accounts broadly in both the U.S. and in El Salvador.
Generalized take-up of the new products could therefore lead all treatment groups to become
increasingly similar to one another in terms of product usage, preventing the data from revealing
whether treatment effects persist over time.
       This does turn out to be the case. In Table 6 we examine impacts of the treatments on
total savings across accounts at the partner bank in 6-month windows up to 48 months post-

                                                                                                    26
treatment. (In all respects, the regressions are analogous to that of the last column of Table 3,
except that average savings balances are measured over differing months post-treatment.) Results
in the first two columns reflect results reported previously in Table 3: there are positive and
statistically significant effects of Treatment 3 on total partner bank savings in months 1-6 and
months 7-12 post-treatment, in both the quartic root and dollar specifications. The impact
persists into months 13-18 post-treatment: the coefficient on Treatment 3 in the quartic
specification remains positive and statistically significant at the 5% level (although the
coefficient in the dollar specification has declined somewhat in magnitude and is no longer
statistically significantly different from zero). In remaining columns of the table, coefficients on
Treatment 3 in both panels further decline in magnitude, and in no case are they statistically
significantly different from zero at conventional levels.37
         These results do not allow us to tell whether the impact of Treatment 3 is truly only
temporary (lasting no more than 18 months post-treatment), or whether persistent treatment
impacts are obscured by the fact that the partner bank did market the Cuenta Unidos and Ahorro
Directo accounts more broadly after the follow-up survey was concluded (roughly 12 months
after the treatments were administered).38
Impact on remittances
         Increases in savings in El Salvador that we have documented (in response to Treatment 3
in particular) could either reflect an increase in the recipient savings rate (keeping remittances
constant) or, alternatively, increases in remittances sent by the migrant. We therefore examine
impacts of the treatments on remittances sent by the migrant to El Salvador.


37
   Online Appendix Figures 1-4 provide month-by-month detail on savings balances by treatment group. Appendix
Figure 1 displays monthly total savings balances, graphically depicting the pattern found in Table 6: balances in
Treatment 3 being clearly higher through roughly months 12-18, after which balances in other treatment groups
catch up. Appendix Figures 2 and 3 display balances in, respectively, joint (Cuenta Unidos) and migrant-only
(Ahorro Directo) accounts. For each of these types of accounts offered by the project, it is clear that, after roughly
the 12th-18th month post-treatment, balances rise in the control group and other treatment groups that were not
originally offered these accounts by our research project. When it comes to savings balances in other accounts at the
partner bank (shown in Appendix Figure 4), the pattern is slightly different, with Treatments 1 and 2 catching up
with Treatment 3 but with balances in the control group remaining persistently lower. Overall it appears that catch
up in the control group after months 12-18 is driven by control group savings in the project accounts (Cuenta Unidos
and Ahorro Directo).
38
   While not dispositive, the time trend in savings in the comparison group (Treatment 0) is suggestive that the
partner bank’s broad marketing of these accounts did lead savings in the comparison group to catch up with those in
the other treatments. The bottom row of Table 6, Panel B displays mean savings in the comparison group, which
show a distinct rise in the 13-18-month post-treatment period (which appears persistent to later periods), coinciding
with the timing of the partner bank’s broad marketing of the new accounts.

                                                                                                                   27
         Results are presented in Table 7. Panel A presents main effects of Treatments 3, 2, and 1,
while Panel B presents separate treatment effects for migrants with and without demand for
control. The dependent variable in all columns is monthly remittances sent by the migrant.
         The first and second columns of the table examine migrant remittances sent via the
partner bank in, respectively, the full sample and the sample of migrants completing the follow-
up survey. These are remittances sent to any recipient in El Salvador (we are not able to parse
out only remittances sent to the primary remittance recipient.)39 The results in the second column
are included to facilitate comparison with the third column, which examines remittances to the
primary remittance recipient via all channels (not just the partner bank), as reported by the
migrant in the follow-up survey. For neither sample is an identifiable effect of any treatment on
remittances sent via the partner bank: all coefficients in Panel A are small in magnitude and none
are statistically significantly different from zero. The same conclusion holds when the dependent
variable is remittances that migrants report sending to primary remittance recipients in the
follow-up survey (column 3). In Panel B where separate effects are estimated for migrants with
and without demand for control, there also is no robust evidence of heterogeneous effects of any
of the treatments on remittances.
         In the context of our other findings, the lack of impact of the treatments on remittances
suggests that the increases in savings we found (particularly due to Treatment 3) reflect an
increase in the savings rate (holding constant the flow of remittances to El Salvador).
VI. Conclusion
         This paper expands our knowledge about financial decision-making by international
migrants, and in particular on how they respond to improvements in their ability to monitor and
control financial decision-making in the origin country. We implemented a field experiment that
offered US-based Salvadoran migrants bank accounts that varied in the degree to which migrants
could monitor and control savings in El Salvador-based accounts. We found that the treatment
that offered migrants the greatest degree of control over El Salvador savings (offering both joint
accounts and accounts in the migrant’s name alone) led to substantial increases in savings at the
partner bank. This increase in savings is likely due to enhanced control exerted by migrants; the
effect of the treatment is significantly larger among migrants who report greater demand for such

39
  For the dependent variables in columns 1 and 2, all funds sent to El Salvador are counted as remittances, whether
retrieved by the recipient in cash or sent directly to a bank account (and whether the bank account is joint with the
migrant or in the name of someone in El Salvador only).

                                                                                                                   28
control in the baseline survey. As a caveat, we note that there are no obvious welfare
implications of our results. Increased control exerted by migrants may not necessarily lead to
higher well-being on the part of family members in the origin household. Migrants may be
pursuing objectives that they place in higher regard than do family members back home.
       Another important result of the paper is that simply channeling remittances into bank
accounts in the home country does not in itself promote savings accumulation. This is clearly
demonstrated by the fact that one of our treatments – that did not offer joint accounts, and instead
promoted opening and remitting into bank accounts in the name solely of someone in El
Salvador – had no identifiable impact on savings. But when migrants are given the ability to
monitor and control savings in the home country, the impact on savings accumulation is much
larger. This insight should guide future efforts to facilitate savings accumulation in home-
country households that are connected with international migrants.
       By showing the effects of an intervention that enhanced migrant control over savings in
remittance-recipient households, this study also suggests some high-potential directions for
future research. In particular, it should be fruitful to study the impacts of migrant control over
other remittance uses that may have positive spillovers and wider development impacts, such as
payments for schooling, health care, and investments in microenterprises.


References
Ashraf, N., “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An Experimental Study in
 the Philippines,” American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 4, September 2009.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
 Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006.
Aycinena, Diego, Claudia Martinez A. and Dean Yang, “The Impact of Remittance Fees on
 Remittance Flows: Evidence from a Field Experiment Among Salvadoran Migrants,” mimeo,
 University of Michigan, 2010.
Browning, M., and Chiappori, P.-A., “Efficient Intra-household Allocations: A General
 Characterisation and Empirical Tests,” Econometrica, 66 (6), 1998.
Chatterjee, Promothesh and Randall L. Rose, “Do Payment Mechanisms Change the Way
 Consumers Perceive Products?” Journal of Consumer Research, 38(6), April 2012.



                                                                                                     29
Chen, Joyce, “Migration and Imperfect Monitoring: Implications for Intra-household
 Allocation,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, May 2006.
Chin, A., L. Karkoviata, and N. Wilcox, “Impact of Bank Accounts on Migrant Savings and
 Remittances: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” mimeo, University of Houston, 2010.
De Laat, Joost, “Household Allocations and Endogenous Information,” mimeo, University of
 Quebec at Montreal, 2008.
Dercon, Stefan and Pramila Krishna, “In Sickness and in Health: Risk Sharing within
 Households in Rural Ethiopia,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 108, No. 4, August 2000.
Dubois, P. and E. Ligon, “Incentives and Nutrition for Rotten Kids: Intrahousehold Food
 Allocation in the Philippines,” mimeo, University of California (Berkeley), 2005.
Duflo, Esther. 2003. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and Intra-Household
 Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review. 17(1).
Goldstein, Markus Alain de Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Is a Friend in Need a Friend
 Indeed? Inclusion and Exclusion in Mutual Insurance Networks in Southern Ghana,” in Stefan
 Dercon (ed.) Insurance against Poverty, Oxford University Press, 2005.
Hertzberg, Andrew, “Exponential Individuals, Hyperbolic Households,” working paper,
 Columbia Business School, 2011.
Kinnan, Cynthia, “Distinguishing Barriers to Insurance in Thai Villages,” working paper,
 Northwestern University, 2011.
Laran, Juliano, Amy Dalton, and Eduardo Andrade, “The Curious Case of Behavioral Backlash:
 Why Brands Produce Priming Effects and Slogans Produce Reverse Priming Effects,” Journal
 of Consumer Research, 37, April 2011.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert Pollak, “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 101, 1993, pp. 988-1010.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
 Retirement Wellbeing,” Working Paper, Pension Research Council, Wharton School,
 University of Pennsylvania, 2006.
Lusardi, A. and O.S. Mitchell, “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of Planning,
 Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, 2007.
Manser, M. and M. Brown, “Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A Bargaining
 Analysis,” International Economic Review, 21, 1980.

                                                                                                30
Martinez, Claudia, “Intra-Household Allocation and Bargaining Power: Evidence from Chile,”
 Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 61, No. 3, 2013.
McElroy, M. and M. Horney, "Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: Towards a Generalization
 of the Theory of Demand," International Economic Review, 22/2, 1981.
Orozco, Manuel, “The Remittance Marketplace: Prices, Policy, and Financial Institutions,” Pew
 Hispanic Center Report, 2004.
Pew Hispanic Center, Billions in Motion: Latino Immigrants, Remittances, and Banking.
 Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center and Multilateral Investment Fund, 2002.
Platteau, Jean-Philippe, “Traditional Systems of Social Security and Hunger Insurance: Past
 Achievements and Modern Challenges,” in E. Ahmad, J. Dreze, J. Hills, and A. Sen (eds.),
 Social Security in Developing Countries, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
Rangel, Marcos, “Alimony Rights and Intrahousehold Allocation of Resources: Evidence from
 Brazil,” Economic Journal, Vol. 116, 2006, pp. 627-658.
Ratha, Dilip, “Workers' Remittances: An Important and Stable Source of External Development
 Finance,” in Global Development Finance 2003: Striving for Stability in Development
 Finance. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2003.
Schaner, Simone, “Intrahousehold Preference Heterogeneity, Commitment, and Strategic
 Savings: Theory and Evidence from Kenya,” working paper, Dartmouth College, 2011.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas, “Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of Household and
 Family Decisions,” in Jere Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Development
 Economics. New York: North-Holland, 1995.
Terry, Donald F. and Steven R. Wilson, eds., Beyond Small Change: Making Migrant
 Remittances Count. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank, 2005.
Udry, Christopher, “Gender, Agricultural Productivity and the Theory of the Household”,
 Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1996.
World Bank, Global Economic Prospects 2006: Economic Implications of Remittances and
 Migration. Washington, DC, 2006.
World Bank, Close to Home: The Development Impact of Remittances in Latin America.
 Washington, DC, 2007.
Yang, Dean, “Migrant Remittances,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 25, No. 3, Summer
2011, pp. 129-152.


                                                                                              31
Figure 1: Cumulative distribution function of quartic root of total savings at partner bank,
 by treatment

     1



  0.95



   0.9



  0.85



   0.8



  0.75



   0.7



  0.65



   0.6



  0.55



   0.5
         0



               1



                       2



                                3



                                        4



                                                 5



                                                          6



                                                                 7



                                                                          8



                                                                                  9



                                                                                           10



                                                                                                   11



                     Treatment 0            Treatment 1           Treatment 2            Treatment 3       12




Note: CDF truncated at 0.5 on vertical axis. Variable depicted is identical to the dependent variable in regressions of
 Table 3, Panel A, column (d).




                                                                                                                    32
Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                                                      Mean      Std. Dev.    10th pct.     Median      90th pct.   Num. Obs.
Treatment indicators and stratification variables
      Treatment 0 (no savings facility offered)                                        0.24         0.43            0            0            1          898
      Treatment 1 (remittance recipient account only)                                  0.23         0.42            0            0            1          898
      Treatment 2 (joint account)                                                      0.27         0.45            0            0            1          898
      Treatment 3 (joint + migrant account)                                            0.25         0.43            0            0            1          898
      Migrant is female                                                                0.29         0.45            0            0            1          898
      Migrant has US bank account                                                      0.63         0.48            0            1            1          898
      Recipient is migrant's parent                                                    0.55         0.50            0            1            1          898
      Recipient is migrant's spouse                                                    0.11         0.31            0            0            1          898
      Recipient is migrant's child                                                     0.04         0.19            0            0            0          898
      Recipient is migrant's other relative                                            0.30         0.46            0            0            1          898
      Migrant has been in US 0-5 years                                                 0.50         0.50            0            0            1          898
      Migrant has been in US 6-10 years                                                0.40         0.49            0            0            1          898
      Migrant has been in US 11-15 years                                               0.11         0.31            0            0            1          898

Baseline variables from DC migrant survey
      Migrant's years in the US                                                        5.57         3.60            1            5           11          898
      Migrant has El Salvador bank account                                             0.17         0.38            0            0            1          898
      Migrant's annual income (US$)                                                  30,999       56,292       11,700       24,960       48,822          865
      Migrant's household's annual income (US$)                                      39,620       87,551       10,530       31,200       65,000          896
      Migrant's years of education                                                     8.53         4.17            2            9           12          865
      Migrant's age                                                                   30.88         7.65           22           30           41          894
      Migrant's annual remittances sent (US$)                                         4,990        4,124        1,200        3,900        9,600          898
      Migrant's total hh savings balance (US$)                                        2,851        5,111            0          750        8,100          806
      Migrant is US citizen                                                           0.007        0.082            0            0            0          894
      Migrant hh size in U.S.                                                          4.81         2.15            2            5            8          898
      Migrant is married or partnered                                                  0.59         0.49            0            1            1          897
      Past experience with direct payments                                             0.08         0.27            0            0            0          898
      Sent funds to El Salvador for others to administer                               0.23         0.42            0            0            1          898
      Interested in direct payments to increase control                                0.21         0.41            0            0            1          898
      Aware of disagreements with recipients over remittance uses                      0.15         0.35            0            0            1          898
      Have had disagreements with recipients over remittance uses                      0.05         0.22            0            0            0          898
      Demand for control (union of above five indicators)                              0.51         0.50            0            1            1          898
      Correct answer to compound interest question                                     0.66         0.47            0            1            1          898
      Correct answer to inflation question                                             0.64         0.48            0            1            1          898
      Correct answer to mutual fund question                                           0.37         0.48            0            0            1          898
      Tracks spending and budgets expenses                                             0.46         0.50            0            0            1          897

Baseline variables from El Salvador household survey
      Recipient's total hh savings balance (US$)                                        382        1,732            0            0          380          733
      Recipient's annual remittances received (US$)                                   3,182        2,787          900        2,400        6,000          725

Pre-treatment savings at partner bank
       Savings balance, average over 12 months prior to treatment-quartic (US$)        1.02         2.08            0            0         4.45          898
       Savings balance, average over 12 months prior to treatment (US$)                 243        1,085            0            0          391          898


Notes: Survey data collected from Jun 2007 to Jan 2008 among Salvadoran migrants in Washington DC and from Nov 2007 to Jun 2008 among households in El
Salvador identified as DC migrant's "primary remittance recipient".
Table 2: Impact of treatments on account ownership at partner bank
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Dependent variable: Indicator for existence of given type of account at partner bank during 12 months post-treatment

                                          Cuenta Unidos accounts (in           Ahorro Directo accounts (in          Other accounts in name of
                                            name of someone in El                name of migrant only)                 migrant or primary
                                                 Salvador)*                                                         remittance recipient (PRR)
                                                       (a)                                  (b)                                  (c)

Treatment 3 (joint account +               0.221***          0.204***            0.234***         0.238***              0.020           0.014
            migrant-only account)           (0.034)           (0.034)             (0.033)          (0.031)             (0.042)         (0.041)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                0.141***          0.125***             -0.025           -0.018              -0.003           0.006
                                            (0.030)           (0.031)            (0.016)          (0.017)             (0.041)          (0.040)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)             0.150***          0.135***             -0.013           -0.006              -0.027           -0.028
                                            (0.032)           (0.032)            (0.018)          (0.018)             (0.042)          (0.040)
Constant                                    0.059***         0.557***            0.041***          0.250              0.265***         0.715***
                                             (0.016)          (0.191)             (0.013)         (0.164)              (0.030)          (0.243)

Control variables                                               Y                                    Y                                    Y

Observations                                  898              898                 898              898                 898              898
R-squared                                    0.041            0.145               0.141            0.217               0.001            0.078

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.046            0.040               0.000            0.000               0.591            0.858
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.088            0.081               0.000            0.000               0.274            0.316
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.819            0.784               0.391            0.450               0.555            0.401

Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent variable equal to 1 if migrant or remittance recipient has given type of project account with partner bank (Banco
Agricola), 0 otherwise. Omitted treatment indicator is for Treatment 0 (comparison group). Control variables include: marketer fixed
effects are for the specific individual (out of 9) who conducted the marketing visit; stratification cell fixed effects for each of 48 unique
combinations of stratification variables: gender (male/female), having a US bank account (yes/no), relationship to remittance recipient
(parent/child/spouse/other), and years in US category (0-5 years/6-10 years/11-15 years); treatment month fixed effects; indicator for
migrant demand for control. Treatment months are Nov 2007 through Jul 2008 inclusive.
*Cuenta Unidos accounts opened with project assistance in Treatments 2 and 3 are all joint accounts shared by migrants and someone in El
Salvador, while those opened in Treatment 1 are all accounts in name of primary remittance recipient (PRR) only. Some Cuenta Unidos
accounts may have been opened without project assistance in any of the treatment groups, and in these cases the accounts may be in the
name of PRRs alone or joint between migrants and someone in El Salvador.
Table 3: Impact of treatments on savings in accounts at partner bank
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Dependent variable: Savings balance (US$), average over 12 months post-treatment, in accounts of given type

                                          Cuenta Unidos accounts (in     Ahorro Directo accounts (in   Other accounts (in name of     In total across all accounts
                                            name of someone in El          name of migrant only)           migrant or primary
                                                 Salvador)*                                               remittance recipient)
                                                       (a)                            (b)                           (c)                  (d) = (a) + (b) + (c)
Panel A (quartic root)

Treatment 3 (joint account +               0.387***          0.354***     0.281***          0.305***      0.282             0.206      0.705***        0.639***
            migrant-only account)           (0.108)           (0.114)      (0.089)           (0.094)     (0.198)           (0.192)      (0.215)         (0.212)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                 0.232**          0.231**      -0.079**           -0.057       0.035             -0.006       0.110           0.102
                                            (0.101)          (0.109)       (0.039)          (0.047)      (0.177)           (0.178)      (0.193)         (0.198)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)              0.184**           0.162*        -0.012           -0.004       -0.084            -0.122       0.044           0.001
                                            (0.092)           (0.088)      (0.051)          (0.051)      (0.179)           (0.180)      (0.193)         (0.195)
Constant                                   0.176***            0.920       0.079**           0.004      0.887***          2.747**      1.119***        2.818**
                                            (0.055)           (0.628)      (0.039)          (0.131)      (0.124)          (1.183)       (0.133)        (1.184)

Control variables                                               Y                              Y                             Y                             Y

Observations                                  898              898           898              898          898              898          898              898
R-squared                                    0.013            0.087         0.037            0.117        0.004            0.064        0.016            0.082

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.214            0.334         0.000            0.000        0.220            0.305        0.008            0.017
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.088            0.101         0.001            0.000        0.072            0.105        0.003            0.004
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.671            0.555         0.048            0.091        0.514            0.531        0.741            0.624

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group                         0.176                          0.079                         0.887                         1.119

Panel B (in dollars)

Treatment 3 (joint account +                 79.770           106.543      28.978*          32.533*     187.826*           142.479    296.574**       281.555**
            migrant-only account)           (68.482)          (83.989)     (15.166)         (17.131)    (106.129)         (101.002)    (126.380)      (132.572)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                  70.062           94.661*        -9.074           -6.996      86.995            25.354      147.983        113.018
                                            (45.054)          (55.237)      (6.920)          (8.159)    (109.439)         (110.911)    (119.543)      (126.260)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)               12.693            27.980        -5.605           -5.802      38.339            1.988        45.426         24.166
                                            (13.961)          (21.121)      (7.211)          (8.338)    (101.573)         (102.704)    (102.511)      (105.030)
Constant                                    16.005*           240.552        9.074            6.610    160.836***          382.230    185.914***      629.391*
                                             (8.469)         (163.721)      (6.920)         (15.665)     (56.859)         (317.066)     (57.586)      (366.516)

Control Variables                                               Y                              Y                             Y                             Y

Observations                                  898              898           898              898          898              898          898              898
R-squared                                    0.003            0.035         0.017            0.087        0.003            0.069        0.006            0.056

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.905            0.893         0.005            0.008        0.435            0.357        0.332            0.285
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.329            0.280         0.012            0.015        0.223            0.243        0.074            0.069
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.208            0.197         0.094            0.713        0.700            0.861        0.448            0.540

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group                         16.005                         9.074                        160.836                      185.914

Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent variables are averaged over end-of-month balances in US dollars. See Table 2 for other notes.
*Cuenta Unidos accounts opened with project assistance in Treatments 2 and 3 are all joint accounts shared by migrants and someone in El Salvador, while those
opened in Treatment 1 are all accounts in name of primary remittance recipient (PRR) only. Some Cuenta Unidos accounts may have been opened without project
assistance in any of the treatment groups, and in these cases the accounts may be in the name of PRRs alone or joint between migrants and someone in El Salvador.
Table 4: Impact of treatments on savings reported by migrants in follow-up survey
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Dependent variable: Savings reported in follow-up survey (Mar - Jun 2009)

                                           Savings in El       Savings in the     Savings in cash         In total
                                             Salvador              U.S.
                                                 (a)                 (b)                 (c)          (d) = (a) + (b) +
Panel A (quartic root)

Treatment 3 (joint account +                    0.366              0.711*             -0.445**             0.516
            migrant-only account)              (0.302)             (0.387)             (0.197)            (0.436)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                     0.463               0.227               -0.080             0.581
                                               (0.316)             (0.360)             (0.202)            (0.436)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)                  0.239               0.173               -0.066             0.266
                                               (0.293)             (0.362)             (0.232)            (0.433)

Control Variables                                 Y                  Y                   Y                   Y

Observations                                     508                508                 508                 508
R-squared                                       0.127              0.167               0.147               0.149

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                       0.734              0.186               0.048               0.874
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                       0.636              0.156               0.079               0.556
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                       0.442              0.873               0.949               0.443

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group           0.629              1.573               0.552               2.567

Panel B (in dollars)

Treatment 3 (joint account +                  382.002              450.125          -188.496**            643.630
            migrant-only account)            (271.230)           (356.568)            (94.733)           (455.407)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                  607.438*             -181.102            -19.996             406.340
                                             (342.681)           (305.878)           (100.273)           (468.693)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)                193.795             -122.822             84.552             155.526
                                             (242.484)           (297.461)           (127.252)           (403.441)

Control Variables                                 Y                  Y                   Y                   Y

Observations                                     508                508                 508                 508
R-squared                                       0.087              0.142               0.102               0.119

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                       0.457              0.030               0.031               0.577
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                       0.425              0.064               0.013               0.220
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                       0.189              0.747               0.338               0.494

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group         264.732             599.866             143.036            1007.634


Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Follow-up survey administered from Mar - Jun 2009. Dependent variable is stock of savings in US dollars.
Omitted treatment indicator is for Treatment 0 (comparison group). Control variables include: marketer fixed
effects are for the specific individual (out of 9) who conducted the marketing visit; stratification cell fixed effects
for each of 48 unique combinations of stratification variables: gender (male/female), having a US bank account
(yes/no), relationship to remittance recipient (parent/child/spouse/other), and years in US category (0-5 years/6-10
years/11-15 years); treatment month fixed effects; indicator for migrant demand for control. Treatment months are
Nov 2007 through Jul 2008 inclusive.
Table 5: Heterogeneity in treatment effects by baseline demand for control
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Dependent variable: Savings balance (US$), average over 12 months post-treatment, in accounts of given type

                                           Cuenta Unidos accounts (in Ahorro Directo accounts Other accounts (in name of In total across all accounts
                                             name of someone in El    (in name of migrant only)   migrant or primary
                                                   Salvador)                                     remittance recipient)
                                                      (a)                        (b)                      (c)                 (d) = (a)+(b)+(c)
Panel A (quartic root)
Treatment 3 * Demand for control                   0.572***                      0.113                      0.331                     0.768***
                                                    (0.171)                    (0.110)                    (0.261)                      (0.293)
Treatment 3 * No demand for control                   0.117                   0.511***                      0.070                      0.497*
                                                    (0.135)                    (0.146)                    (0.279)                      (0.302)
Treatment 2 * Demand for control                   0.478***                    -0.119*                      0.047                        0.283
                                                    (0.161)                    (0.072)                    (0.254)                      (0.286)
Treatment 2 * No demand for control                  -0.022                      0.009                     -0.054                       -0.074
                                                    (0.134)                    (0.044)                    (0.256)                      (0.275)
Treatment 1 * Demand for control                      0.121                     -0.114                     -0.355                       -0.340
                                                    (0.110)                    (0.076)                    (0.231)                      (0.253)
Treatment 1 * No demand for control                  0.186                     0.114*                       0.099                        0.326
                                                    (0.140)                    (0.066)                    (0.277)                      (0.298)
Control Variables                                      Y                          Y                            Y                         Y
Observations                                          898                        898                           898                      898
R-Squared                                            0.098                      0.126                         0.068                    0.090
P-value of F-test: equality of interactions with
 Treatment 3                                         0.031                      0.025                         0.490                    0.516
 Treatment 2                                         0.014                      0.100                         0.783                    0.372
 Treatment 1                                         0.722                      0.024                         0.209                    0.091
Mean of dep. var. in comparison group
 Migrants with demand for control                    0.086                      0.129                         0.923                    1.113
 Migrants with no demand for control                 0.277                      0.022                          0.85                     1.13

Panel B (in dollars)
Treatment 3 * Demand for control                    189.768                     -4.669                   299.785**                   484.884**
                                                   (148.826)                  (14.858)                   (130.469)                   (199.087)
Treatment 3 * No demand for control                  16.499                   72.243**                     -27.013                      61.729
                                                    (27.879)                  (29.198)                   (148.808)                   (153.673)
Treatment 2 * Demand for control                   162.918*                    -17.819                    118.489                    263.588*
                                                    (98.902)                  (12.954)                   (111.959)                   (155.977)
Treatment 2 * No demand for control                  24.894                      4.335                     -67.874                     -38.645
                                                    (35.275)                   (6.938)                   (195.811)                   (198.076)
Treatment 1 * Demand for control                     14.106                    -18.008                     -65.784                     -69.687
                                                    (22.881)                  (14.363)                    (96.316)                    (98.699)
Treatment 1 * No demand for control                  36.222                     7.967                       59.510                    103.699
                                                    (30.408)                   (6.471)                   (168.831)                   (171.613)

Control Variables                                      Y                          Y                            Y                         Y
Observations                                          898                        898                           898                      898
R-Squared                                            0.039                      0.101                         0.074                    0.062
P-value of F-test: equality of interactions with
 Treatment 3                                         0.212                      0.013                         0.089                    0.077
 Treatment 2                                         0.173                      0.098                         0.411                    0.228
 Treatment 1                                         0.541                      0.086                         0.494                    0.352
Mean of dep. var. in comparison group
 Migrants with demand for control                   13.637                     16.907                      94.118                     124.662
 Migrants with no demand for control                18.672                      0.252                     235.974                     254.898

Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent variables are averaged over end-of-month balances in US dollars. Regressions need not include main effects of Treatments 3, 2 and 1
because they are fully interacted with "demand for control" and "no demand for control". See Table 2 for other notes.
Table 6: Impact of treatments on savings at partner bank, over time
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Dependent variable: Savings balance (US$), average over given months post-treatment, in total across all partner bank accounts

                Post-treatment months:        1-6            7-12           13-18           19-24           25-30          31-36           37-42          43-48

Panel A (quartic root)
Treatment 3 (joint account +               0.634***        0.626***        0.475**          0.326           0.275          0.322           0.255           0.212
            indiv. migrant account)         (0.207)         (0.214)        (0.221)         (0.206)         (0.207)        (0.210)         (0.207)         (0.218)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                  0.143           0.091          -0.047          -0.045          -0.091         -0.119          -0.122          -0.125
                                            (0.195)         (0.197)        (0.196)         (0.193)         (0.197)        (0.201)         (0.199)         (0.206)
Treatment 1 (remittance recipient            0.056           -0.058         -0.137          -0.172          -0.150         -0.131          -0.096          -0.204
            account)                        (0.190)         (0.192)        (0.200)         (0.203)         (0.212)        (0.223)         (0.220)         (0.221)

Control Variables                              Y               Y              Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y

Observations                                  898             898            898             898             898            898             898             898
R-squared                                    0.083           0.082          0.074           0.067           0.064          0.068           0.070           0.070

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.028           0.016          0.017           0.075           0.075          0.033           0.074           0.127
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.007           0.002          0.006           0.024           0.061          0.052           0.132           0.079
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.671           0.463          0.655           0.544           0.787          0.958           0.903           0.714

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group        1.051           1.056          1.124           1.122           1.112          1.112           1.083           1.152

Panel B (in dollars)
Treatment 3 (joint account +               277.787**       285.323*        211.905         213.830         153.626         31.484          20.687         31.584
            indiv. migrant account)        (120.166)       (156.322)      (227.437)       (219.450)       (211.533)      (169.174)       (220.522)      (274.700)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                 152.104          73.933        -32.024          37.460          25.950        -35.547         -64.035        -111.047
                                           (122.947)       (135.507)      (122.470)       (129.029)       (170.891)      (201.742)       (215.868)      (238.924)
Treatment 1 (remittance recipient            40.049          8.284          7.155          107.273         203.372        178.405         142.401         56.479
            account)                        (96.619)       (119.421)      (126.208)       (127.078)       (183.632)      (215.878)       (210.993)      (228.290)

Control Variables                              Y               Y              Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y

Observations                                  898             898            898             898             898            898             898             898
R-squared                                    0.061           0.051          0.033           0.034           0.036          0.048           0.045           0.046

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.422           0.207          0.234           0.401           0.546          0.674           0.692           0.591
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.079           0.077          0.302           0.603           0.833          0.471           0.572           0.922
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.433           0.663          0.741           0.622           0.432          0.366           0.338           0.443

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group       165.620         206.209        288.509         230.890        248.745         301.652         304.683        357.046


Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent variables are averaged over end-of-month balances in US dollars. Omitted treatment indicator is for Treatment 0 (comparison group). Control
variables include: marketer fixed effects are for the specific individual (out of 9) who conducted the marketing visit; stratification cell fixed effects for each of
48 unique combinations of stratification variables: gender (male/female), having a US bank account (yes/no), relationship to remittance recipient
(parent/child/spouse/other), and years in US category (0-5 years/6-10 years/11-15 years); treatment month fixed effects; indicator for migrant demand for
control. Treatment months are Nov 2007 through Jul 2008 inclusive.
Table 7: Impact of treatments on remittances (sent into bank accounts or as cash)
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

                 Dependent variable:                                               Monthly remittances sent by migrant
                Remittance recipient:                       Anyone in El Salvador         Anyone in El Salvador       Primary remittance recipient
                 Remittance channel:                             Partner bank                   Partner bank                  All channels
                                                                                                                       July 2008 until follow-up
                     Time Frame:                           July 2008 to June 2009         July 2008 to June 2009
                                                                                                                                survey
                                                                                           Migrants completing        Migrants completing follow-
                       Sample:                                   Full Sample
                                                                                            follow-up survey                   up survey
                     Data Source:                           Partner bank database          Partner bank database            Follow-up survey

Panel A: Main effect of treatments
Treatment 3 (joint account +                                         10.659                        18.132                        35.940
            migrant-only account)                                  (18.778)                       (24.477)                      (52.405)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                                         -20.180                         -9.358                       -2.078
                                                                   (16.061)                       (19.391)                      (33.161)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)                                      -24.121                        -31.648                        5.365
                                                                   (16.270)                       (20.926)                      (37.339)
Control variables                                                     Y                              Y                              Y
Observations                                                         898                            560                            560
R-squared                                                           0.149                          0.199                          0.092
P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                                           0.081                          0.236                          0.391
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                                           0.053                          0.035                          0.528
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                                           0.781                          0.261                          0.810
Mean of dep. var. in comparison group                               71.283                         82.423                       239.954

Panel B: Separate treatment effects for migrants with and without baseline demand for control
Treatment 3 * Demand for control                                     -5.036                         -8.904                       -10.517
                                                                   (29.416)                       (33.463)                      (53.487)
Treatment 3 * No demand for control                                 27.516                         47.373                        88.036
                                                                   (20.963)                       (31.321)                      (86.988)
Treatment 2 * Demand for control                                    -30.120                         -2.136                       -15.025
                                                                   (27.596)                       (32.783)                      (57.674)
Treatment 2 * No demand for control                                  -9.584                        -15.412                        12.517
                                                                   (16.446)                       (25.576)                      (38.312)
Treatment 1 * Demand for control                                    -36.302                       -59.460*                         2.512
                                                                   (27.427)                       (31.719)                         61.83
Treatment 1 * No demand for control                                 -11.237                         -1.655                        14.382
                                                                   (19.254)                       (31.352)                      (36.958)
Control variables                                                      Y                              Y                              Y
Observations                                                         898                            560                            560
R-squared                                                           0.150                          0.204                          0.094
P-value of F-test: equality of interactions with
 Treatment 3                                                        0.355                          0.193                          0.310
 Treatment 2                                                        0.529                          0.765                          0.703
 Treatment 1                                                        0.469                          0.222                          0.812
Mean of dep. var. in comparison group
 Migrants with demand for control                                   91.473                         99.412                       277.754
 Migrants with no demand for control                                48.545                         62.213                       194.986

Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes -- Dependent variables are monthly remittances in US dollars. For the dependent variables in columns 1 and 2, all funds sent to El
Salvador are counted as remittances, whether retrieved by the recipient in cash or sent directly to a bank account. Follow-up survey
administered from Mar - Jun 2009. Omitted treatment indicator is for Treatment 0 (comparison group). Control variables include: marketer
fixed effects are for the specific individual (out of 9) who conducted the marketing visit; stratification cell fixed effects for each of 48 unique
combinations of stratification variables: gender (male/female), having a US bank account (yes/no), relationship to remittance recipient
(parent/child/spouse/other), and years in US category (0-5 years/6-10 years/11-15 years); treatment month fixed effects; indicator for migrant
demand for control. Treatment months are Nov 2007 through Jul 2008 inclusive.
NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Online Appendix
for:
Savings in Transnational Households: A Field Experiment Among Migrants from El
Salvador
By Nava Ashraf, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martinez, and Dean Yang

Appendix A: Marketing Scripts for Treatments 0, 1, 2, and 3

Treatment 0: comparison group, not offered any new savings accounts or account-opening
assistance

Initiate conversation with questions regarding client’s preferences for money sending and saving
services. For example:
             Do your family members currently save money?
             Which service providers do they currently utilize to send money?
             What type of transfer do you use, traditional remittance (with code/password) or
               remittance by credit to an account?
             Why do you use these services?
             What difficulties does your family member have in picking up/receiving the
               money that you send?

If they send money through traditional remittance (with code/password):
Did you know that besides sending money to your family via traditional remittance, there is a
more practical, less costly option?

The option to which I am referring is “remittance by credit to an account”. Let me explain why
this option offers more advantages than a traditional remittance.

As you may know, when you send money via a traditional remittance, your family receives a
code or password to take to a Banco Agrícola branch and wait in line to receive the remittance.
By contrast, when you send money via a “remittance by credit to an account”, you obtain the
following advantages:

    Access to funds through a debit card: Your remittance recipient can access the funds in the
     account through a debit card. This way, should your remittance recipient need money
     immediately you will no longer have to worry about going to send money right away since
     he/she will now have money available in this account.
    Direct deposit of your remittance to this account: Remitting into an account facilitates your
     remittance recipient receiving the money you send: no longer will he/she have to go to the
     bank and wait in line to receive it or run the risk of losing the code/pin number. He/she
     can use any ATM to take out money using a debit card from anywhere in El Salvador.


Treatment 1: offer of remittance recipient account

                                                                                                  1
Initiate conversation with questions regarding client’s preferences for money sending and saving
services. For example:
             Do your family members currently save money?
             Which service providers do they currently utilize to send money?
             What type of transfer do you use, traditional remittance (with code/password) or
               remittance by credit to an account?
             Why do you use these services?
             What difficulties does your family member have in picking up/receiving the
               money that you send?

I come to present to you a service which will allow your remittance recipient to obtain a savings
account courtesy of Banco Agrícola. This account offers you the following advantages:

    Savings for your remittance recipient in El Salvador: Your remittance recipient will be able
     to open a savings account in his/her name in El Salvador through Banco Agrícola.
    Access to funds through a debit card: Your remittance recipient can access the funds in the
     account through a debit card. This way, should your remittance recipient need money
     immediately you will no longer have to worry about going to send money right away since
     he/she will now have money available in this account.
    Direct deposit of your remittance to this account: Remitting into an account facilitates your
     remittance recipient receiving the money you send: no longer will he/she have to go to the
     bank and wait in line to receive it or run the risk of losing the code/pin number. He/she
     can use any ATM to take out money using a debit card from anywhere in El Salvador.


Treatment 2: offer of joint account (Cuenta Unidos)

Initiate conversation with questions regarding client’s preferences for money sending and saving
services. For example:
             Do your family members currently save money?
             Which service providers do they currently utilize to send money?
             What type of transfer do you use, traditional remittance (with code/password) or
               remittance by credit to an account?
             Why do you use these services?
             What difficulties does your family member have in picking up/receiving the
               money that you send?

I come to present to you a service which will allow your remittance recipient to obtain a “Cuenta
Unidos” courtesy of Banco Agrícola. This account offers you the following advantages:

    Savings for your remittance recipient in El Salvador: Your remittance recipient will be able
     to open a savings account in his/her name in El Salvador through Banco Agrícola.
    Both your remittance recipient and you will be able to verify the balance on the account:
     This account will allow you to check the balance on the account through a service provided
     by a call center.
                                                                                                    2
    Access to funds for you and your remittance recipient through a debit card: Both you and
     your remittance recipient will have access to the funds in the account through a debit card.
     This way, should your remittance recipient need money immediately you will no longer
     have to worry about going to send money right away since he/she will now have money
     available in this account. Likewise, should you need money in the United States, you will
     also have access to funds from this account through the use of this debit card.
    Direct deposit of your remittance to this account: Remitting into an account facilitates your
     remittance recipient receiving the money you send: no longer will he/she have to go to the
     bank and wait in line to receive it or run the risk of losing the code/pin number. He/she
     can use any ATM to take out money using a debit card from anywhere in El Salvador.


Treatment 3: offer of joint account (Cuenta Unidos) and migrant-only account (Ahorro Directo)

Initiate conversation with questions regarding client’s preferences for money sending and saving
services. For example:
             Do your family members currently save money?
             Which service providers do they currently utilize to send money?
             What type of transfer do you use, traditional remittance (with code/password) or
               remittance by credit to an account?
             Why do you use these services?
             What difficulties does your family member have in picking up/receiving the
               money that you send?

I come to present to you a service which will allow your remittance recipient to obtain a “Cuenta
Unidos” courtesy of Banco Agrícola. This account offers you the following advantages:

    Savings for your remittance recipient in El Salvador: Your remittance recipient will be able
     to open a savings account in his/her name in El Salvador through Banco Agrícola.
    Both your remittance recipient and you will be able to verify the balance on the account:
     This account will allow you to check the balance on the account through a service provided
     by a call center.
    Access to funds for you and your remittance recipient through a debit card: Both you and
     your remittance recipient will have access to the funds in the account through a debit card.
     This way, should your remittance recipient need money immediately you will no longer
     have to worry about going to send money right away since he/she will now have money
     available in this account. Likewise, should you need money in the United States, you will
     also have access to funds from this account through the use of this debit card.
    Direct deposit of your remittance to this account: Remitting into an account facilitates your
     remittance recipient receiving the money you send: no longer will he/she have to go to the
     bank and wait in line to receive it or run the risk of losing the code/pin number. He/she
     can use any ATM to take out money using a debit card from anywhere in El Salvador.

Present Ahorro Directo:
As part of this promotion, with the opening of a “Cuenta Unidos”, you will also have the option
of opening a private individual account, “Ahorro Directo”, over which no one but yourself will

                                                                                                  3
have access or control, not even the person you are sharing Cuenta Unidos with. No one else
except you will be able to check account balances or make withdrawals from this account, and
no one else has to know that this account exists. It is exclusively yours.

Before describing the benefits of this account, let me ask you a few questions. Consult with the
client’s preferences and experiences in regards to the management of his/her money. For
example:
             How much control do you have over the management of your finances in El
                Salvador?
             Do you save money now? How do you keep those savings? Do you save in the
                US or in El Salvador?
             What methods do you use to access your funds when you visit El Salvador?
             Have you considered the convenience of having a savings account in El Salvador
                for the future?

With the Ahorro Directo, you will have exclusive control over your money in El Salvador. This
product will be very beneficial to you in the management of your finances for the following
reasons:

   You will have the power to personally manage your money in El Salvador: You will have
    the opportunity to open a savings account in El Salvador in your name from here, over
    which only you will have access or control.
   You will never again have to use an intermediary to save money for you: If you save
    money through money transfers to your family or friends, with the opening of this account
    you will be able to make money transfers directly to your account without having to ask
    someone else any favors. In other words, you will be sending remittances to your own
    account instead of sending to someone else.
   You will benefit from the added security: Through the use of this product you will have
    access to your money in El Salvador as well as in the United States. This offers you
    important advantages, since you will not only be saving for your future, but you will also
    have the money available from any Banco Agricola branch in El Salvador in case you
    travel to El Salvador. In addition, this account includes a debit card, so you will no longer
    have to carry large amounts of cash with you to El Salvador, improving your personal
    security.
   It will be easy for you to check your account balance: This account will also allow you to
    check your balance through a call center.




                                                                                                   4
Appendix Figure 1: Total savings balances at partner bank, by post-treatment month
                                         700
   Savings (US$, end of month balance)


                                         600

                                         500

                                         400                                                                           Control
                                                                                                                       T1
                                         300
                                                                                                                       T2
                                         200                                                                           T3

                                         100

                                          0
                                               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
                                                                       Month since treatment

Notes: Variable depicted is savings balance (US$, end of month) in given month since treatment, in total across all
partner bank accounts. T1=treatment 1 (PRR account only), T2=treatment 2 (joint account), T3=treatment 3 (joint
account + migrant-only account).

Appendix Figure 2: Joint account (Cuenta Unidos) savings balances at partner bank, by
post-treatment month
                                         300
   Savings (US$, end of month balance)




                                         250


                                         200

                                                                                                                       Control
                                         150
                                                                                                                       T1
                                                                                                                       T2
                                         100
                                                                                                                       T3

                                         50


                                          0
                                               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
                                                                       Month since treatment

Notes: Variable depicted is joint account (Cuenta Unidos) savings balance (US$, end of month) in given month
since treatment. See Appendix Figure 1 for other notes.



                                                                                                                                 5
Appendix Figure 3: Migrant-only account (Ahorro Directo) savings balances at partner
bank, by post-treatment month
                                         180

                                         160
   Savings (US$, end of month balance)




                                         140

                                         120

                                         100                                                                           Control

                                         80                                                                            T1
                                                                                                                       T2
                                         60
                                                                                                                       T3
                                         40

                                         20

                                          0
                                               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
                                                                       Month since treatment

Notes: Variable depicted is migrant-only account (Ahorro Directo) savings balance (US$, end of month) in given
month since treatment. See Appendix Figure 1 for other notes.

Appendix Figure 4: Savings balances in other accounts at partner bank, by post-treatment
month
                                         450

                                         400
   Savings (US$, end of month balance)




                                         350

                                         300

                                         250                                                                           Control

                                         200                                                                           T1
                                                                                                                       T2
                                         150
                                                                                                                       T3
                                         100

                                         50

                                          0
                                               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
                                                                       Month since treatment

Notes: Variable depicted is savings balance (US$, end of month) in given month since treatment in other accounts
(neither Cuenta Unidos nor Ahorro Directo). See Appendix Figure 1 for other notes.



                                                                                                                                 6
Appendix Table 1: Comparison of means, study participants vs. DC-area Salvadorans and Hispanics in US Census

                           Data source:       Baseline survey                           US Census 2000

                                                                                        Salvadoran-born,   Hispanic, not US
                     Sample restriction:                            Salvadoran-born
                                                                                         not US citizen        citizen

     Fraction male                                 0.71                   0.57                0.57               0.57
Panel A: Men
     Age                                          30.34                  30.34               30.25               30.62
                                                  (7.36)                 (8.87)              (8.84)              (9.13)
     Migrant has been in US 0-5 years              0.49                   0.33                0.35               0.45
     Migrant has been in US 6-10 years             0.40                   0.29                0.29               0.28
     Migrant has been in US 11-15 years            0.10                   0.38                0.36               0.27
     No Education                                  0.07                   0.13                0.13               0.09
     Some Education, no degree                     0.63                   0.60                0.61               0.52
     High School Degree or more                    0.30                   0.27                0.25               0.39
     Migrant is US citizen                         0.00                   0.10                0.00               0.00
     Migrant is married or partnered               0.53                   0.45                0.44               0.47

     Sample Size                                    638                   1,933              1,735               4,427

Panel B: Women
     Age                                          32.20                  31.71               31.66               32.59
                                                  (8.19)                 (9.52)              (9.42)              (9.98)
     Migrant has been in US 0-5 years              0.51                   0.29                0.31               0.40
     Migrant has been in US 6-10 years             0.37                   0.34                0.35               0.32
     Migrant has been in US 11-15 years            0.12                   0.37                0.34               0.28
     No Education                                  0.08                   0.13                0.13               0.08
     Some Education, no degree                     0.56                   0.58                0.60               0.46
     High School Degree or more                    0.36                   0.30                0.27               0.46
     Migrant is US citizen                         0.01                   0.12                0.00               0.00
     Migrant is married or partnered               0.73                   0.57                0.57               0.59
     Sample Size                                    260                   1,453              1,259               3,263

Note: US Census 2000 data are IPUMS 5% sample, restricted to individuals aged 18-65 in the metro Washington DC area
(including MD and VA suburbs). All variables other than age are indicator variables. Standard deviation in parentheses for
age variable.
Appendix Table 2: Means of variables by treatment group
                                                                                                                  Treatment group                                                      P-value of F-test …
                                                                                                                                                                   T0 = T1 = T2
                                                                                                  0               1               2              3                                   T1 = T0         T2 = T0        T3 = T0        Num. of Obs.
                                                                                                                                                                       = T3
Baseline stratification variables
    Migrant is female                                                                            0.26            0.31           0.31            0.28                   0.556           0.226          0.266           0.720             898
    Migrant has US bank account                                                                  0.61            0.61           0.66            0.63                   0.590           0.883          0.209           0.676             898
    Recipient is migrant's parent                                                                0.55            0.55           0.54            0.56                   0.949           0.998          0.740           0.802             898
    Recipient is migrant's spouse                                                                0.14            0.09           0.11            0.09                   0.317           0.104          0.331           0.093             898
    Recipient is migrant's child                                                                 0.05            0.04           0.02            0.03                   0.480           0.757          0.185           0.343             898
    Recipient is migrant's other relative                                                        0.26            0.31           0.33            0.32                   0.326           0.184          0.091           0.163             898
    Migrant has been in US 0-5 years                                                             0.52            0.49           0.48            0.51                   0.811           0.604          0.389           0.919             898
    Migrant has been in US 6-10 years                                                            0.39            0.40           0.41            0.38                   0.893           0.729          0.638           0.824             898
    Migrant has been in US 11-15 years                                                           0.10            0.10           0.11            0.11                   0.927           0.768          0.523           0.611             898
Baseline survey variables
    Migrant's years in the US                                                                    5.42           5.47            5.76            5.59                   0.764           0.904          0.330           0.635             898
    Migrant has El Salvador bank account                                                         0.16           0.15            0.18            0.20                   0.500           0.632          0.571           0.329             898
    Migrant's annual income (US$)                                                               30,669         36,587          29,108          28,109                  0.555           0.452          0.481           0.285             865
    Migrant's household's annual income (US$)                                                   36,355         42,264          42,376          37,319                  0.782           0.448          0.466           0.736             896
    Migrant's years of education                                                                  8.62           8.15            8.94            8.35                  0.213           0.271          0.415           0.506             865
    Migrant's age                                                                                30.61          31.05           31.02           30.84                  0.929           0.567          0.553           0.761             894
    Migrant's annual remittances sent (US$)                                                      5,451          4,876           4,689           4,974                  0.314           0.187          0.062           0.268             898
    Migrant's total hh savings balance (US$)                                                     2,942          3,080           2,544           2,883                  0.747           0.796          0.415           0.905             806
    Migrant is US citizen                                                                         0.00           0.00            0.01            0.01                  0.112           0.317          0.083           0.156             894
    Migrant hh size in U.S.                                                                       4.72           5.07            4.84            4.62                  0.198           0.104          0.546           0.625             898
    Migrant is married or partnered                                                               0.54           0.58            0.62            0.60                  0.329           0.467          0.075           0.211             897
    Past experience with direct payments                                                          0.08           0.08            0.07            0.08                  0.940           0.898          0.743           0.792             898
    Sent funds to El Salvador for others to administer                                            0.23           0.20            0.25            0.24                  0.525           0.344          0.665           0.860             898
    Interested in direct payments to increase control                                             0.21           0.24            0.20            0.19                  0.695           0.489          0.893           0.622             898
    Aware of disagreements with recipients over remittance uses                                   0.16           0.15            0.14            0.13                  0.768           0.633          0.537           0.289             898
    Have had disagreements with recipients over remittance uses                                   0.05           0.07            0.05            0.04                  0.433           0.257          0.976           0.587             898
    Demand for control (union of above five indicators)                                           0.53           0.49            0.49            0.52                  0.749           0.414          0.368           0.840             898
    Correct answer to compound interest question                                                  0.64           0.66            0.67            0.68                  0.841           0.691          0.581           0.366             898
    Correct answer to inflation question                                                          0.61           0.66            0.63            0.68                  0.518           0.332          0.667           0.160             898
    Correct answer to mutual fund question                                                        0.41           0.37            0.34            0.36                  0.490           0.399          0.121           0.360             898
    Tracks spending and budgets expenses                                                          0.46           0.50            0.43            0.46                  0.617           0.480          0.531           0.982             897

Baseline variables from El Salvador household survey
    Recipient's total hh savings balance (US$)                                                   249            543             274             459                    0.305           0.114          0.846           0.217             733
    Recipient's annual remittances received (US$)                                                3136           3112            3244            3224                   0.957           0.929          0.731           0.769             725

Pre-treatment savings at partner bank
    Quartic root of savings balance, average over 12 months prior to treatment                   0.97            0.97           0.94            1.18                   0.621           0.963          0.896           0.283             898
    Savings balance, average over 12 months prior to treatment (US$)                             229             232            200             315                    0.711           0.980          0.767           0.393             898

Attrition from follow-up survey
    Attrition from US follow up savings data                                                     0.49            0.45           0.39            0.42                   0.132           0.451          0.024           0.133             898

Notes -- Table presents means of key variables for each treatment group prior to treatment. P-value is for F-test of equality of means across treatment groups. The first 9 variables listed in table are stratification variables: migrants were
first sorted into 48 cells (based on gender, US bank account ownership, relationship to remittance recipient, and years on US category) before randomization into treatments 0, 1, 2, or 3. Savings figures reported in US dollars.
Appendix Table 3: Means of variables by treatment group, follow-up survey sample
                                                                                                                 Treatment group                                                P-value of F-test …
                                                                                                                                                            T0 = T1 = T2                                               Num. of
                                                                                                  0              1              2               3                             T1 = T0        T2 = T0         T3 = T0
                                                                                                                                                                = T3                                                    Obs.
Baseline stratification variables
    Migrant is female                                                                           0.29           0.28            0.33           0.29              0.761          0.903           0.408          0.941     508
    Migrant has US bank account                                                                 0.58           0.63            0.67           0.64              0.553          0.408           0.150          0.333     508
    Recipient is migrant's parent                                                               0.53           0.52            0.55           0.58              0.790          0.940           0.750          0.408     508
    Recipient is migrant's spouse                                                               0.16           0.10            0.09           0.11              0.438          0.219           0.102          0.305     508
    Recipient is migrant's child                                                                0.07           0.05            0.02           0.04              0.168          0.570           0.062          0.255     508
    Recipient is migrant's other relative                                                       0.24           0.32            0.34           0.27              0.251          0.179           0.077          0.642     508
    Migrant has been in US 0-5 years                                                            0.49           0.47            0.44           0.52              0.607          0.748           0.413          0.666     508
    Migrant has been in US 6-10 years                                                           0.39           0.41            0.44           0.37              0.656          0.809           0.445          0.675     508
    Migrant has been in US 11-15 years                                                          0.12           0.12            0.12           0.11              0.998          0.897           0.924          0.971     508
Baseline survey variables
    Migrant's years in the US                                                                    5.59           5.58            5.75           5.73             0.975          0.989           0.725          0.778     508
    Migrant has El Salvador bank account                                                         0.17           0.17            0.14           0.21             0.465          0.930           0.520          0.381     508
    Migrant's annual income (US$)                                                              30,297         41,590          29,034         28,447             0.786          0.420           0.715          0.635     490
    Migrant's household's annual income (US$)                                                  34,996         50,717          34,425         39,389             0.385          0.258           0.859          0.303     508
    Migrant's years of education                                                                 8.46           8.03            8.63           8.56             0.698          0.453           0.744          0.863     491
    Migrant's age                                                                               31.08          32.21           31.10          31.00             0.600          0.292           0.988          0.937     505
    Migrant's annual remittances sent (US$)                                                     5,335          5,532           4,855          5,197             0.583          0.758           0.397          0.821     508
    Migrant's total hh savings balance (US$)                                                    2,731          3,097           1,907          2,819             0.138          0.630           0.141          0.892     469
    Migrant is US citizen                                                                        0.00           0.00            0.01           0.01             0.224          1.000           0.157          0.316     505
    Migrant hh size in U.S.                                                                      4.87           5.21            4.98           4.50             0.095          0.271           0.665          0.187     508
    Migrant is married or partnered                                                              0.57           0.58            0.62           0.62             0.811          0.862           0.427          0.459     508
    Past experience with direct payments                                                         0.11           0.10            0.08           0.08             0.831          0.773           0.461          0.411     508
    Sent funds to El Salvador for others to administer                                           0.25           0.20            0.24           0.25             0.747          0.363           0.851          0.973     508
    Interested in direct payments to increase control                                            0.20           0.23            0.17           0.16             0.468          0.481           0.540          0.467     508
    Aware of disagreements with recipients over remittance uses                                  0.16           0.14            0.15           0.14             0.960          0.651           0.758          0.615     508
    Have had disagreements with recipients over remittance uses                                  0.05           0.07            0.05           0.03             0.507          0.617           0.993          0.372     508
    Demand for control (union of above five indicators)                                          0.53           0.50            0.45           0.55             0.419          0.733           0.237          0.724     508
    Correct answer to compound interest question                                                 0.60           0.71            0.67           0.67             0.330          0.066           0.214          0.239     508
    Correct answer to inflation question                                                         0.62           0.60            0.63           0.66             0.808          0.805           0.773          0.510     508
    Correct answer to mutual fund question                                                       0.37           0.37            0.31           0.36             0.715          0.903           0.374          0.905     508
    Tracks spending and budgets expenses                                                         0.44           0.44            0.44           0.47             0.935          0.928           0.968          0.578     508

Baseline variables from El Salvador household survey
    Recipient's total hh savings balance (US$)                                                  273             684            336             584              0.392          0.147           0.745          0.234     428
    Recipient's annual remittances received (US$)                                              2,988           3,371          3,474           3,525             0.501          0.293           0.221          0.179     426
Pre-treatment savings at partner bank
    Quartic root of savings balance, average over 12 months prior to treatment                  0.64           1.03            0.98           1.27              0.094          0.109           0.133          0.016     508
    Savings balance, average over 12 months prior to treatment (US$)                            161            204             233            344               0.558          0.712           0.611          0.162     508

Notes -- Table presents means of key variables for each treatment group prior to treatment, for observations that have valid savings data in migrant follow-up survey. See previous table for other notes.
Appendix Table 4: Impact of treatments on savings in accounts at partner bank in follow-up sample (N=508)
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Dependent variable: Savings balance (US$), average over 12 months post-treatment, in accounts of given type

                                         Cuenta Unidos accounts (in Ahorro Directo accounts Other accounts (in name of In total across all accounts
                                           name of someone in El    (in name of migrant only)   migrant or primary
                                                 Salvador)                                     remittance recipient)
                                                      (a)                          (b)                         (c)               (d) = (a) + (b) + (c)
Panel A (quartic root)

Treatment 3 (joint account +               0.432***         0.470***    0.322***         0.356***   0.813***         0.686***   1.233***      1.163***
            migrant-only account)           (0.164)          (0.174)     (0.122)          (0.134)    (0.243)          (0.222)    (0.278)       (0.271)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                  0.208          0.316**     -0.055           -0.042      0.515**         0.471**    0.538**       0.612**
                                            (0.143)         (0.145)     (0.055)          (0.068)     (0.205)         (0.203)    (0.237)       (0.237)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)               0.027            0.046     -0.020           -0.021      0.367*           0.321      0.364          0.319
                                            (0.107)          (0.104)    (0.065)          (0.079)     (0.202)         (0.204)    (0.223)        (0.228)
Constant                                   0.225***           0.078      0.055            0.273     0.470***          0.197     0.750***        0.369
                                            (0.087)          (0.523)    (0.055)          (0.199)     (0.112)         (1.094)     (0.143)       (0.980)

Marketer fixed effects                                         Y                            Y                           Y                         Y

Observations                                  508             508         508              508         508             508        508            508
R-squared                                    0.019           0.130       0.044            0.123       0.020           0.126      0.039          0.142

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.212           0.400       0.001            0.000       0.278           0.413      0.023          0.064
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.008           0.010       0.003            0.002       0.107           0.161      0.004          0.004
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.166           0.078       0.316            0.672       0.543           0.529      0.503          0.274

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group                        0.225                        0.055                       0.470                     0.750

Panel B (in dollars)

Treatment 3 (joint account +               135.173           188.150     31.361           33.423    389.601*** 312.574*** 556.134*** 534.147***
            migrant-only account)         (117.167)         (148.999)   (24.064)         (25.973)    (131.556)  (115.378)  (175.701)  (190.761)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                 89.403          140.727*    -12.886          -13.149     286.795*   174.253*  363.312** 301.832**
                                           (69.562)          (82.795)   (12.830)         (14.781)    (147.464)  (103.903)  (165.567)  (137.280)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)             -15.839            -8.065    -10.501          -14.217     109.494*     49.877     83.154     27.595
                                           (12.540)          (34.131)   (13.042)         (15.476)     (58.990)  (101.570)   (61.365)  (107.148)
Constant                                    19.067          431.676*     12.886           26.748      33.239*   -186.121  65.192***    272.303
                                           (12.485)         (246.722)   (12.830)         (32.563)     (17.255)  (365.487)   (24.435)  (466.947)

Control Variables                                              Y                            Y                           Y                         Y

Observations                                  508             508         508              508         508             508        508            508
R-squared                                    0.006           0.067       0.017            0.100       0.014           0.125      0.020          0.107

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                    0.734           0.739       0.031            0.030       0.599           0.366      0.418          0.277
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                    0.194           0.147       0.042            0.046       0.052           0.060      0.011          0.010
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                    0.125           0.088       0.316            0.867       0.259           0.406      0.106          0.123

Mean of dep. var. in comparison group                        19.067                       12.886                      33.239                   65.192


Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent variables are averaged over end-of-month balances in US dollars. See Table 2 for other notes.
Appendix Table 5: Impact of treatments on joint account savings reported by migrant in non-partner banks
                      in follow-up survey
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

          Dependent variable: Savings not at partner bank …
                                                                  ... in joint accounts,
                                                                                                    ... in joint accounts,
                                                                  migrant and primary
                                                                                                     migrant and others
                                                                  remittance recipient
                                                                           (1)                                (2)
Panal A (quartic root)
Treatment 3 (joint account +                                              0.059                            0.120*
            migrant-only account)                                        (0.047)                           (0.072)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                                               0.027                            0.215**
                                                                         (0.023)                           (0.106)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)                                            0.113                             0.153
                                                                         (0.104)                           (0.111)

Control variables                                                           Y                                 Y

Observations                                                               508                               508
R-squared                                                                 0.044                             0.070

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                                                 0.317                             0.413
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                                                 0.578                             0.787
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                                                 0.343                             0.659

Panal B (in dollars)
Treatment 3 (joint account +                                              24.143                             40.102
            migrant-only account)                                        (25.273)                           (29.590)
Treatment 2 (joint account)                                               18.495                            91.163*
                                                                         (23.690)                           (50.610)
Treatment 1 (PRR account only)                                           131.785                            138.861
                                                                        (126.342)                          (115.383)

Control variables                                                           Y                                 Y

Observations                                                               508                               508
R-squared                                                                 0.047                             0.073

P-value of F-test: equality of …
  Treatment 3 & 2 coeffs.                                                 0.701                             0.329
  Treatment 3 & 1 coeffs.                                                 0.321                             0.382
  Treatment 2 & 1 coeffs.                                                 0.304                             0.696


Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent variable is stock of savings in US dollars. See Table 4 for other notes.
