NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW MUCH FAVORABLE SELECTION IS LEFT IN MEDICARE ADVANTAGE?
Joseph P. Newhouse
Mary Price
J. Michael McWilliams
John Hsu
Thomas G. McGuire
Working Paper 20021
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20021
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

The authors are grateful to the National Institute of Aging, Grant # P01 AG032952 for support. Newhouse
wishes to disclose that he is a director of Aetna, which sells Medicare Advantage plans as well as Medigap
plans. Hsu has consulted for Kaiser Permanente, which sells Medicare Advantage plans, and has consulted
for Boston Consulting Group, which has advised Medicare Advantage plans. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20021.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joseph P. Newhouse, Mary Price, J. Michael McWilliams, John Hsu, and Thomas G. McGuire.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Much Favorable Selection Is Left in Medicare Advantage?
Joseph P. Newhouse, Mary Price, J. Michael McWilliams, John Hsu, and Thomas G. McGuire
NBER Working Paper No. 20021
March 2014
JEL No. I1,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
There are two types of selection models in the health economics literature. One focuses on choice
between a fixed set of contracts. Consumers with greater demand for medical care services prefer
contracts with more generous reimbursement, resulting in a suboptimal proportion of consumers in
such contracts in equilibrium. In extreme cases more generous contracts may disappear (the “death
spiral”). In the other model insurers tailor the contracts they offer consumers to attract profitable
consumers. An equilibrium may or may not exist in such models, but if it exists it is not first best.
The Medicare Advantage program offers an opportunity to study these models empirically, although
unlike the models in the economics literature there is a regulator with various tools to address selection.
One such tool is risk adjustment, or making budget neutral transfers among insurers using observable
characteristics of enrollees that predict spending. Medicare drastically changed its risk adjustment
program starting in 2004 and made a number of other changes to reduce selection as well. Previous
work has argued that the changes worsened selection. We show, using a much larger data set, that
this was not the case, but that some inherent selection may remain.
Joseph P. Newhouse
Division of Health Policy Research
and Education
Harvard University
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
newhouse@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Mary Price
Division of Research
Kaiser Permanente
442 Brimhall Street
St. Paul, MN 55105
price.bdc@gmail.com
J. Michael McWilliams
Harvard University
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
mcwilliams@hcp.med.harvard.edu

John Hsu
Partners Healthcare
JHSU7@PARTNERS.ORG
Thomas G. McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

The health economics literature contains two types of selection models. One holds insurance
contracts fixed and makes the weak assumption that the demand for contracts with more generous
reimbursement is positively correlated with anticipated health care use. If premiums are the same for
every person with given observable characteristics who chooses a given contract, as is generally the
case, and if consumers have a choice of contracts, the resulting adverse selection implies an equilibrium
with too few people choosing more generous contracts (Feldman and Dowd 1982; Cutler and Reber
1998; Einav, et al. 2010; Einav and Finkelstein 2011). In the extreme, a death spiral can ensue, and more
generous plans can disappear altogether (Shore and Bertko 1999; Yegian, et al. 2000; Weinberg and
Kramer 2011).
A second model focuses on the incentives of insurers to attract better than average risks by
tailoring insurance options to attract them (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976; Newhouse 1996; Hendren
2012). Inefficiency takes the form of insurance contracts with the wrong mix of premiums and benefits
and/or of resources devoted to particular benefit areas (Frank, et al. 2000). As is well known, in this
type of model an equilibrium may or may not exist depending on assumptions about the distribution of
risks and insurers’ behavior (Wilson 1977; Dubey and Geanakoplos 2002; Breyer, et al. 2012).
A prominent empirical example of selection in the health economics literature has been Part C
of Medicare, or Medicare Advantage (MA). Until 2006 insurers participating in the MA program agreed
to accept a fixed sum per enrollee to provide benefits at least as comprehensive as the “public option”
of Traditional Medicare (TM).1 This take‐it‐or‐leave‐it fixed sum was a function of spending by the
average TM beneficiary in the MA plan’s county, although the nature of the function changed over time.
Starting in 2006 and continuing to the present, each insurer submits a bid rather than simply agreeing to
a take‐it‐or‐leave‐it price set by Medicare. But a modified version of the pre‐2006 administered price
system lives on; instead of the insurer’s receiving a fixed price; the beneficiary receives an analog to a
voucher that equals the average fixed amount that would have been paid to the insurer if the pre‐2006
program had continued. If the insurer’s bid is less than the amount of the “voucher,” and almost all bids
are, the beneficiary receives 50‐70% of the difference between the bid and the voucher as additional
services or lower out‐of‐pocket payments. The government keeps the other 30‐50%. In the few cases in
which the bid exceeds the voucher, the beneficiary pays the entire increment. Importantly, TM is not
part of this bidding system. For more detail see (Newhouse and McGuire 2014).
An MA insurer competes with both TM and with other MA insurers through the terms of the
contracts or insurance plans that they offer beneficiaries. At a high level of generality the attraction of
MA relative to TM for a beneficiary without supplementary insurance (Medigap) is much less cost
sharing at the point of service and often additional covered services such as vision or dental.2 In return,
1

The requirement that benefits be at least as comprehensive as TM meant (and means) that MA plans had to
cover any service covered by TM, for example, physician visits. Further, the actuarial value of any beneficiary out‐
of‐pocket payments in the MA plan, both premiums and cost sharing, could not (and cannot) exceed the actuarial
value of the cost sharing in TM. MA participants were (and are) required to be enrolled in Part B and pay the Part
B premium.
2
A beneficiary enrolling in TM has the option of purchasing an individual Medigap plan to cover most or all of the
cost sharing in TM, in effect converting the additional cost sharing in TM relative to MA to an additional premium

the beneficiary agrees to change the terms at which he or she can use certain physicians or hospitals; if
a given physician or hospital is not in the MA plan’s network, the beneficiary’s out‐of‐pocket cost to use
that physician or hospital would likely be considerably above what the beneficiary would pay in TM.
Each MA insurer has an incentive to design their plan to attract participants whose spending is
below the MA plan’s bid, net of the risk adjustment payments we describe below. Except for the risk
adjustment payments, this incentive is the same as that of insurers in the well‐known Rothschild‐Stiglitz
(1976) model, the second type of selection model referred to above. Plans must accept all beneficiaries
who want to join, so to affect the distribution of costs among enrollees, plans must influence who wants
to join them in the first place. Their main instruments for doing so are their choice of networks of
providers and structure of drug formularies, as well as their marketing and choice of geographic area in
which to operate (Frank et al. 2000; Cao and McGuire 2003).
In the Rothschild‐Stiglitz model there is no regulator of the contracts that can be offered,
whereas the Medicare Advantage program uses a number of instruments to mitigate selection behavior
by plans, as we describe below.3 A key issue is how effective these instruments are. Historically they
were not very effective, so Medicare has introduced additional anti‐selection instruments in the past
decade.
Two groups of economists have studied the effect of the introduction of these new instruments
and reached different conclusions. Our group has published three papers that suggest favorable
selection in MA has fallen markedly, but that some remains (McWilliams, et al. 2012; Newhouse, et al.
2012; Newhouse, et al. 2013). By contrast, Brown, et al. have concluded that plans found new ways to
select in response to Medicare regulations so as to increase the degree of favorable selection (Brown, et
al. 2011). In the remainder of this paper we briefly review the evidence to date and present new
evidence by re‐estimating an approximation to Brown, et al.’s key equation on a much larger data set.
The effectiveness of the new instruments is an important issue for the Medicare program, as well as
other publicly regulated programs, including the ACA’s health insurance exchanges.
We conclude that selection has fallen markedly among the main group of persons enrolled in
the MA Coordinated Care Program (primarily HMOs but also PPO’s), the elderly who are not Medicaid
eligible (“non‐duals”), who are not institutionalized, and whose initial basis of eligibility was old age.
Nonetheless, some modest selection remains. Ascertaining whether selection changed among other
groups of persons enrolled in MA is difficult because of small numbers and legislative changes in the
design of the plans available to them.4 Whereas the second model of selection that focuses on plan
relative to MA. Around 30 percent of beneficiaries have a supplementary plan that is partly or fully subsidized by a
prior employer, although this may be structured as a lump sum subsidy with Medicare Advantage plans as a
choice. Poorer Medicare beneficiaries are eligible for Medicaid, which historically functioned like a supplementary
plan to TM, although many states are currently enrolling Medicaid beneficiaries in MA with the ability to opt out to
TM.
3
Employers play this role in the commercial market by choice of plans to offer employees and subsidy policy.
4
The other groups include those whose original reason for eligibility was not old age (about 16% of Medicare
beneficiaries are disabled under 65 in 2009), those also eligible for Medicaid (18% of Medicare beneficiaries), and
those institutionalized (about 5% of the Medicare population). These groups are not mutually exclusive; for

incentives implies that in principle better regulation might ameliorate the selection, the first model
implies there may be some inherent characteristics of TM and the current structure of the Medicare
program that lead to at least some residual selection between MA and TM.
Background on the Medicare Advantage Program
MA plans face two problems in competing against TM. First, the unit prices they negotiate with
physicians and hospitals are typically above the take‐it‐or‐leave‐it prices paid by TM. Second, they must
finance the lower cost sharing they offer. To compete therefore, MA plans must reduce the quantity of
services they pay for, either through medical management of chronic diseases (e.g., attempting to
increase compliance with prescribed medication and thereby lowering the likelihood of hospitalization),
choosing physicians to be in their network who practice conservatively, or with the mechanism of
interest to us, offering networks of providers and drug formularies and configuring cost sharing in ways
that will attract good risks, as envisioned in the second model of selection described above.
The first type of selection model, however, could also be relevant. Not surprisingly those with
multiple illnesses on average use more providers than those with no or a single health problem, as we
show below. These persons, who also may have more complex disease or at least greater concerns
about complexity associated with having multiple comorbid conditions, could prefer TM’s freedom of
choice of provider (almost all providers participate in TM), since the more providers the beneficiary
uses, the greater the chance that one or more of them is not in an MA plan’s network. Networks and
formularies are inherent in MA, since MA plans must have a credible threat to exclude the provider from
their network to negotiate price.5 If selection of this type is going on, beneficiaries in MA plans will tend
to be “healthier” and less costly than those in TM, but better regulation cannot address it given the
current structure of the Medicare program.6
Medicare employs several instruments to mitigate plans’ selection incentives. First, it “risk
adjusts” the amounts it pays MA plans. The general idea is that Medicare makes budget neutral
transfers among MA plans according to certain observed characteristics of each plan’s mix of enrollees;
thus, plans whose enrollees are below average in expected cost are paid less than those whose enrollees
are above average in expected cost. TM, however, is not part of this transfer system. Up until 2000, the
algorithm to determine a beneficiary’s expected cost accounted for only demographic variables such as
age, gender, Medicaid eligibility, whether the beneficiary was institutionalized, and the beneficiary’s
county of residence. These variables were used to predict spending by TM beneficiaries and thus
example, 44% of the dual eligible group was under 65. Percentages are from the Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission 2013 Data Book (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2013). As we describe below, in the time
period we examine, these groups were underrepresented in Medicare Advantage.
5
Starting in 2012 the MA program has paid bonuses to plans based on the observed quality of care. Plans thus
have an incentive to exclude from their network or charge high copayments to see providers whose measured
quality is low.
6
In principle, such selection could be addressed with sufficiently good risk adjustment in a voucher like scheme
that included TM, for example, the premium support proposal of Senator Wyden and Representative Ryan (Antos
2012). Nonetheless, there would not be efficient sorting of beneficiaries between TM and MA for reasons we
describe in the conclusion.

yielded relative supply prices for individuals in MA plans with given characteristics. For example, a plan
that hypothetically enrolled only 65‐69 year old males in a given county would have been paid less than
a plan that hypothetically enrolled only 70‐74 years old males in the same county. Second, Medicare
regulates network and formulary adequacy; a plan’s network, for example, must include a sufficient
number of oncologists. Third, Medicare regulates a plan’s choice of geographic area in which to
operate; generally a plan must either operate in an entire county or not enter the market in that county;
it requires special approval to choose particular zip codes within a county in which to operate. Fourth,
as mentioned above, Medicare constrains the amount of cost sharing; the actuarial value of a plan, or
the percentage of an average beneficiary’s cost that the contract covers, must equal or exceed that of
TM. Thus, a plan’s ability to attract good risks by offering even higher cost sharing and lower premiums
than TM, a standard kind of selection tool in unregulated insurance markets, is limited. In practice this
actuarial value constraint is rarely binding, because, as noted above, MA plans typically offer much
lower cost sharing than TM. Finally, Medicare has an overarching authority to refuse to contract with a
plan that it deems as engaged in selection.
The health economics literature, however, has convincingly demonstrated that in the 1990’s
these various anti‐selection tools did not prevent favorable selection into MA plans. The Congressional
Budget Office estimated that in the mid 1990’s Medicare on average paid 8% more for the beneficiaries
in MA than if those same beneficiaries had enrolled in TM ‐ despite Medicare’s paying a take‐it‐or‐leave‐
it price that at that time was 95% of the average TM spending in a county for a beneficiary with average
risk (Congressional Budget Office 1997; Morgan, et al. 1997; Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000; Glied 2000;
Newhouse 2002; McGuire, et al. 2011; Breyer et al. 2012).
As a result of the observed favorable selection into MA, Medicare took two additional steps in
the past decade to decrease selection. First, it incorporated diagnostic information into its risk
adjustment scheme. Specifically, starting in 2000 Medicare adjusted its then fixed payment to plans
using information on inpatient diagnoses, but gave that system only 10% weight; the other 90% of the
weight continued to be on the old demographic system.7 This system continued until 2004, when
Medicare began a transition to a system that incorporated diagnostic information from both inpatient
and outpatient settings (Pope, et al. 2004). That system, which Medicare continues to use, is called
CMS‐HCC’s or just HCC’s, and in 2004 it had 30% weight in determining payment, in 2005 50% weight, in
2006 75% weight, and the transition was complete in 2007. Which enrollees are profitable are
influenced by these weights, which we exploit later in our year‐by‐year analyses. During the transition,
the remaining weight was on the old system that consisted mostly (90%) of demographic variables.
The HCC risk adjustment system effectively sets a relative price for each plan enrollee that is a
function of the relative spending to treat an enrollee with similar observable characteristics in TM. For
example, an MA plan would be reimbursed considerably more for a 75 year old woman living in the
community with congestive heart failure (HCC80) than for a 75 year old woman living in the same

7

The small weight on the diagnosis‐based system was to mitigate an incentive to hospitalize just to record a
diagnosis.

community with breast cancer (HCC10) (Pope et al. 2004). Like the old system, however, this newer
system just makes budget neutral transfers among MA plans; it does not incorporate TM.
Second, Medicare made it more difficult for beneficiaries to move between TM and MA. Prior
to 2006 Medicare allowed a beneficiary to move between MA and TM at the end of any month, in
contrast to commercial insurance where an individual typically chooses a health insurance contract for
an entire year during an annual open enrollment period. The ability for Medicare beneficiaries to
change from MA to TM monthly was initially seen as a beneficiary protection against underservice by or
dissatisfaction with an MA plan but it facilitated selection, since a beneficiary in MA with a new
diagnosis who wanted to use an out‐of‐network physician to treat the problem could move to TM
almost immediately.
Starting in 2006, however, a beneficiary who chose MA was locked in to the chosen plan for the
last six months of the calendar year, but could still change plans monthly during the first half of the year.
Beginning in 2007 the lock‐in period was the last 9 months and in 2011 it was extended to the last 10.5
months of the year. Nonetheless, by allowing a plan change in the first six weeks of the year Medicare
remains less restrictive than commercial insurance. The lock‐in, however, does not apply to the
minority of Medicare beneficiaries also eligible for Medicaid, so‐called dual eligibles.
Coincident with these changes, Medicare also introduced new types of MA plans that were
limited to certain beneficiaries. In particular, two types of Special Needs Plans (SNP’s) were introduced,
one for dual eligibles (those also eligible for Medicaid) and one for the institutionalized.8 Another type
of plan, private fee‐for‐service plans, were authorized in 1997 legislation and entered the market in
1998. They were open to all beneficiaries, but attracted few enrollees before 2004, after which time
they grew rapidly. These plans, however, had very different characteristics than the other MA options,
which we describe in more detail below.
Estimates of Selection Effects
Virtually all the historical evidence on selection and much of the more recent evidence
compares use of medical services among those currently in TM who subsequently switch to MA with
those who remain in TM. The limitation to those in TM reflects the availability of TM data and the lack
of analogous MA data. In addition to examining those in TM who switch to MA, the literature also often
compares those now in TM who recently left MA with those who were always in TM.9 These
comparisons are typically adjusted for age, gender, Medicaid status, employment status, and county,
which were also the principal adjusters for plan payment in the 1990’s.
The early literature cited above, using data from the 1990’s, found that those enrolling in MA
were relatively low utilizers when they were enrolled in TM immediately prior to their enrollment in MA,
8

There were also separate plans for those with certain chronic diseases. Of the various types of SNP’s, the one for
the duals dominated numerically; 83% of SNP enrollees were in those plans (Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission 2007).
9
Selection, of course, is unidentified if one simply compares use in TM and MA contemporaneously, since
differences could arise from selection, differences in medical management, and differences in cost sharing.

when compared with those who remained in TM and did not switch to MA. Data on the use of the much
less numerous group disenrolling from MA were mildly conflicting; some data showed the disenrollees
to be relatively high users after moving to TM when compared with the group that had remained in TM,
and other data showed the use of the two groups was similar. In short, these data suggested that good
risks were enrolling in MA and bad risks might be disenrolling (Physician Payment Review Commission
1996; Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2000). It was on the basis of such comparisons between
switchers and stayers that the CBO determined that MA program added to Medicare program cost.
There are three problems with inferring selection from such studies. The first two arise from
status quo bias, the tendency of beneficiaries to remain in the same plan year after year (Samuelson and
Zeckhauser 1988). First, because of status quo bias, only a small percentage of beneficiaries switch from
TM to MA each year, as we confirm below. As a result, even if those who switch exhibit the expected
type of selection, the characteristics of the much larger stock of beneficiaries who remain in their plans
year after year could differ substantially from the characteristics of those who switch.
Second, even if those few who switch differ in their unobserved characteristics at the time of
the switch, initial differences appear to regress to the mean. For example, in 1998 the age‐sex‐Medicaid
adjusted mortality rate among those who were enrolled in MA for less than a year was 21 percent less
than those who remained in TM, but for those who had been in MA five years or more, the difference
was only 11 percent (Newhouse, et al., 2012). We note in passing that these mortality data support the
inference that in the 1990’s there was favorable selection into MA since it is implausible that any causal
effect of MA on mortality could be 21 percent or even 11 percent. Note these mortality differences
apply to the stock of beneficiaries in each type of plan, not just the small flow between them.
The third problem is methodological. One would like to know the magnitude of selection net of
those who switch into and out of MA, but a methodological problem interferes with such a calculation.10
In the period we are examining, however, many fewer persons, only about a fifth as many, switch out of
MA into TM as switch into MA from TM; hence we focus here on those switching into rather than out of
MA.11
More recent data, however, show less evidence of favorable selection than the data from the
1990s did. By 2008 the difference in age‐sex‐Medicaid adjusted mortality among those enrolled in MA
for less than a year had fallen from its 1998 value of 21 percent to 13 percent and the difference among

10

The difficulty in reaching a summary value for those switching in both directions is that the risk score for those
switching into MA must be based on lagged diagnoses, since historically diagnostic data were not available from
MA enrollees. For the same reason among those disenrolling the risk score must be based on concurrent
diagnoses because lagged diagnoses are not available; as a result, these scores are not comparable. Nonetheless,
the difference in numbers of those switching into MA relative to those switching out of MA means the
characteristics of those switching in, the group we focus on, would likely dominate any summary value of
selection.
11
This decision means our conclusions on selection may be somewhat optimistic because those disenrolling from
MA into TM in the more recent period do appear sicker than those who remain in TM continuously (Newhouse, et
al., 2012).

those enrolled five years or more in MA, instead of 11 percent, was an insignificant 1 percent less, again
consistent with regression toward the mean.12
Other data in addition to the mortality data suggest selection behavior changed in the past
decade. To implement the risk adjustment described above, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) computes a risk score, which is simply the average weight of the HCCs among the plan’s
enrollees. The risk score, which is proportional to the average spending in TM for an enrollee with the
given observable characteristics including diagnosis, changed substantially among those switching into
MA over the 2004‐2008 period relative to those remaining in TM. In 2003 those in TM switching into
MA in 2004 had risk scores that were about 10% less than those who remained in TM, consistent with
the earlier studies of favorable selection into MA; by 2008 that figure had fallen to 3% (Newhouse, et al.,
2012).13 This period coincided with the introduction of the CMS‐HCC’s and the lock‐in.
These risk score data, of course, are subject to the caveat noted above that the characteristics of
the switchers may not closely represent those of the stock of beneficiaries. McWilliams, et al. (2012),
however, compared self‐rated health status as well as utilization among the stock of those in MA and
those in TM over the 2001‐2007 period. Like the mortality data between 1998 and 2008, these
comparisons showed a striking change. The proportion of beneficiaries who rated their health as fair or
poor, the two worst categories, was over 20% less in MA than in TM in 2001‐2003, but by 2006‐2007
was only 5% less and one could not reject the null of no significant difference.14 McWilliams, et al.
(2012) also compared changes in the total utilization of medical services over this period. If medical
management techniques were relatively constant, such changes would primarily reflect changes in
selection.15 Utilization in MA was about 18% less in the 2001‐2003 period, but only about 8% less in
2006‐2007. Drug fills, which in 2001‐2003 were less in MA than TM, were greater by 2006‐2007.
In short, these data suggest that a different mix of beneficiaries began to choose MA, at a rate
large enough to affect characteristics of the entire stock of beneficiaries in the two plan types. One
additional piece of data suggests that by later in the period, the distribution of beneficiaries in MA and
TM were coming into balance. Newhouse, et al. (2013) obtained data for 2010‐2011 from one MA plan
on its revenues and its medical cost (i.e., its payout to physicians, hospitals, etc.) for beneficiaries in 48
common HCC’s or combinations of HCC’s, e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and specified heart arrhythmias. In these data each beneficiary only
entered one of the 48 groups. Revenue to MA plans for persons in a given HCC or combination of HCC’s
12

Because of medical management, a 1 percent difference could potentially be causal.
These results are consistent with Brown, et al.’s findings in their Figure 2. Brown, et al., point out that the upper
part of the risk score distribution was unprofitable; however, this is based on TM spending patterns that do not
replicate in MA (Newhouse, et al., 2013). In Newhouse (2013) we had cost data by HCC from 2 MA plans; in one of
them, but not the other, the profitability of a beneficiary fell monotonically with the risk score, consistent with
Brown, et al. Brown, et al. interpret their results as consistent with the second model of plan selection, however,
we interpret them as consistent with the first model of plan selection, as we describe below.
14
Even in 2006‐2007, however, about 10% more of MA beneficiaries, however, said their health had worsened
relative to the prior year.
15
Any improvement in medical management techniques, the expected direction of any change, would mean the
inference of reduced selection was understated.
13

is approximately proportional to what TM pays for these HCC’s or combinations of HCC’s. Because the
plan had a varying ability to influence cost in these various disease categories and because it faced
varying degrees of market power across physicians who treated different diseases, its margins varied by
160 percentage points over these categories, which would appear to give it strong incentives to select
by HCC category.16 Nonetheless, there was almost no difference between the distribution of
beneficiaries across these 48 categories in the MA plan and the distribution in TM. The mean absolute
difference in the share of beneficiaries in MA and TM across the 48 categories was only 0.34 percentage
points. In this one plan at least, there was no evidence that, post risk adjustment and lock‐in changes,
the plan was structuring its product to attract beneficiaries in the relatively more profitable HCC
categories.
But What Happened to Profitability?
Although the earlier literature suggested that in the 1990’s plans benefited financially from
favorable selection, the results just cited do not answer the question of whether plans changed their
selection mechanism as the new HCC risk adjustment phased in such a way that they maintained or
enhanced their profit. As Brown, et al. (2011) point out, after the implementation of the HCC system, it
was profitable for plans to select within an HCC category rather than simply select low utilizers within an
age‐sex category. Brown, et al. present empirical evidence that plans did change their behavior in
exactly this fashion. In the remainder of this paper we describe Brown’s basis for this claim and then re‐
estimate their key equation on a much larger data set and more targeted population.
Brown, et al. estimated the following two equations using data from 1994 to 2007. The two
equations compare the risk score and Medicare spending for persons in TM who switch from TM to MA
for some part of the following year with those who do not switch to MA and remain in TM. The
question of interest is whether those opting for MA at the end of 2003, and so starting MA enrollment in
2004, differ in their use (relative to stayers in TM) from those opting for MA in prior years. The sample
Brown, et al. use comes from Medicare claims that are linked to the Medicare Current Beneficiary
Survey (MCBS) and is limited to persons who were in TM in year t since no analogous data are available
for those enrolled in MA.

,

16

2002

For example, the least profitable diagnosis for the plan was unstable angina and other acute ischemic heart
disease where medical intervention by the plan would be minimal because of the acute nature of the treatment.
Similarly diseases typically treated by specialists, such as cancer and multiple sclerosis, were much less profitable
than chronic diseases typically treated by primary care physicians such as diabetes. Specialists, being fewer in
number, have more market power vis‐à‐vis plans than do primary care physicians. Although an unknown amount
of the 160 point spread across conditions is attributable to sampling error, there is a clear pattern in the more and
less profitable diagnoses, suggesting the variation by diagnosis is not merely noise.

$
,
,

2002

In both equations Risk Scoreit is the CMS‐HCC value for beneficiary i in year t, and in the second equation
Gov $it is TM spending on beneficiary i in year t, including any out‐of‐pocket spending by the beneficiary.
Gov $it is thus a measure of how sick the beneficiary is in year t. After 2002 takes the value 1 for the
years 2003 and later and is zero otherwise.
It is easiest to interpret these equations if one simply assumes that those who switched to MA
spent the entire next year in MA so that the fraction of the next year spent in MA is 1 for those who
switched and zero for those who did not. Then for those who switched into MA for 1995, the risk score
, whereas for those who remained in TM it is
based on the diagnoses recorded in TM in 1994 is
just . For subsequent years one simply adds the coefficient of the year dummy to both groups, with
an additional effect for the MA group in the After 2002 years. Consistent with the results from the
literature cited above showing favorable selection in the 1990’s, Brown et al. find negative and highly
significant in the first equation, indicating that those who switched to MA had a lower risk score when in
TM and presumptively spent less. We also found this result (Newhouse, et al., 2012).
The results of estimating the second equation are of greater interest since the second equation
not only measures total Medicare spending but also controls for the risk score, which was used to adjust
payments to plans starting in 2004. Gov $it, the total spending by TM beneficiaries in 1994 who
, and starting in 2003 it is
plus a year fixed effect that
switched to MA in 1995 is
applies to both switchers and stayers. Brown, et al.’s test of whether the spending for those who chose
to switch into MA in the years 2003 and later (and so were in MA in 2004 and later) differed from those
who chose switch in prior years is whether one can reject the hypothesis that = 0, since the transition
to the HCC system began in 2004. They estimate to be negative with a t‐statistic of 2.02. Since risk
score is controlled for, Brown, et al. interpret this as indicating that plans changed their selection
behavior to select those within HCC who were spending less in TM the year before they joined an MA
plan.
Brown, et al.’s use of claim files linked to the MCBS severely limits their sample size. There are
about 16,000 observations per year in total in the MCBS. The share in TM varies over the time period,
but averages around 90% in the pre‐HCC period and somewhat less in the post‐period. Of that 90%
about 1‐4 percent switch into MA in a given year, or about 150‐600 per year, which is likely why Brown,
et al pooled the nine years before the introduction of the HCC’s to compare with the four subsequent
years.17 As we described earlier, the incentives to select varied by year during the 2004‐2007 period,
17

Note that this averages to only about 2‐8 persons per HCC per year. Although the original specification of the
CMS‐HCC model included 189 HCC’s, only 70 were ultimately used in the risk adjustment scheme, presumably for
reasons of precision (Pope, et al., 2004). Beneficiaries with multiple diseases typically have weights for each
disease added to arrive at a risk score, although there are a handful of one‐way interactions in the model.

that is, these four years encompassed the transition to the HCC method. To obtain greater precision we
re‐estimated Brown, et al.’s equations using the much larger 20% random sample of Medicare claims
from each calendar year in the 2001‐2011 period.
Brown, et al. include all TM enrollees in their sample, but we limit our sample to those whose
original reason for Medicare eligibility was old age, thus excluding beneficiaries who became eligible
before 65 for reasons of disability or having End Stage Renal Disease. Table 1 shows that the group
whose original reason for eligibility was old age comprises 79% of Medicare beneficiaries. We focus on
the group that became eligible from turning 65 because it comprises the bulk of Medicare beneficiaries
and makes the population more homogeneous. For the latter reason we also exclude the dual eligibles
and the institutionalized. There are, however, additional reasons to exclude the dual eligibles and the
institutionalized. The 2003 Medicare Modernization Act created separate Special Needs Plans (SNPs) for
the duals, the institutionalized, and those with certain chronic conditions as part of the MA program.18
Thus, legislative authorization for these plans did not exist until 2003, so the menu of choices for these
two groups expanded coincident with the introduction of the HCC’s. Moreover, the lock‐in provisions
that took effect in 2006 do not apply to duals, and the institutionalized are paid with a separately
estimated risk adjustment formula.
Descriptive data on the group we focus on is shown in Table 2; similar data on two groups we
exclude, the duals and the institutionalized, are shown in Tables 3 and 4. As can be seen, these two
groups are both smaller and spend considerably more than the non‐institutionalized, non‐duals.
One type of plan that flourished between 2006 and 2010 was the private‐fee‐for‐service (PFFS)
plan. Although this plan was paid like an MA plan, its characteristics are similar to TM. PFFS plans
generally did not have networks, so that enrollees could see any provider who saw Medicare patients
without a differential out‐of‐pocket payment; the provider was paid at TM rates.19 Unlike other MA
plans, there was by law no medical management. PFFS plans only had 80,000 enrollees in 2005 (and less
than half that in prior years), but grew to 800,000 in 2006, 1.5 million in 2007, 2.3 million in 2008, 2.4
million in 2009, and then began to decline because of a requirement that PFFS plans have networks that
took effect in 2011.20 In this period PFFS dominated TM for many beneficiaries (McWilliams, et al.
2011). Because PFFS plans are both different from HMO and PPO plans but also because they attracted
many switchers in some years, we will show results including and excluding those who switched to PFFS
plans. Tables 5 and 6 disaggregate the sample shown in Table 2 into those switching to HMO’s and
PPO’s versus those switching to PFFS.

18

These plans could have changed selection patterns among the dual eligibles and institutionalized. Such plans
first entered the market in 2004, but there were only 11 such plans in that year, a number that grew to 125 plans
in 2005. The first enrollment data we have found are for 2006, when there were 276 SNP plans with 541,000
enrollees out of a total of 6.9 million MA enrollees.18 In 2006, 226 of the 276 plans were for dual eligibles, and they
had 440,000 enrollees (6% of all MA enrollees); there were also 37 plans for the institutionalized with 20,000
enrollees (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2007).
19
Starting in 2011 PFFS plans were required to have networks; at that time many transformed themselves into PPO
plans.
20
The enrollment data are from various reports of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

The samples shown in Tables 1‐6 include only those who were enrolled in both Parts A and B of
Medicare in the prior year and who were enrolled in Medicare on January 1 of the succeeding year. This
is necessary to allow us to identify those who switched from TM to MA, but it does exclude those who
died in the prior year. They also exclude the relatively small numbers of beneficiaries in cost‐based MA
plans, because the reimbursement for such plans is based on their medical costs and is not fixed as it is
for most MA plans. Cost‐based plans enrolled 10% of enrollees in 1996, but only 4% in 2014 (Prospective
Payment Assessment Commission 1997; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 2014). Finally and
importantly, risk scores for new Medicare enrollees in MA are based only on demographic variables
because newly eligible Medicare beneficiaries have no prior claims information. Lacking diagnostic
information for this group with which one could compute an HCC score, we also exclude them.
Three conclusions are immediately apparent from the data in Tables 1‐6. First, as already noted,
the proportion of switchers in any given year is small. Second, the raw means indicate risk adjustment
has a considerable burden if selection is to be mitigated; in the ten years shown in Table 2, mean
spending in TM among who switched to MA in the year before they switched was 17% to 34% less than
among the much larger group that remained in TM. Third, the number of switchers among the duals
and the institutionalized is small in absolute terms, especially in the pre‐HCC years; in those years the
number of switchers to PFFS plans is also small.
The left hand panel Table 7 shows results from re‐estimating Brown, et al.’s second equation
using the sample shown in Table 2. The key coefficients are those for Switched to MA the following year
and Switched to MA the following year*Year. For those who were in TM in 2001 and switched to MA on
January 1, 2002, the Switched to MA coefficient indicates that they spent $174 less on average within
each HCC than those who remained in TM assuming they spent the full year in MA. In 2002 this amount
increased to $393 (=174+219). Using the data from Table 2, these amounts were 3‐6% of mean
spending in those years. In 2003‐2005, as the HCC system was transitioning into place, favorable
selection within HCC increased, especially among those choosing to switch in 2004 and 2005. These
results are consistent with Brown, et al.’s result that within‐HCC selection increased among those
choosing to enroll in MA in 2003 and later.
After 2005, however, selection fell, and from 2006‐2010, the years when the HCC system was
fully in place, the amount of selection within HCC was approximately the same as in 2001‐2002, before
the HCC system was implemented. If one averages the within‐HCC selection for 2001‐2002, the two
years before the transition, the within‐HCC selection was $284; the analogous figure for 2006‐2010, the
five years after the system was fully in place, was $320. The $36 difference between these two means is
well within one standard deviation of the difference.
Although the data in Table 7 suggest that in 2003‐2005 there was additional favorable selection
within HCC when compared with the pre‐HCC years, in those years there was 70%, 50%, and 25%
weight, respectively, on the old demographic system. As a result, it may well not have been profitable
to select within HCC, especially in 2003 and 2004, because during these phase‐in years even low cost
patients in a high cost HCC likely would be more expensive than a patient with no HCC’s and so would

have reduced the plan’s profit. We therefore do not regard the data for these transition years as
necessarily indicating that plans chose to select within HCC.
The right hand panel in Table 7 shows results for the same years using the old demographic risk
adjustment methods, that is, excluding the risk score but adjusting for age and gender.21 The results
show much greater selection from use of the old system. When only age and gender are adjusted for,
those who remained in TM in 2001 and 2002 spent $1,689 and $2,239 (=1,689+550) more in TM than
those who switched, respectively.22 Thus, the comparison of the $1,689 and $2,239 values (average
$1,964) with the $320 figure from the years following full implementation of the HCC’s (Table 7, left
hand panel) indicates that the combination of the HCC risk adjustment system and the lock‐in greatly
reduced selection.
Although Table 7 contains our principal findings, we examined the robustness of our findings to
including as explanatory variables the MA penetration in the beneficiary’s county of residence and a
main effect for those who moved (Table 8). The inclusion of these variables did not change our
qualitative conclusions, namely that at a given level of penetration, selection in the era before HCC’s
with only demographic adjusters was notably greater than in the era after implementation of the HCC’s,
and that selection within HCCs was little different among those who switched in the 2006‐2010 period
than it was in 2001 and 2002. Interestingly, however, starting in 2002 the effect of a 10 percentage
point change in MA penetration in a county became monotonically more negative, a period when MA
enrollment was rising substantially, from around 15% of all beneficiaries in 2001‐2002 to around 24% in
2010‐2011. The usual economic model of selection (Cutler and Reber 1998; Feldman and Dowd 1982)
suggests that an increase in penetration should attract worse risks into MA (as well as raise the average
risk in TM). The data in Table 8 do not support this prediction; starting in 2005 the coefficient on the
penetration variable turns negative and becomes steadily more negative. During this period penetration
rose nationally every year; the steadily more negative coefficients indicate that, if anything, increasingly
better risks were being attracted to MA as county‐level penetration increased in the cross section. This
is consistent with a finding we had reached earlier using different methods (Newhouse et al. 2012).
As described above, PFFS plans differed considerably from HMO plans, and one might therefore
anticipate selection patterns would differ. Hence, we reestimated the results in Table 7 using only those
who switched to HMO plans.23 These results are shown in Table 9. We were unable to identify whether
the plan was a PFFS or an HMO plan for those who switched in 2010, so Table 9 has once less post‐HCC
year than Table 7. The average switcher in the 3 post‐HCC years shown in Table 9 spent $365 less in TM
the year prior to the switch, compared with the $320 figure in Table 6. This difference of $45 is also
within one standard error; thus, our findings are robust to considering just those who switch to HMO
and PPO plans rather than all MA plans, including PFFS.
21

The earlier formula also adjusted for Medicaid and institutionalized status, but those groups are not in our
sample.
22
Although the earlier system also used Medicaid eligibility and institutional status to risk adjust, this sample omits
those two groups and thus we only adjust using age and gender.
23
Very few persons switched to PFFS in 2001 and 2002 (Table 6) so that comparisons of pre‐ and post HCC years
are imprecise.

We suggested above that the more unique physicians a beneficiary anticipated seeing, the more
likely the beneficiary would prefer TM because it would be more likely that they would want to use out‐
of‐network physicians if they enrolled in MA. Table 10 shows that the average number of unique
physicians seen by a beneficiary rises monotonically with the number of HCC’s. Thus, the costliest
beneficiaries within an HCC may inherently prefer the greater provider choice in TM.
Conclusions
We have two main results:




Although there appears to be selection within HCC that favors MA, the magnitude of
this selection is little changed from the period two years before the HCC system was
introduced to the five years following its full introduction.
Although some favorable selection into MA appears to remain, the introduction of the
HCC system and the lock‐in has markedly diminished it. Since these two innovations
were introduced at approximately the same time, we have not tried to decompose the
amount of reduction attributable to each. This decrease in selection is consistent with
other evidence (Newhouse, et al. 2012; Newhouse et al. 2013; Newhouse and McGuire
2014).

A key policy question, of course, is the magnitude of the remaining selection in the MA program.
How much should these findings influence one’s judgment on that question? Given the small
proportion of beneficiaries who switch from TM to MA in a given year relative to the stock of enrollees
in TM, one to four percent of all beneficiaries, we think rather little. Because of status quo bias,
beneficiaries tend to remain in the plan they selected, and over time there is regression to the mean.
Stated differently, the longer that beneficiaries remain in TM or MA, concerns about the effects of any
initial differential selection are mitigated. For example, age‐sex‐Medicaid adjusted mortality in 2008
was 13 percent less after in the year immediately after enrolling in MA compared with mortality among
those who stayed in TM, but for those who have been in MA five years or more, adjusted mortality was
an insignificant one percent less relative to those who stayed in TM. In addition, McWilliams, et al.
(2012) made a straightforward comparisons of self‐rated health status among all TM and MA
beneficiaries, not just those in TM who switched compared with those who did not. That comparison
showed that the proportion of MA beneficiaries who rated their health fair or poor was notably less in
MA in 2001‐2003, in the pre‐HCC and lock‐in era, but that it had converged toward the TM rate by 2006‐
2007. Thus, the mix of risks overall among all those enrolled in MA and TM may be close.
We return now to the two types of selection identified in the health economics literature and
the associated inefficiencies, and consider what our results mean in those terms. The first type of
selection problem is when individuals sort themselves inefficiently between plan types, due to the
premium for the more generous plan being “too high” because more costly types are more likely to
prefer the more generous coverage. The premium thus reflects the average incremental cost between
plans (as it needs to for efficiency) but also a component due to selection (which interferes with efficient
sorting). When risk adjustors better track expected costs, as we found evidence for here, premium

differences between plans in a competitive market will contain less of a component due to selection.24
Thus, our findings suggest that inefficiencies in plan choices in Medicare Advantage have likely
diminished. It is worth keeping in mind, however, that any single premium cannot sort beneficiaries
efficiently so some selection problems of this first type would remain even if selection as we measure it
here were completely eliminated (McGuire, et al. 2013). Efficient plan choice of premium and benefits
may also be interfered with by institutional rules that discourage plans from deviating from a premium
exactly equal to the mandatory Part B premium automatically paid by all beneficiaries who elect an MA
plan (Newhouse and McGuire 2014).
The second type of selection occurs when plans distort their mix of premiums and benefits to
attract profitable enrollees. The new risk adjustment system greatly changed plans’ financial incentives
to favor low cost beneficiaries within an HCC rather than low cost beneficiaries within an age‐sex group.
Our first conclusion suggests that plans did not alter their selection behavior in response to this change
in incentive. We find this conclusion plausible; while plans choose networks, formularies, cost‐sharing
structure, and marketing, under the new system they would have to motivate the physicians and
hospitals with whom they contract to select profitable patients within an HCC, and it is not obvious how
plans, who mostly have arms‐length contracts with hospitals and physicians, would do that. It certainly
is conceivable that a plan could form networks of providers who happen to have low cost patients
within a diagnosis at a given point in time, but given the randomness in spending among a given panel of
patients at the provider level along with the turnover in patients at any given provider or provider
group, providers that appear to be low cost today may be high cost tomorrow (Hofer, et al. 1999;
Bronskill, et al. 2002). Also the more stringent lock‐in periods may have inhibited some plan switching in
response to health status changes.
Furthermore, in other work we failed to find evidence of selection across HCC’s (Newhouse, et
al. 2013). It seems plausible that it is less costly to select across HCC’s than within HCC, since networks
and formularies might be structured to attract or not attract individuals with certain diagnoses. Our
failure to find this type of selection with the HCC system in place strengthens our confidence that
selection mechanisms did not change in response to the HCC’s.
One other phenomenon may explain some remaining selection. Newhouse, et al. (2012)
showed that more than half of those who disenrolled from Medicare Advantage re‐enrolled within 12
months from disenrolling. This is consistent with beneficiary provider shopping: when a beneficiary
wants a medical procedure performed by an out‐of‐network provider, they switch to TM to have it
done, and then re‐enroll in the MA plan, for example, a hip replacement done by a particular surgeon.
Although the lock‐in could have reduced such provider shopping, this type of behavior may plausibly
have been approximately constant before and after the HCC system and the lock‐in, that is, it is related
to the inherent difference between TM and MA of freedom of provider choice within TM.
24

Although premiums and cost sharing for TM are set administratively, the expected cost of MA premiums and
cost sharing is constrained to equal to or less than TM’s actuarial value. In practice by 2007 the expected cost of
MA was less for almost all beneficiaries (McWilliams, et al., 2011). Thus, this constraint on the actuarial value of
MA plans is rarely binding.

Balancing profitability across groups of beneficiaries according to their health care use, as the
HCC system seeks to do, is likely to mitigate incentives to distort certain services in relation to others,
but our findings do not allay concerns about the basic incentives to reduce premiums and benefits to
attract profitable types. Nonetheless, in contrast to the basic Rothschild‐Stiglitz model where there is
no regulator and no constraint on contracts that can be offered, Medicare has numerous instruments
with which to address selection and it appears to have made substantial progress in doing so.
In sum, improving the match between risk adjusted payments and expected costs in MA is likely
to have improved the efficiency of the MA program, both in terms of efficient sorting of beneficiaries
between TM and MA and in terms of the nature of plan offerings. Efficiency problems would, however,
persist even with a complete elimination of selection as studied here because of Medicare’s single
premium policy. Attention to premium policy as well as risk‐adjustment policy is called for to more fully
address performance of the MA program.

REFERENCES
Antos, Joseph R., "The Wyden–Ryan Proposal — A Foundation for Realistic Medicare Reform," New
England Journal of Medicine, 2012, 366(10):879‐81.
Breyer, Friedrich, M. Kate Bundorf, and Mark V. Pauly, "Health Care Spending Risk, Health Insurance,
and Payment to Health Plans," Handbook of Health Economics, Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G.
McGuire and Pedro Pita Barros, Eds. Amsterdam, North‐Holland. 2:2012, 691‐762.
Bronskill, Susan E., Sharon‐Lise T. Normand, Mary Beth Landrum, et al., "Longitudinal Profiles of Health
Care Providers," Statistics in Medicine, 2002, 21(8):1067‐88.
Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, et al., How Does Risk Selection Respnd to Risk
Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program. Cambridge, MA, National Bureau
of Economic Research:2011.
Cao, Zhun, and Thomas G. McGuire, "Service‐Level Selection by HMOs in Medicare," Journal of Health
Economics, 2003, 22(6):915‐31.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014). "Monthly Contract and Enrollment Summary
Report." Retrieved March 19, 2014, from http://www.cms.gov/Research‐Statistics‐Data‐and‐
Systems/Statistics‐Trends‐and‐Reports/MCRAdvPartDEnrolData/Monthly‐Contract‐and‐
Enrollment‐Summary‐Report.html?DLSort=1&DLPage=1&DLSortDir=descending#.
Congressional Budget Office, "Predicting How Changes in Medicare Payment Rates Would Affect Risk‐
Sector Enrollment and Costs." Washington, DC, Congressional Budget Office:1997.
Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber, "Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff Between Competition
and Adverse Selection," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113(2):433‐66.
Cutler, David M., and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "The Anatomy of Health Insurance," Handbook of Health
Economics, Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse, Eds. Amsterdam, Elsevier. 1A:2000,
563‐644.
Dubey, Pradeep, and John Geanakoplos, "Competitive Pooling: Rothschild‐Stiglitz Reconsidered,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117(4):1529‐70.
Einav, Liran, and Amy N. Finkelstein, "Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in Pictures,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25(1):115‐38.
Einav, Liran, Amy N. Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen, "Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using
Variation in Prices," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125(3):877‐921.
Feldman, Roger, and Bryan Dowd, "Simulation of a Health Insurance Market with Adverse Selection,"
Operations Research, 1982, 30(6):1027‐42.
Frank, Richard G., Jacob Glazer, and Thomas G. McGuire, "Measuring Adverse Selection in Managed
Health Care," Journal of Health Economics, 2000, 19(6):829‐54.
Glied, Sherry A., "Managed Care," Handbook of Health Economics, Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P.
Newhouse, Eds. Amsterdam, North‐Holland. 1A:2000, 707‐53.
Hendren, Nathaniel, "Private Information and Insurance Rejections." Cambridge, National Bureau of
Economic Research:2012.
Hofer, Timothy P., Rodney A. Hayward, Sheldon Greenfield, et al., "The Unreliabilty of Individual
Physician 'Report Cards' for Assessing the Costs and Quality of Care of a Chronic Disease," JAMA,
1999, 281(24):2098‐105.
McGuire, Thomas G., Jacob Glazer, Joseph P. Newhouse, et al., "Integrating Risk Adjustment and
Enrollee Premiums in Health Plan Payment," Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32(6):1263‐77.
McGuire, Thomas G., Joseph P. Newhouse, and Anna D. Sinaiko, "A History of Medicare Part C," The
Milbank Quarterly, 2011, 89(2):289‐332.

McWilliams, J. Michael, Christopher C. Afendulis, Thomas G. McGuire, et al., "Complex Medicare
Advantage Choices May Overwhelm Seniors—Especially Those With Impaired Decision Making,"
Health Affairs, 2011, 30(9):1786‐94.
McWilliams, J. Michael, John Hsu, and Joseph P. Newhouse, "New Risk‐Adjustment System Was
Associated With Reduced Favorable Selection In Medicare Advantage," Health Affairs, 2012,
31(12):2630‐40.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "Report to the Congress: Improving Risk Adjustment in
Medicare." Washington, DC, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission:2000.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy."
Washington, DC, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission:2007.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, March
2007." Washington, DC, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission:2007.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "A Data Book: Healthcare Spending and the Medicare
Program." Washington, DC, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission:2013.
Morgan, Robert O., Beth A. Virnig, Carolee A. DeVito, et al., "The Medicare‐HMO Revolving Door — The
Healthy Go in and the Sick Go Out," New England Journal of Medicine, 1997, 337(3):169‐75.
Newhouse, Joseph P., "Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers: Selection versus Efficiency in
Production," Journal of Economic Literature, 1996, 34(3):1236‐63.
Newhouse, Joseph P., Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. Cambridge, MIT Press, 2002.
Newhouse, Joseph P., Jie Huang, Mary Price, et al., "Steps To Reduce Favorable Risk Selection In
Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded, Boding Well For Health Insurance Exchanges," Health
Affairs, 2012, 31(12):2618‐28.
Newhouse, Joseph P., and Thomas G. McGuire, "How Successful Is Medicare Advantage?," The Milbank
Quarterly, 2014, 92(2):in press.
Newhouse, Joseph P., J. Michael McWilliams, Mary Price, et al., "How Much Do Health Plans Select?,"
Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32(6):1278‐88.
Newhouse, Joseph P., Mary Price, Jie Huang, et al., "Steps To Reduce Favorable Risk Selection In
Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded, Boding Well For Health Insurance Exchanges," Health
Affairs, 2012, 31(12):2618‐28.
Physician Payment Review Commission, Annual Report to Congress, 1996. Washington, DC, Physician
Payment Review Commission, 1996.
Pope, Gregory C., John Kautter, Randall P. Ellis, et al., "Risk Adjustment of Medicare Capitation Payments
Using the CMS‐HCC Model," Health Care Financing Review, 2004, 25(4):119‐41.
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, "Medicare and the American Health Care System: Report
to the Congress, June 1997." Washington, DC, Prospective Payment Assessment
Commission:1997.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz, "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
Economics of Imperfect Information," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1976, 90(4):629‐50.
Samuelson, William, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "Status Quo Bias in Decision Making," Journal of Risk and
Insurance, 1988, 1(1):7‐59.
Shore, Karen K., and John Bertko (1999), "Comparison of Small Group Rates in California: HIPC vs. Non‐
HIPC," Retrieved March 17, 2014, from
http://www.chcf.org/~/media/MEDIA%20LIBRARY%20Files/PDF/H/PDF%20hipcrates.pdf.
Weinberg, Micah, and Bill Kramer (2011), "Building Successful SHOP Exchanges: Lessons from the
California Experience," Retrieved March 17, 2014, from
http://www.pbgh.org/storage/documents/PBGH_SHOP_05.pdf.
Wilson, Charles A., "A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information," Journal of Economic
Theory, 1977, 16(2):167‐207.

Yegian, Jill Mathews, Thomas C. Buchmueller, Mark D. Smith, et al., "The Health Insurance Plan of
California: The First Five Years," Health Affairs, 2000, 19(5):158‐65.

Table 1: Beneficiaries by Age and Original Reason for Eligibility (ORE)*
ORE=Aged
Total

ORE=Disability or ESRD

Age 65+

Age 65+

Age <65

2001

5,760,821

4,563,388

79.2%

422,207

7.3%

775,226

13.5%

2002

5,959,061

4,701,352

78.9%

442,511

7.4%

815,198

13.7%

2003

6,095,807

4,779,197

78.4%

458,698

7.5%

857,912

14.1%

2004

6,143,162

4,781,953

77.8%

465,479

7.6%

895,730

14.6%

2005

6,129,633

4,740,059

77.3%

467,811

7.6%

921,763

15.0%

2006

5,974,412

4,607,287

77.1%

459,927

7.7%

907,198

15.2%

2007

5,887,761

4,506,823

76.5%

460,829

7.8%

920,109

15.6%

2008

5,820,956

4,427,286

76.1%

465,482

8.0%

928,188

15.9%

2009

5,871,707

4,429,056

75.4%

476,663

8.1%

965,988

16.5%

2010

5,958,291

4,462,672

74.9%

498,891

8.4%

996,728

16.7%

*The following types of beneficiaries were excluded from the sample: newly eligible beneficiaries (since no
prior claims information was available); beneficiaries who did not have 12 months of continuous
enrollment in TM, both Parts A and B, in the prior year. In addition, beneficiaries who switched into cost
MA plans or special needs plans were excluded.

Table 2a: Unadjusted expenditures by Year and Switching Status,
Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals*
Stay in TM in next Year
N

Mean $

Switch to MA in Next Year
SD

N

Mean $

SD

2001

3,731,431

5,325

11,144

24,562

3,739

8,711

2002

3,851,378

6,001

13,034

26,129

4,006

9,628

2003

3,971,622

6,358

13,433

41,798

4,183

9,416

2004

3,927,310

6,651

13,837

77,193

4,566

10,060

2005

3,789,618

6,871

14,169

160,230

4,722

10,210

2006

3,687,693

6,958

14,406

161,753

5,750

11,947

2007

3,610,107

7,016

14,527

156,727

5,822

12,222

2008

3,531,134

7,015

14,670

126,855

5,374

11,752

2009

3,537,119

7,263

15,349

111,616

5,776

12,908

2010

3,577,950

7,343

15,510

91,620

5,590

12,256

*2007$ The following types of beneficiaries were excluded from the sample: Beneficiaries whose
original eligibility was attributable to disability or ESRD; newly eligible beneficiaries (since no prior claims
information was available); beneficiaries who did not have 12 months of continuous enrollment in TM,
both Parts A and B, in the prior year; the institutionalized; and dual eligibles. In addition, beneficiaries
who switched into cost MA plans or special needs plans were excluded.

Table 2b: Unadjusted Risk Scores* by Year and Switching Status
Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to MA in Next Year

N

Mean Score

SD

N

Mean Score

SD

2001

3,731,431

0.922

0.760

24,562

0.788

0.658

2002

3,851,378

0.953

0.817

26,129

0.804

0.687

2003

3,971,622

0.976

0.844

41,798

0.809

0.686

2004

3,927,310

0.983

0.852

77,193

0.842

0.714

2005

3,789,618

1.000

0.868

160,230

0.853

0.716

2006

3,687,693

1.018

0.886

161,753

0.927

0.800

2007

3,610,107

1.023

0.881

156,727

0.947

0.813

2008

3,531,134

1.004

0.829

126,855

0.883

0.730

2009

3,537,119

1.010

0.838

111,616

0.898

0.753

2010

3,577,950

0.967

0.799

91,620

0.846

0.708

*Risk scores are computed using the 2007 CMS‐HCC model.

Table 3a: Unadjusted expenditures by Year and Switching Status
Non‐institutionalized Duals
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to HMO in Next Year

N

Mean

SD

N

Mean

SD

2001

380,492

7,277

14,437

2,732

6,925

14,772

2002

395,135

8,376

16,866

3,023

7,881

15,810

2003

412,942

8,969

17,326

5,216

7,653

16,084

2004

404,749

9,214

17,675

12,546

8,225

16,357

2005

389,618

9,574

18,379

39,323

7,973

15,659

2006

375,952

9,756

18,745

28,342

8,885

16,522

2007

367,100

9,953

19,349

23,563

8,722

16,203

2008

408,096

10,357

19,788

20,555

8,865

17,365

2009

419,309

10,803

20,709

18,297

9,527

17,780

2010

427,833

10,665

20,520

18,567

9,052

17,715

*in 2007$ The following types of beneficiaries were excluded from the sample: Beneficiaries whose
original eligibility was attributable to disability ,ESRD, or Alzheimer’s; newly eligible beneficiaries (since
no prior claims information was available); beneficiaries who did not have 12 months of continuous
enrollment in TM, both Parts A and B, in the prior year; the institutionalized; and dual eligibles. In
addition, beneficiaries who switched into cost MA plans or special needs plans were excluded.

Table 3b: Unadjusted Risk Scores* by Year and Switching Status
Non‐institutionalized Duals
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to HMO in Next Year

N

Mean

SD

N

Mean

SD

2001

380,492

1.2801

0.9305

2,732

1.184

0.848

2002

395,135

1.3362

0.9960

3,023

1.211

0.897

2003

412,942

1.3731

1.0317

5,216

1.191

0.926

2004

404,749

1.3772

1.0385

12,546

1.253

0.931

2005

389,618

1.3979

1.0533

39,323

1.277

0.938

2006

375,952

1.4243

1.0818

28,342

1.342

0.989

2007

367,100

1.4336

1.0814

23,563

1.322

0.981

2008

408,096

1.4099

1.0215

20,555

1.284

0.922

2009

419,309

1.4403

1.0304

18,297

1.299

0.943

2010

427,833

1.3692

0.9835

18,567

1.228

0.888

* Risk scores are computed using the 2007 CMS‐HCC model.

Table 4a: Unadjusted expenditures* by Year and Switching Status
Institutionalized
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to HMO in Next Year

N

Mean

SD

N

Mean

SD

2001

421,423

21,860

30,161

2,748

23,305

28,939

2002

423,218

17,899

27,276

2,469

20,997

28,985

2003

345,235

19,144

28,250

2,384

20,662

30,462

2004

356,336

19,949

29,052

3,819

21,077

30,964

2005

351,318

20,738

29,846

9,952

18,285

27,269

2006

345,477

20,996

30,421

8,070

20,755

30,130

2007

340,690

21,491

30,918

8,636

20,910

29,790

2008

334,485

22,264

31,560

6,161

20,742

28,957

2009

336,523

23,393

33,289

6,192

23,283

32,872

2010

341,551

23,560

33,600

5,151

23,015

32,490

*2007$. The following types of beneficiaries were excluded from the sample: Beneficiaries whose
original eligibility was attributable to disability ,ESRD, or Alzheimer’s; newly eligible beneficiaries (since
no prior claims information was available); beneficiaries who did not have 12 months of continuous
enrollment in TM, both Parts A and B, in the prior year. In addition, beneficiaries who switched into cost
MA plans or special needs plans were excluded.

Table 4b: Institutionalized: Unadjusted Risk Scores by Year and Switching Status
Institutionalized
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to HMO in Next Year

N

Mean

SD

N

Mean

SD

2001

421,423

1.797

1.050

2,748

1.815

1.018

2002

423,218

1.720

0.999

2,469

1.780

0.991

2003

345,235

1.751

1.031

2,384

1.731

0.975

2004

356,336

1.753

1.036

3,819

1.747

0.989

2005

351,318

1.774

1.057

9,952

1.717

0.977

2006

345,477

1.793

1.068

8,070

1.800

1.047

2007

340,690

1.801

1.072

8,636

1.786

1.026

2008

334,485

1.751

0.987

6,161

1.717

0.921

2009

336,523

1.767

0.984

6,192

1.768

0.951

2010

341,551

1.687

0.946

5,151

1.702

0.922

Risk scores are computed using the 2007 CMS‐HCC model.

Table 5a: Unadjusted expenditures by Year and Switching Status,
Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals*
Stay in TM in next Year
N

Mean $

Switch to MA-HMO’s in Next Year
SD

N

Mean $

SD

2001

3,731,431

5,325

11,144

23,966

3,714

8,691

2002

3,851,378

6,001

13,034

24,988

4,033

9,725

2003

3,971,622

6,358

13,433

37,727

4,210

9,524

2004

3,927,310

6,651

13,837

58,207

4,657

10,288

2005

3,789,618

6,871

14,169

87,142

4,766

10,257

2006

3,687,693

6,958

14,406

53,373

5,279

11,456

2007

3,610,107

7,016

14,527

70,898

5,389

11,705

2008

3,531,134

7,015

14,670

74,039

4,940

10,973

2009

3,537,119

7,263

15,349

85,114

5,662

12,796

*2007$ The following types of beneficiaries were excluded from the sample: Beneficiaries whose
original eligibility was attributable to disability ,ESRD, or Alzheimer’s; newly eligible beneficiaries (since
no prior claims information was available); beneficiaries who did not have 12 months of continuous
enrollment in TM, both Parts A and B, in the prior year; the institutionalized; and dual eligibles. In
addition, beneficiaries who switched into PFFS, cost MA plans or special needs plans were excluded.
MA‐PPO enrollees are included. 2010 values are not shown in this table because we are unable to
identify the type of MA plan that was chosen in 2010.

Table 5b: Unadjusted Risk Scores* by Year and Switching Status
Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to MA-HMO’s in Next Year

N

Mean Score

SD

N

Mean Score

SD

2001

3,731,431

0.922

0.760

23,966

0.786

0.658

2002

3,851,378

0.953

0.817

24,988

0.806

0.689

2003

3,971,622

0.976

0.844

37,727

0.817

0.695

2004

3,927,310

0.983

0.852

58,207

0.860

0.737

2005

3,789,618

1.000

0.868

87,142

0.872

0.735

2006

3,687,693

1.018

0.886

53,373

0.897

0.785

2007

3,610,107

1.023

0.881

70,898

0.901

0.779

2008

3,531,134

1.004

0.829

74,039

0.850

0.702

2009

3,537,119

1.010

0.838

85,114

0.891

0.751

*Risk scores are computed using the 2007 CMS‐HCC model.

Table 6a: Unadjusted expenditures by Year and Switching Status,
Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals*
Stay in TM in next Year
N

Mean $

Switch to MA-PFFS in Next Year
SD

N

Mean $

SD

2001

3,731,431

5,325

11,144

596

4,764

9,445

2002

3,851,378

6,001

13,034

1,141

3,416

7,155

2003

3,971,622

6,358

13,433

4,071

3,934

8,345

2004

3,927,310

6,651

13,837

18,986

4,286

9,323

2005

3,789,618

6,871

14,169

73,088

4,668

10,153

2006

3,687,693

6,958

14,406

108,380

5,982

12,175

2007

3,610,107

7,016

14,527

85,829

6,180

12,621

2008

3,531,134

7,015

14,670

52,816

5,982

12,739

2009

3,537,119

7,263

15,349

26,502

6,143

13,253

*2007$. The following types of beneficiaries were excluded from the sample: Beneficiaries whose
original eligibility was attributable to disability ,ESRD, or Alzheimer’s; newly eligible beneficiaries (since
no prior claims information was available); beneficiaries who did not have 12 months of continuous
enrollment in TM, both Parts A and B, in the prior year; the institutionalized; and dual eligibles. In
addition, beneficiaries who switched into cost MA plans or special needs plans were excluded. 2010
values are not shown in this table because we are unable to identify the type of MA plan that was
chosen in 2010.

Table 6b: Unadjusted Risk Scores* by Year and Switching Status
Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals
Stay in TM in next Year

Switch to MA-PFFS in Next Year

N

Mean Score

SD

N

Mean Score

SD

2001

3,731,431

0.922

0.760

596

0.8728

0.6707

2002

3,851,378

0.953

0.817

1,141

0.7611

0.6425

2003

3,971,622

0.976

0.844

4,071

0.7346

0.5912

2004

3,927,310

0.983

0.852

18,986

0.7849

0.6379

2005

3,789,618

1.000

0.868

73,088

0.8308

0.6918

2006

3,687,693

1.018

0.886

108,380

0.9416

0.8072

2007

3,610,107

1.023

0.881

85,829

0.9849

0.8379

2008

3,531,134

1.004

0.829

52,816

0.9286

0.7666

2009

3,537,119

1.010

0.838

26,502

0.9221

0.7565

*Risk scores are computed using the 2007 CMS‐HCC model.

Table 7: Outcome = Expenditures in Year T, Predictor = Fraction of Year T+1 in MA (risk score
adjustment vs. no adjustment), Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals*
Model 1: Adjusted for Risk Score
Coeff
Fraction of months in MA in
Next Year
Year
(reference=2001)

Fraction of months in
MA in Next Year*Year

95%

CI

Coeff

SE

95%

CI

76.19

‐
1,838.18

‐
1,539.50

‐174.13

63.09

‐297.79

‐50.47

‐
1,688.84

333.81

6.06

321.93

345.69

676.18

7.63

661.23

691.13

2003

441.20

6.32

428.82

453.58

1,014.92

8.12

999.00

1,030.84

2004

660.89

6.54

648.08

673.70

1,302.56

8.47

1,285.97

1,319.16

2005

696.30

6.80

682.98

709.62

1,510.95

8.82

1,493.67

1,528.23

2006

586.26

7.18

572.18

600.34

1,591.44

9.41

1,572.99

1,609.89

2007

593.84

7.26

579.60

608.08

1,643.04

9.53

1,624.37

1,661.71

2008

798.21

7.52

783.47

812.95

1,652.43

9.65

1,633.51

1,671.35

2009

984.16

7.75

968.96

999.36

1,922.47

9.94

1,902.99

1,941.96

2010

1,523.65

7.85

1,508.26

1,539.05

2,012.32

9.97

1,992.77

2,031.87

2002

‐218.87

98.75

‐412.41

‐25.32

‐549.81

122.32

‐789.55

‐310.07

‐289.79

86.33

‐458.98

‐120.59

‐828.00

105.29

‐
1,034.37

‐621.63

2004

‐553.46

77.99

‐706.32

‐400.60

‐772.56

95.99

‐960.70

‐584.42

2005

‐513.90

68.19

‐647.56

‐380.25

‐571.23

82.88

‐733.67

‐408.78

2006

‐34.95

68.20

‐168.62

98.72

556.52

83.47

392.91

720.12

2007

‐227.04

68.32

‐360.93

‐93.14

589.73

83.57

425.92

753.53

2008

‐147.75

69.72

‐284.40

‐11.09

242.79

84.81

76.56

409.01

2009

‐89.04

71.62

‐229.41

51.33

501.16

87.40

329.86

672.47

2010

‐231.84

71.95

‐372.86

‐90.82

231.72

87.81

59.61

403.83

10,829.92

7.69

10,814.83

10,845.00
1,039.19

8.90

1,021.75

1,056.63

2002

2003

Risk Score (centered on 1)
Age Group

SE

Model 2: Not adjusted for Risk Score

70‐

74

(reference=65‐69)

75‐
79

2,198.67

10.18

2,178.72

2,218.63

80‐
84

2,973.63

11.05

2,951.96

2,995.29

85‐
89

3,449.23

13.09

3,423.57

3,474.90

90‐
94

3,628.99

18.36

3,593.01

3,664.98

95+

3,113.58

32.25

3,050.37

3,176.79

48.40

10.49

27.83

68.97

70‐
74

325.25

13.90

298.00

352.49

75‐
79

819.12

16.26

787.26

850.98

80‐
84

1,123.17

18.35

1,087.21

1,159.13

85‐
89

1,225.91

22.44

1,181.94

1,269.88

90‐
94

1,143.91

33.94

1,077.40

1,210.43

95+

1,427.16

68.08

1,293.72

1,560.60

3,215.42

8.52

3,198.72

3,232.12

Male

Male*Age Group

Constant

6,174.42

*The sample is the same as in Table 2.

4.69

6,165.22

6,183.62

Table 8: Model Results with MA Penetration: Outcome = Expenditures in Year T, Predictor = Fraction of Year T+1
in MA (risk score adjustment vs. no adjustment), Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals*
Model 1: Adjusted for Risk Score

Model 2: Not adjusted for Risk Score

Coeff

SE

95%

CI

Coeff

SE

95%

CI

Fraction of months in MA in Next
Year

-210.18

63.32

-334.28

-86.09

-1,964.87

76.49

-2,114.78

1,814.95

Year (reference=2001)

2002

638.70

13.66

611.93

665.48

1,622.14

17.90

1,587.06

1,657.23

2003

753.38

13.65

726.62

780.13

1,966.81

17.99

1,931.54

2,002.08

2004

1,007.14

13.83

980.02

1,034.25

2,293.03

18.28

2,257.21

2,328.85

2005

1,047.99

14.29

1,019.98

1,076.01

2,529.94

18.88

2,492.94

2,566.94

2006

964.23

15.21

934.41

994.04

2,680.92

20.14

2,641.45

2,720.39

2007

1,018.21

15.98

986.90

1,049.52

2,745.02

21.16

2,703.55

2,786.50

2008

1,287.94

16.82

1,254.97

1,320.91

2,765.90

22.00

2,722.78

2,809.03

2009

1,502.92

17.61

1,468.42

1,537.43

3,038.70

22.93

2,993.76

3,083.64

2010

2,165.28

17.69

2,130.62

2,199.95

3,163.19

22.90

3,118.30

3,208.08

2002

-266.21

99.04

-460.33

-72.09

-617.10

122.70

-857.59

-376.61

2003

-308.93

86.61

-478.69

-139.17

-811.81

105.68

-1,018.93

-604.68

2004

-526.14

78.23

-679.47

-372.81

-641.32

96.30

-830.06

-452.58

2005

-480.42

68.41

-614.51

-346.33

-345.08

83.17

-508.09

-182.08

2006

-0.69

68.41

-134.77

133.39

826.28

83.74

662.15

990.41

2007

-181.04

68.54

-315.39

-46.70

850.10

83.87

685.72

1,014.49

2008

-91.17

69.96

-228.28

45.94

501.91

85.11

335.09

668.72

2009

-25.10

71.85

-165.92

115.72

757.69

87.70

585.81

929.57

2010

-160.31

72.16

-301.74

-18.87

491.97

88.10

319.30

664.64

23.92

3.38

17.30

30.54

182.67

4.27

174.30

191.05

25.96

4.71

16.73

35.19

26.25

5.93

14.62

37.88

13.71

4.99

3.92

23.49

9.70

6.42

-2.88

22.28

Fraction of months in MA
in Next Year*Year

MA Penetration in County (10%
increase)
MA Penetration in
County
(10% incr)*Year

2002
2003

2004

-21.66

5.16

-31.77

-11.55

-35.60

6.70

-48.73

-22.47

2005

-24.84

5.33

-35.28

-14.39

-73.33

6.90

-86.85

-59.80

2006

-41.65

5.47

-52.36

-30.93

-142.98

7.14

-156.97

-128.98

2007

-64.49

5.74

-75.74

-53.24

-152.11

7.46

-166.74

-137.48

2008

-91.37

5.83

-102.81

-79.94

-157.29

7.43

-171.84

-142.73

2009

-101.18

6.04

-113.01

-89.34

-163.35

7.65

-178.35

-148.35

2010

-156.00

5.96

-167.69

-144.31

-179.84

7.52

-194.58

-165.11

334.30

11.51

311.75

356.85

961.84

15.32

931.80

991.87

10,829.43

7.70

10,814.35

10,844.51

Moved
Risk Score (centered on 1)
Age Group

70-74

1,043.19

8.90

1,025.75

1,060.63

(reference=65-69)

75-79

2,196.12

10.18

2,176.17

2,216.07

80-84

2,961.12

11.05

2,939.46

2,982.77

85-89

3,428.98

13.09

3,403.33

3,454.63

90-94

3,604.20

18.35

3,568.24

3,640.17

95+

3,091.45

32.22

3,028.30

3,154.61

44.28

10.50

23.71

64.85

70-74

328.06

13.90

300.81

355.30

75-79

826.37

16.25

794.51

858.22

80-84

1,132.36

18.34

1,096.41

1,168.31

85-89

1,233.97

22.42

1,190.02

1,277.92

90-94

1,148.87

33.91

1,082.40

1,215.34

95+

1,428.28

68.03

1,294.95

1,561.62

2,034.76

18.15

1,999.18

2,070.33

Male
Male*Age Group

Constant

5,810.87

*The sample is the same as Table 2.

12.97

5,785.44

5,836.29

Table 9: Outcome = Expenditures in Year T, Predictor = Fraction of Year T+1 in MA (risk score
adjustment vs. no adjustment), Non‐Institutionalized, Non‐Duals Switching to HMO’s and PPO’s*
Model 1: Adjusted for Risk Score

Model 2: Not adjusted for Risk Score

Coeff

SE

95%

CI

Coeff

SE

95%

CI

Fraction of months in MA in Next
Year

-196.69

63.32

-320.80

-72.58

-1,704.53

76.56

-1,854.58

-1,554.48

Year (reference=2001)

2002

337.20

6.06

325.31

349.09

676.46

7.63

661.50

691.41

2003

446.83

6.32

434.45

459.22

1,016.29

8.12

1,000.36

1,032.21

2004

667.62

6.54

654.80

680.44

1,305.89

8.47

1,289.29

1,322.49

2005

704.61

6.80

691.29

717.94

1,514.82

8.82

1,497.53

1,532.11

2006

597.28

7.18

583.20

611.36

1,594.98

9.42

1,576.52

1,613.43

2007

604.86

7.26

590.63

619.10

1,645.76

9.53

1,627.09

1,664.44

2008

807.31

7.52

792.57

822.06

1,654.99

9.66

1,636.06

1,673.91

2009

993.77

7.77

978.54

1,009.00

1,924.48

9.94

1,904.99

1,943.96

2002

-211.06

99.51

-406.10

-16.02

-507.30

123.54

-749.43

-265.17

-355.56

88.45

-528.92

-182.20

-808.93

108.16

-1,020.92

-596.93

2004

-659.68

81.88

-820.16

-499.19

-585.88

101.25

-784.33

-387.43

2005

-683.76

72.11

-825.10

-542.42

-486.88

87.82

-659.01

-314.76

2006

-196.44

76.14

-345.67

-47.21

-55.24

94.60

-240.65

130.17

2007

-155.84

73.67

-300.22

-11.45

194.29

90.71

16.50

372.08

2008

-228.47

73.21

-371.97

-84.98

-160.82

89.11

-335.47

13.84

2009

-120.70

74.07

-265.87

24.47

390.32

90.71

212.54

568.10

10,724.59

7.93

10,709.06

10,740.13

Fraction of months in
MA
in Next Yr*Yr

2003

Risk Score (centered on 1)
Age Group

70-74

1,023.49

9.34

1,005.20

1,041.79

(reference=65-69)

75-79

2,161.12

10.55

2,140.44

2,181.81

80-84

2,904.99

11.43

2,882.59

2,927.38

85-89

3,344.25

13.52

3,317.74

3,370.75

90-94

3,485.41

18.98

3,448.22

3,522.61

95+

2,966.50

33.10

2,901.63

3,031.38

67.11

11.01

45.53

88.69

70-74

327.83

14.62

299.18

356.48

75-79

830.72

16.90

797.60

863.85

80-84

1,132.71

18.97

1,095.54

1,169.89

85-89

1,235.56

23.27

1,189.95

1,281.17

90-94

1,142.96

35.21

1,073.94

1,211.98

95+

1,357.56

70.25

1,219.87

1,495.25

3,246.75

8.72

3,229.67

3,263.84

Male
Male*Age Group

Constant

6,166.15

*The sample is the same as in Table 5.

4.70

6,156.93

6,175.36

Table 10: Mean number of providers seen in 2011 by number of HCCs
No. of HCCs

Subjects

Mean No. of Providers

SD

Min

Max

0

1,642,618

3.50

3.74

0

90

1

1,091,932

5.38

4.48

0

101

2

633,884

6.74

5.33

0

104

3

346,879

8.00

6.18

0

101

4

406,325

10.55

8.31

0

225

Source: 2011 20% Medicare claims sample and the Carrier file. Providers include MD’s, DO’s,
and RN’s billing independently other than radiologists, anesthesiologists, and pathologists as
identified from the provider specialty variable on the Carrier file. All differences are significant
at the 0.0001 level.

