                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    BOOK TRANSLATIONS AS IDEA FLOWS:
THE EFFECTS OF THE COLLAPSE OF COMMUNISM ON THE DIFFUSION OF KNOWLEDGE

                                            Ran Abramitzky
                                              Isabelle Sin

                                         Working Paper 20023
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20023


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2014




 We are grateful to Stefano DellaVigna (editor), Nathan Nunn, Manuel Amador, Kamran Bilir, Nick
 Bloom, Aaron Bodoh-Creed, Albie Bollard, Tim Bresnahan, Elan Dagenais, Doireann Fitzgerald,
 Paul Gregory, Avner Greif, Caroline Hoxby, Nir Jaimovich, Seema Jayachandran, Pete Klenow, Naomi
 Lamoreaux, Ed Leamer, Aprajit Mahajan, Roy Mill, Neale Mahoney, John Pencavel, Luigi Pistaferri,
 Gary Richardson, Robert Staiger, Alessandra Voena, Romain Wacziarg, Gui Woolston, Gavin Wright,
 two anonymous referees, and participants of numerous seminars and conferences for most useful
 suggestions.We owe special thanks to the Index Translationum team, especially Alain Brion, Mauro
 Rosi, andMarius Tukaj for providing us with the translation data. Isabelle Sin gratefully acknowledges
 financialsupport from the Ric Weiland fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
 anddo not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Ran Abramitzky and Isabelle Sin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
Book Translations as Idea Flows: The Effects of the Collapse of Communism on the Diffusion
of Knowledge
Ran Abramitzky and Isabelle Sin
NBER Working Paper No. 20023
March 2014
JEL No. F02,F15,N0,N70,N74,P20,P30,P51,P52

                                            ABSTRACT

We use book translations as a new measure of international idea flows and study the effects of
Communism’s collapse in Eastern Europe on these flows. Using novel data on 800,000 translations
and difference-in-differences approaches, we show that while translations between Communist
languages decreased by two thirds with the collapse, Western-to-Communist translations increased
by a factor of four and quickly converged to Western levels. Convergence was more pronounced in
the fields of applied and social sciences, and was more complete in Satellite and Baltic than in Soviet
countries. We discuss how these patterns help us understand how repressive institutions and preferences
towards Western European ideas shaped the international diffusion of knowledge.


Ran Abramitzky
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ranabr@stanford.edu

Isabelle Sin
Motu Economic and
  Public Policy Research
Level 1
97 Cuba Street
Wellington 6142
New Zealand
isabelle.sin@motu.org.nz




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20023
1. Introduction

          Economists and economic historians have long recognized the

importance of knowledge and ideas for growth and development, and the

importance of institutions in shaping the international flow of ideas.1

Nevertheless, there is little empirical work on idea flows, primarily because

ideas are challenging to measure. In particular, it is challenging to capture the

two main properties of ideas, namely non-rivalry (the use of an idea by one

party in no way affects its simultaneous use by another) and disembodiment (in

contrast to embodiment in purchased goods or equipment). We address this

challenge by suggesting a new measure of the international flow of ideas and a

setting in which to study the role of institutions in shaping the diffusion of

ideas between countries.

          Specifically, we use book translations as a measure of the international

flow of ideas. Translations are an attractive measure of the diffusion of ideas

because they are both non-rival and disembodied, and their key purpose is to

transmit written ideas, information or knowledge between speakers of different

languages. In the absence of translation, many ideas stored in words might

never leave the language or country in which they were conceived. Of course,

book translations are not the only way societies gain new knowledge, but they

are one channel for the flow of pure ideas between linguistically distinct




1
    See, for example, Kuznets (1966), Mokyr (2003, 2009, 2010), Romer (1993, 2010), Klenow

(2005), and Jones and Romer (2010).


                                             3
groups, and are both quantifiable and classifiable by field and specific content.2

Moreover, the types of ideas captured by translations are broad, ranging from

technical ideas (such as in physics or engineering books), to ideas that are

essentially social or cultural (such as in books on religion, philosophy, or

literature). Finally, empirical analysis of translations is possible because

systematic data on translations can be generated from national bibliographies.

           We propose a natural setting to identify the effect of institutional

change on idea flows, namely the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe,

and document how this institutional change affected flows of book translations.

The collapse of Communism was a large shock that swiftly moved countries

from the nearly complete isolation from Western ideas that they had

maintained for over half a century to full openness. This paper sheds light on

the type of ideas most likely to be affected by policy changes that reduce

information restrictions. In particular, we can examine whether the collapse of

Communism had a stronger effect on more “useful knowledge” (as coined by

Mokyr, 2003) for economic development than on “less-useful” knowledge with

more cultural content. This setting also allows us to examine whether and how

quickly an international convergence in the flow of ideas can be achieved

following an institutional change. In particular, we examine how quickly the

2
    An alternative measure of disembodied, non-rival idea flows is patent citations, which track

the diffusion of particular technological knowledge across disciplines and geographical space

(see, for example, Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson 1993, Jaffe and Trajtenberg 1999). Book

translations are a complementary measure that is driven by a quite different process and

captures a different range of types of ideas.


                                                4
flow of ideas in Communist countries converged to its level in the West, and

the extent to which there was persistence in the type of ideas flowing into

former Communist countries.

       Comparisons of translation patterns in the core Soviet, Baltic and

Satellite countries allow us to shed light on the roles of preferences (demand)

and repression (supply). While censorship suppressed Western ideas in all three

regions, the Soviet and Baltic countries arguably suffered more severe

repression as part of the Soviet Union. In addition, the Baltic and Satellite

countries had more Western-oriented preferences. Differences in the effect of

the collapse between the core Soviet and Baltic countries thus suggest the role

of preferences in driving translation flows; differences between the Baltics and

the Satellite countries suggest the role of repression.

       We use newly-collected data on 789,315 book translations for the

period 1980 to 2000. The data were extracted from Unesco's Index

Translationum (IT), an international bibliography of the translations published

annually in a wide range of countries. We note that we test the effect of

Communism’s collapse on translations of titles rather than on trade in physical

books. Translations are a measure of disembodied idea flows, and are thus non-

rival, whereas books themselves are rival, as well as likely being driven largely

by the same factors as trade in other goods with cultural content. Moreover, the

availability of a translation could potentially capture idea flows better than the




                                         5
number of copies sold.3 As discussed by Mokyr (2003), an idea flows when it

becomes accessible to the individuals who value it and can make use of it,

rather than when it becomes known to most people in society.

           We compare translation patterns in former Communist countries before

and after the collapse using simple OLS regressions. To account for possible

general changes in translations over the 1980s and 1990s, we also compare

translation patterns in Communist countries with those in Western European

countries using a difference-in-differences framework.

           We start by showing that when Communism collapsed the overall flow

of Western-to-Communist translations increased by a factor of four, which was

offset by a two-third decrease in Communist-to-Communist translations. We

further document a large increase in Eastern European access to important

Western ideas measured by translations of the most influential Western titles of

the twentieth century. We show that many of these important titles were first

translated into any Communist language after the collapse, suggesting the

increase in Western-to-Communist translations represented an increase in the

availability of Western ideas in any Communist language. In contrast,

Communism’s collapse did not increase Western demand for Eastern European

ideas, which stayed very low after the collapse. These findings are shown to

not be driven by changes in the publishing industry that allowed a larger total

number of books to be published. We further show that the effect of the


3
    It would nevertheless be interesting to investigate whether copies of translation sold follow

similar patterns to translations, but these data are unavailable.


                                                 6
collapse of Communism was largest for translations of titles in fields that were

perceived as especially threatening (e.g. religion) and for translations by

authors who were perceived as especially threatening. In contrast, translations

of titles in exact science, which was strongly supported by Communist

governments, increased relatively little from the West when Communism

collapsed.

           We find that within just a few years total Western-to-Communist

translations fully converged to Western levels. This convergence, however,

was not uniform. Translations of Western titles in the fields of applied science

and social science fully converged to their levels in the West. In contrast,

translations of Western titles in the arts did not converge to their levels in the

West. This pattern suggests that fields that contain more “useful knowledge”

and lend themselves more directly to economic development converged more

than fields that contain more cultural information, which illustrate how some

cultural differences persisted even after Communism collapsed.4

           A comparison between translation patterns in Soviet, Baltic, and

Satellite countries suggests strong roles for both repression and preferences in

determining translation flows. Specifically, before the collapse, Soviet and

Baltic countries broadly shared supply-side institutional factors (strong

repression), because the Baltic states were under direct Soviet control.

However, they differed in that the Baltic states had higher underlying demand


4
    This illustration is consistent with the literature showing how history can shape culture (e.g.

Greif 1994, Nunn 2011, Nunn and Wantchekon 2009, and Fletcher and Iyigun 2010).


                                                 7
for Western ideas. We find that Western-to-Baltic translations increased

substantially more than Western-to-Soviet translations following the collapse,

suggesting preferences for Western ideas played an important role. The

relatively small increase in Western-to-Soviet translations is likely the result of

the comparatively low Soviet demand for Western ideas and the relatively mild

nature of the Soviet reforms.

       Moreover, a Baltic-Satellite comparison suggests repression played an

important role in shaping translation flows. Baltic and Satellite countries

broadly shared demand-side factors, i.e. they shared strong preferences for

Western ideas. However, under the direct control of the Soviet regime, Baltic

countries suffered from more repression. We find that before the collapse

levels of Western-to-Satellite translations were higher than Western-to-Baltic

translations, that the effect of the collapse was stronger in Baltic than Satellite

countries, and that the gap in Western translations between Baltic and Satellite

countries disappeared post collapse. These findings are consistent with

repression playing an important role. Importantly, Baltic and Satellite countries

not only started to catch up on translation of older titles, but they also

converged to Western levels of translations of current titles.

       This paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we present the data on

book translations and explain the construction of our measures of idea flows.

Section 3 briefly outlines the historical context of publishing in Communist

Europe and of the collapse of Communism. Section 4 describes our empirical

strategy for examining the effect of the collapse of Communism on book



                                        8
translations. Section 5 presents results on the effect of the collapse of

Communism on the total flow of translations. Section 6 presents results

breaking translations down by book field. Section 7 discusses further the

advantages and limitations of translations as a measure of the diffusion of ideas

and concludes.



2. Data

           The translation data are extracted from Unesco's Index Translationum

(IT), an international bibliography of the translations published in a wide range

of countries. These data originate at the national level through the law of legal

deposit, which specifies that every book published that is intended for

circulation must be submitted to the national depository. The national

depository then compiles a list of the publications that are translations, and

submits this list to Unesco, which standardizes the entries across countries to

form the IT.

           Titles in the IT are categorized according to the nine main categories of

the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC) system: General (0.1% of

translations in the period 1980-2000); Philosophy (including Psychology,

5.3%); Religion and Theology (5.7%); Law, Social Sciences, Education

(8.5%); Natural and Exact Sciences (4.2%); Applied Sciences (11.4%); Arts,

Games, Sports (5.2%); Literature (including books for children, 52.3%)5;




5
    Literature also includes the very small category Philology and Linguistics.


                                                  9
History, Geography, Biography (including memoirs and autobiographies,

6.6%).6

           The bibliographic entry for each translation includes information on the

country, city, and year in the which the translation was published, the language

of the original title and the target language into which it was translated, the

field (UDC class) of the title, the number of pages or volumes of the title, the

author, and the original and translated titles of the book.7

           We use data on the translations in Communist countries (our group of

interest) and Western European countries (our comparison group) over the

period 1980 to 2000, which comprise approximately 800,000 translations. We

limit our Communist countries to European countries that were part of the

Eastern Bloc and that were Warsaw Pact members in the 1980s, meaning they

were under heavy Soviet control pre-collapse because Soviet troops were

permitted to be stationed within their borders. Our Communist countries are

thus seven former Soviet countries, which we group into the core Soviet

countries (Russia, Belarus, Moldova, and the Ukraine), the Baltics (Estonia,

Latvia, Lithuania), and six Soviet Satellite countries (Bulgaria, the Czech




6
     For a detailed description of the subfields that make up each UDC field, see

https://www.unido.org/library/help/udc.html.
7
    Note in some cases books are translated from a translation rather than from the original. In

these cases we use the language the book was originally published in as the original language,

and disregard the intermediate language.


                                               10
Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Slovakia).8 The Western European

countries in our sample are: Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Denmark, Spain,

Finland, France, Iceland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, and

Sweden. Results are unchanged if we add the USA to the group of Western

countries. We include each country only in the years it reported consistently,

resulting in an unbalanced panel. Note that Germany is excluded from the

analysis because our data do not allow us to distinguish whether a translation

published in Berlin (the center of German publishing) after unification was in

East or West Germany, and in any case the country post collapse was a single

market with a common language. The UK is also excluded because it stopped

reporting its translations to Unesco in 1990. However, we do use translations

from all Western and Communist languages flowing to our included countries,

including translations from English.

           Creation of a translation series over time for each country is

complicated by the fact that some countries only became independent upon the

upheaval of interest in the middle of our period of study. Prior to 1992, the

USSR as a whole reported its translations; prior to 1993, Czechoslovakia as a

whole reported its translations. Our data provide a rare opportunity to

nevertheless allocate the idea flows to the constituent countries. Specifically,

we allocate the translations reported by the USSR and Czechoslovakia to one



8
    We omit Yugoslavia because it escaped the Soviet sphere in the Tito-Stalin split of 1948, and

Albania because it withdrew from the Warsaw pact in 1968; thus in our period of interest they

were no longer politically aligned with the Soviet Union.


                                                11
of their constituent countries based on the city in which each translation was

published.

       We note that the translations reported are only those that were

submitted to the central depository of the country. In particular, this excludes

samizdat, the illegal books published under the Communist regime. The

exclusion of these titles is unfortunate. The number of samizdat translations

produced under Communism is not available, but they were likely only a small

fraction of total translations. These illegal publications were largely political

magazines and bulletins defending human rights and criticizing repression.

Although some were poems and books, both locally written by dissidents and

translated from foreign publications, the large personal risk involved in owning

such books meant their circulation was limited, and the ideas contained therein

were not available to the general populace.



3. Historical context

3.1. A brief timeline of the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe

       In the early 1980s, the Soviet Union and its satellites were all

Communist countries with centrally planned economies, in which the ruling

(and only) party, the Communist Party under some name or other, interfered in

virtually all aspects of its citizens’ lives. Eastern Europe was isolated from

Western Europe by the Iron Curtain, which hindered the movement of both

people and information.




                                       12
       The changes that would result in the fall of Communism began in the

late 1980s when Gorbachev came to power in the USSR. Among the reforms

he instituted, perhaps the most important two were perestroika, restructuring of

the economy and political system, and glasnost, openness in the media and

culture. Through these sets of gradual reforms, the Soviet Union began to move

in the direction of a market economy, with a decrease in centralization and the

emergence of private firms, and the increase in the freedom of people to

express their views on a range of topics without fear of retribution.

       An important consequence of glasnost was that people could now

openly air their dissatisfaction with the Communist regime. This freedom

spread to the Soviet satellites, and was likely a contributing factor in

revolutions that heralded the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the

Communist regimes in the Satellite countries in the last few months of 1989.

       The Communist USSR held together for nearly a further two years,

though the power of the Soviet Communists was waning and nationalism in the

Soviet republics was on the rise. Late in 1991, a conservative coup in Russia

aimed at preventing the disintegration of the Soviet Union was staged. Its

unintended effect was just the opposite; the USSR was officially dissolved.

       The Communist countries had many commonalities, but there was

heterogeneity between them in the strength of their Western orientation. The

former Soviet countries had a more Russian orientation, the preferences of their

consumers favored Western ideas less, and they maintained stronger ties with

Russia and demonstrated less effort or desire to integrate with Western Europe.



                                       13
However, the three Baltic states of the Soviet Union, Latvia, Lithuania and

Estonia, were more similar to the Satellites than they were to the Soviet

nations. Historically, they were relatively recent additions to the USSR

(annexed in 1940), and had always maintained their more Western preferences.

They were the first among the Soviet nations to declare their independence

from the Soviet Union. Furthermore, their independent streak was highlighted

when, upon the collapse of the Soviet Union, they were the only three Soviet

states not to join the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the loose

alliance of independent countries that succeeded the USSR. Since the

disintegration of the USSR, the former Communist countries have coalesced

into two trading blocs: the Russia-focused CIS countries in one, and the

Western-centered non-CIS countries, including the Baltic states, in the other.

For this reason, our main analysis distinguishes the three Baltic states from the

other Soviet countries. Moreover, results tell a similar story when we use

physical distance from Western Europe as an alternative measure for Western

orientation among Communist countries.



3.2. Restricting information flows: publishing and censorship under

Communism

           Prior to Gorbachev’s reforms, book publishing in the Soviet Union9

was a state-run industry that produced vast numbers of books with little regard


9
    We discuss the publishing and censorship system of the Soviet Union, which is the one best

understood by Western scholars and observers during the Communist period. The publishing


                                              14
for consumer demand.10 Books seem to have been an important medium for

conveying information and ideas.11 All publishers were owned and operated by

the government, and each had its own subject area or field in which it enjoyed

a complete monopoly. Book prices, like other prices and wages in the

publishing industry, were strictly controlled; each subject had a designated

price range, chosen to ensure the subjects the government intended to be

widely read were available at low cost. Selection of the titles published was

centrally coordinated and crafted according to the government’s grand plan.12

           Central to the organization of the Soviet publishing system was the

conception of publishing as an ideological activity. Reading was viewed as a

way in which the social consciousness of individuals was shaped, thus full state

control over the material published and its availability to citizens was vital.

Profits and publishing in order to meet demand were considered less important,

though periodically concern surfaced in Soviet publishing circles about the




industries of the other Communist countries varied in their exact details, but were similar in

their principles.
10
     Skelly and Stabnikov (1993).
11
     For instance, Walker (1978) notes, “The idea of the book as a ‘direct force in production’,

which can contribute measurable improvements to the country’s economic performance, has

been aired by several Soviet writers,” and that reading was viewed as an important way in

which the “social consciousness” of individuals was molded.
12
     Walker (1978).


                                               15
shortages of books in specific fields. The process determining the exact titles

printed in any year was complex and centrally planned to a high degree.13

           Censorship of books intended for sale in the USSR was the domain of

Glavlit (occasionally referred to by its full name, the “Chief Administration for

the Protection of State Secrets in the Press attached to the Council of Ministers

of the USSR”). Editors of publishing houses were expected to use their good

sense in selecting titles for publication, but the corrected galley-proofs (granki)

then had to be perused by Glavlit “…both for the mention of prohibited topics

and for the observance of political lines and nuances…” (Walker, 1978, page

66) before publication could occur.




13
     USSR-level and republic-level authorities decided on the proportion of total books published

in the coming year that would be in each subject area, and assigned printing capacity, paper,

and binding materials to individual publishers. Working within these bounds and other

specifications given to them, publishers compiled their own lists of planned printings, each

item on which then received an approval, rejection, or other recommendation from a

“coordinating” central authority. Considerations for the coordinating authority were

maintaining the subject monopolies of the printing houses, avoiding duplication of subject

matter, and economy in the use of paper, which was often in short supply. Additional

centralized planning occurred that was related to the publication of translations (Walker, 1978).

Foreign titles were selected for translation by utilizing experts employed for the purpose at

home, representatives located in numerous countries abroad, and foreign visiting experts such

as scientists. The representatives located abroad reviewed tens of thousands of new books

annually. They then bought copies of the most important titles from local bookshops, and

mailed them back to their publishers in the USSR (Bernstein et al., 1971).


                                                16
       Censorship of translations followed a somewhat different, but

undoubtedly no less rigorous, process, explained by Walker (1978):



   The importance of careful and vigilant selection by Soviet publishers in

   choosing works for translation from foreign languages has been frequently

   stressed by Party and government, and is visible in a number of special

   regulations applying to the publication of translations. A publishing-house

   considering translation of a foreign work must, unless there is a special need

   for speedy publication, obtain at least two recommendations for the translation

   from scholarly institutions or specialists, and secure the agreement of the

   appropriate chief editorial office in the State Committee for Publishing before

   submitting details of the work for ‘coordination’ to the State Committee or (in

   the case of scientific and technical works) to the State Scientific and Technical

   Library.”



       Between 1986 and 1991, control over the publishing industry moved

out of state hands. State-owned publishing houses were joined by a multitude

of other ownership structures, competition entered the industry, and the focus

shifted away from producer-led publishing to consumer-led publishing. The

monopoly system of publishers was scrapped; price controls and many state

subsidies were terminated. Through the reforms, firms, organizations, and

institutions gained the right to publish, and Russian authors and publishers




                                          17
gained the right to freely buy or sell rights, including in transactions with

international parties.14



4. Empirical strategy: OLS and difference-in-differences estimates

           Communism may have affected idea flows through its effects on the

supply of ideas and on the demand for ideas. On the supply side, the political

agenda and censorship depressed certain ideas and promoted others. Most

notably, the Communist regime depressed ideas centered around the capitalist

ideology and promoted pro-communist ideas. On the demand side,

Communism may have shaped preferences for ideas (e.g. for Communist ideas)

and such preferences may or may not have changed with the collapse of

Communism (Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln, 2007).

           Our most basic identification strategy examines the effect of the

collapse as a whole, acting through either supply or demand channels.

Specifically, we compare translation flows in Communist countries before and

after the collapse, where the effect of the collapse depends on both the supply

and demand sides. We then consider a number of “counterfactuals” that shed

light on the specific roles played by supply and demand factors. First, we

compare translation patterns in Soviet, Baltic and Satellite countries. While

censorship suppressed Western ideas in all three regions, the Soviet and Baltic

countries arguably suffered more severe repression as part of the Soviet Union.

In addition, the Baltic and Satellite countries were always more Western in


14
     Skelly and Stabnikov (1993).


                                       18
their orientation and might have had greater pent-up demand for translations.

Differences in the effect of the collapse between the core Soviet and Baltic

countries would thus suggest the role of preferences in driving translation

flows; differences between the Baltics and the Satellite countries would suggest

the role of repression. Second, we compare translation patterns in Eastern

relative to Western Europe. The premise here is that there was no censorship

post collapse, so that any lack of convergence between East and West post

collapse reflected remaining East/West differences in the demand for ideas.

Finally, we repeat the comparisons above by type of ideas, such as translations

of various book fields with more or less direct economic benefit, and

translations of titles that posed more or less threat to the Communist regime.

          Because Communist countries may have suppressed information flows

from the West and artificially translated more from each other, we distinguish

in all our regressions between translations from Western languages and those

from Communist languages.15

          All of our regressions examine the change in translation patterns in

former Communist countries post collapse, and take a variation of the

following form:

15
     The Communist languages are: Armenian, Azerbaijani, Belarusian, Bulgarian, Czech,

Estonian, Georgian, Hungarian, Kazakh, Kirghiz, Latvian, Lithuanian, Moldovan, Polish,

Romanian, Russian, Slovakian, Tajik, Turkmen, Ukrainian, and Uzbek. The Western European

languages are: Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, Modern Greek, Icelandic, Irish, Italian,

Maltese, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Note the German language is neither

classified as a Communist language nor a Western European language.


                                              19
        $Yijt = !1a Postt # WesternLang j + !1b Postt # CommunistLang j &
        &                                                                      %
        '                                                                      (
                + ! 2 aWesternLang j + ! 2bCommunistLang j + ! 3 X ijt + " ijt *             (1)
        &
        )                                                                      &



        where Yijt is the (log) number of book translations in country i, in year t, from

        original language type j (Western or Communist), WesternLang j is a dummy

        for      the   translations     being    from      a     Western    European       language;
                                             !
        CommunistLang j is a dummy for the translations being from a Communist

        language, and Post t is a dummy variable for the years 1991 and onwards.16
!
        This equation thus allows a basic pre/post collapse comparison for translations

        from !
             Western and Communist languages. The coefficients on the interactions

        with Post t measure the changes in translations from the two language sources

        post collapse. X ijt is a set of additional controls that includes the logs of
    !
        population and GDP per capita,17 and may also include country fixed effects
             !
        interacted with original language to account for differences across countries

        that are constant over time.

                   We also estimate difference-in-differences models that include Western

        European countries as a comparison group, which accounts for other common


        16
             We choose post-1991 because it is midway between the end of Communism in the Satellites

        (late in 1989) and the collapse of the Soviet Union (late in 1991). Using alternative Post

        variables, namely post-1989, post-1990, and post-1992, does not substantially alter the results

        (not presented).
        17
             Population and GDP data are from Maddison (2003).


                                                      20
   factors that may have affected translation patterns over the sample period 1980-

   2000, and also allows us to directly test persistence in East/West differences.

   Specifically, we compare the pre- and post-collapse translation flows into

   Communist countries with flows into Western European countries. The basic

   difference-in-differences specification is:



    !!"# = !!! !"##$%&'(!   ×  !"#$!   ×  !"#$"%&'(&)!                                                                   
          +  !!! !"##$%&'(!   ×  !"#$!   ×  !"##$%&'()*%+!                                                 
          +  ! !"##$%&'(   ×  !"#$"%&'(&)                                                                                             
               !!           !                   !
                                                                                                                                         (2)
           +  !!! !"##$%&'(!   ×  !"##$%&'()*%+!                                                                                 
         
          +  !!! !"#$! ×!"#$"%&'(&)! + !!! !"#$! ×!!""#$%&'()$*!   
          +  !!! !"#$"%&  !"#$! + !!! !"##$%&'()*%+! + !! !!"# + !!"#



   where Communist i is a dummy variable for whether the translating country

   was a former Communist country, and the other variables are as in equation

! (1). The first coefficient of interest, "1a , measures the effect of the collapse of

   Communism on Western-to-Communist translations (relative to Western-to-

   Western translations), and !
                              the second, "1b , measures the effect of the collapse

   of Communism on Communist-to-Communist translations (relative to

   Communist-to-Western translations).
                              !        In addition to specifications that control

   for log population and GDP per capita and include country fixed effects

   interacted with original language, we also run specifications with year fixed

   effects interacted with original language to absorb changes over time that are

   common to all regions.




                                                                       21
           In both the basic regression and difference-in-differences model, the

construction of the dependent variable is complicated by the lack of a one-to-

one mapping between countries and languages. We deal with this by only

counting translations into the “main” language for each country, defined as the

most widely spoken language in the country.18 In Section 5.5 we show the

main results are robust to using the number of pages translated as an alternative

dependent variable, and discuss how the results are affected by including

translations into secondary languages.



5. The effect of the collapse of Communism on total translations

5.1. Western-to-Communist translations jumped and converged to

Western levels, Communist-to-Communist translations declined

           Figure 1 shows translations per million inhabitants in the Soviet

countries, the Baltics, the Satellites, and the Western European countries. For

each set of countries, we show translations from Western European languages

and from Communist languages.19

           This figure shows that before the collapse of Communism, Western

European countries had much higher per capita translation rates into their main

language than Communist countries, and these translations were almost

entirely from Western European languages. The Baltics and Satellites

18
     “Most widely spoken” is defined in terms of native speakers where these data are available,

otherwise in terms of the language spoken at home or spoken on a day-to-day basis.
19
     Translations from English show very similar changes over time to translations from all

Western European languages.


                                               22
translated more than the Soviet countries, and all three translated primarily

from Communist languages. However, in the few years around 1990, the

patterns of translation for Communist countries changed drastically. The

Baltics’ and Satellites’ translations of Western European titles shot up to

approach or even exceed the level of translations of Western European

countries, and their translations of Communist titles fell away.

       By the year 2000, the Satellites’ translation patterns had converged to

those of Western European countries to a remarkable degree, though they still

showed a slight bias towards translations from other former Communist

countries. Translations in the Baltics had also moved away from Communist

titles and towards Western European ones, though Baltic countries still

translated more Communist titles than did Western Europe. The Soviet

countries also experienced a fall in translations from Communist languages,

but their increase in translations from Western European languages was small

and short-lived. These translation patterns stand in contrast to translations from

Western European languages in Western European countries, which increased

only gradually and by much less over this period.

       We next subject these patterns to regression analysis as described in

Section 4, which allows us to control better for the relationship between a

country’s translations, population and GDP.

       Column 1 of Table 1 presents the OLS estimation results of regression

equation (1), where country fixed effects interacted with dummies for either




                                       23
Western or Communist original language are included.20 The results suggest

that translations by Communist countries from Western languages increased

dramatically, by 480% (e1.761 – 1). In contrast, translations from fellow

Communist countries fell sharply, by 69%. Columns 3-5 present versions of

the equivalent difference-in-differences results (equation (2)). Column 3

includes neither country fixed effects nor year fixed effects; column 4

introduces country fixed effects interacted with original language; column 5

also introduces year fixed effects interacted with original language. Because

translations tended to increase in Western Europe during the 1990s, the

difference-in-difference estimates are generally smaller than the OLS

estimates, but they are still economically large and statistically significant.

Specifically, in the specification with country fixed effects interacted with

original language (column 4), Communist translations from Western European

languages rose by 290% relative to Western translations, whereas translations

between Communist countries fell by 67%. Column 5 shows these results are

robust to including year fixed effects interacted with original language.21 These

large magnitudes demonstrate just how dramatically the titles available in


20
     We do not have comparable population or GDP data for Iceland, thus this country is

excluded from these regressions.
21
     We also ran specifications where we allowed separate linear time trends for each original

language in each country (results not presented). The main results hold up, though significance

is reduced. Note however that this specification may in fact underestimate the effect of the

collapse of Communism on translations because some of the changes that constituted the

collapse of Communism are likely falsely attributed to the time trends.


                                              24
Eastern Europe shifted from Eastern to Western European when Communism

collapsed.

          In contrast, column 4 of Table 1 also shows that Western countries did

not translate more Communist titles post collapse; the coefficient on the

interaction of Postt with CommunistLangj is small (-0.084) and statistically

insignificant. That is, translations from Communist languages in Western

Europe, which were few, showed little change over the period. The lack of

change is as we would expect, given translation flows in this direction were not

restricted prior to the collapse.

          We next examine how the differences in level of repression pre-

collapse and degree of Western orientation between Soviet, Baltic, and Satellite

countries reveal themselves in their translation patterns.22 Specifically, to our


22
     As an alternative measure for Western orientation among Communist countries, we use

physical distance from Western Europe. Results (presented in Appendix Table B.1) tell a

similar story: Western-to-Communist translations increased post collapse more in former

Communist countries located closer to Western Europe; and former Communist countries close

to Western Europe converged to Western levels of translations of Western titles, whereas more

distant Communist countries did not. These findings are consistent with the idea that countries

with more Western preferences, as proxied by distance to Western Europe, converged more to

Western translation levels than countries with less Western preferences. Alternatively, in

Appendix Tables B.2 and B.3, we replace distance from Western Europe with the quality of the

legal and political systems or with the strength of intellectual property rights protection. These

institutional measures have little correlation with translations post collapse. As a further

alternative, we divide the Communist countries by whether they are Slavic or non-Slavic, and

by whether they are primarily Catholic or Orthodox. Translations in the Slavic countries show


                                               25
previous OLS specification we add interactions between all variables and

dummies for the translating country being a Baltic or being a Satellite, and in

our difference-in-differences specification we allow all Communist effects and

interactions to differ for Baltic, Satellite and other Communist (Soviet)

countries.

         Column 2 of Table 1 present the results from the OLS specification,

and columns 6-8 present results from the difference-in-differences specification

with various additional controls. In every specification, the increase in

translations from Western European languages was largest for the Baltics,

intermediate for the Satellites, and positive but insignificant for the Soviets; the

decrease in translations from Communist languages was insignificantly larger

for the Baltics, and insignificantly smaller for the Satellites than for the Soviet

countries. Satellite translations of Western titles increased by 290% in the

difference-in-differences specification with population and GDP controls and

country fixed effects interacted with original language, compared with 760%

for Baltic translations, and 54% for Soviet translations. In contrast, translations




similar patterns to those in the Soviet nations, and translations in the non-Slavic countries are

similar to in the Satellites and Baltics. However, the Slavic/non-Slavic difference is less

pronounced than the Soviet/Baltic/Satellite differences. Similarly, the Orthodox countries

behave more like the Soviet nations and the Catholic countries more like the Baltics and

Satellites, though the distinction here is smaller again. The Slavic countries are Russia, the

Ukraine, Belarus, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, and Bulgaria. The Catholic countries

are Lithuania, Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Hungary.


                                               26
of Communist titles decreased by 61% for Satellites, 78% for Baltic countries,

and 74% for Soviet countries.

           To address the critique of Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004), we

follow their recommended procedure and aggregate our data to one pre-

collapse and one post-collapse observation.23              24
                                                                Appendix Table B.10 shows

the equivalent difference-in-differences regressions to Table 1, but run with

only these two observations for each country/original language pair. The main

findings largely remain unchanged.

           Because the collapse of Communism was a huge event associated with

many different changes to aspects of society and the economy, adjustment (in

the translation industry and elsewhere) may have taken some time. We thus

now examine the time path of changes in translations that followed the collapse

of Communism. We run a version of column 6 of Table 1 that replaces Post

and its interactions with year dummies (for each year 1981 and onwards) and

their equivalent interactions.25 This analysis also allows us to examine more



23
     They show that difference-in-differences techniques applied to data with more than two

periods generate inconsistent standard errors because they do not account for serial correlation

of the outcomes.
24
     The pre-collapse values of the variables are the averages for the years 1980 to 1989, and the

post-collapse values are the averages for 1992 to 2000. We discard data from 1990 and 1991,

considering this the transition period.
25
     We do not expect to see significant changes prior to 1989, and indeed the coefficients on the

interactions are small and insignificant for both types of original languages and all three sets of

translating countries every year pre 1989.


                                                27
precisely how similar Eastern and Western Europe become. Figure 2 plots the

coefficients of interest. Strikingly, it shows that most of the effects of the

collapse occurred within a few years, after which point translations largely

stabilized at their new levels. Panel A shows that the positive effect of the

collapse of Communism on translations from Western Europe begins in 1989

and becomes significant in 1991 for the Satellite countries, but appears only in

1992 for the Soviets and Baltics, consistent with the later date of the collapse

of Communism in the USSR. By about 1992 the increase stabilizes, especially

for the Baltic and Satellite countries. Panel B shows that the negative effect of

the collapse on translations between Communist countries increases until 1991,

at which time it largely stabilizes.26 27 28

           As suggested by Figure 1,29 these regression results show that, within a

few years of the collapse, translations of Western titles in Baltic and Satellite

26
     Appendix Figure A.1 shows a similar graph where we also include country fixed effects

interacted with original language in the regression equation (equivalent to column 7 of Table

1). The effects are similar and generally more precisely estimated, but there it is not possible to

compare Communist translations with the Western level of translations.
27
     We present this figure for the difference-in-differences specification, but the equivalent

graph for the OLS specification looks nearly identical.
28
     This figure also shows Communist-to-Baltic translations were particularly low in 1991. We

are unable to determine whether this is a genuine phenomenon caused by the collapse of

Communism, or whether the data on translations this year are just incomplete.
29
     Note Figure 1 understates the convergence of Communist translations of Western titles to

Western translation levels because it doesn’t control for incomes, which were lower on average

in the Communist countries.


                                               28
countries converged to and even surpassed such translations in Western

countries, but in Soviet countries did not. Likewise, Panel B of Figure 2 shows

that translations of Communist titles fell over several years in all three

Communist regions (though coefficients are not significant for every year), but

remained higher than their level in the West.

           The relatively small increase in Western-to-Soviet translations is likely

the result of both demand-side and supply-side factors. On the demand side,

Soviet preferences favored Western ideas less than did Baltic and Satellite

preferences.30 On the supply side, the reforms in the Soviet countries tended to

be less comprehensive than the reforms in the Baltic and Satellite countries.31

Appendix Figure A.3 shows that the average strength of democracy in the

Soviets never increased to the degree it did in the Baltics and Satellites, and in

fact partially reverted in the mid-1990s. In Appendix D we describe these

democracy data and investigate more fully how the degree of reform in a

country was related to its change in translations. In Appendix Tables B.2 and



30
     Suggestive evidence of this can be seen in the support individuals had for a free market

economy post collapse. Central and Eastern Eurobarometer surveys conducted between 1991

and 1997 in many of the Soviet, Baltic, and Satellite countries asked whether the respondent

felt a free market economy was right or wrong for his or her country. Comparisons between

average responses in the three regions, presented in Appendix Figure A.2, show support for a

free market economy was substantially higher in the Baltics and Satellites (and in fact similar

in these regions) than in the Soviet countries.
31
     However, degree of reform was arguably endogenous to preferences, so this supply-side

factor could ultimately stem from the demand side.


                                                  29
B.3 we explore whether differences between Communist countries in the

quality of the legal and political systems or in the strength of intellectual

property rights protection post collapse can explain the differences in

convergence to Western Europe. We find these institutional measures are at

most weakly correlated with translation flows post collapse, though they were

strongly correlated pre collapse. This may suggest the limited importance of

such institutional factors in the small increase in Western-to-Soviet

translations.

        In Section 5.5 we discuss the robustness of these findings to including

translations into the secondary languages of the countries.



5.2. Convergence in translation flows or catching up on stocks?

        The convergence of Communist to Western countries that we observe

could reflect a convergence in the rate of translation of new titles (flows),

which might suggest a genuine convergence in access to new Western ideas.

Alternatively, it could reflect a catching up on older titles missed out on during

the Communist era (stocks), which might suggest the apparent convergence is

only a temporary phenomenon and does not imply similar access to new

Western ideas in Communist and Western Europe. We now examine this issue.

        Table 2 shows our difference-in-differences regressions separately for

translations from Western languages for flows, which we define as titles




                                       30
translated within 15 years of their publication, and stocks, or older titles.32               33



Both translations of stocks and flows of Western titles show large increases and

convergence to Western levels in Communist Europe upon the collapse of

Communism. This suggests both a convergence in access to new Western

ideas, and a catching up on older ideas.



5.3. The collapse of Communism increased Communist access to

important Western titles

           The ideas in some books are more important than the ideas in others.

We now investigate how the collapse of Communism affected Communist

translations of Western titles that are considered particularly influential. In this

analysis, we track when and where specific titles were translated, and are thus

able to show that the increase in Communist translations of Western titles

represented an increase in the availability of Western titles in any Communist



32
     Our main data set does not contain the years in which the original titles were published.

However, for a sample of over 1,400 translations from Western languages, we identified the

original dates of publication from online sources, and used these to calculate the percentage of

titles translated in Western and Communist countries pre and post that were stocks or flows.

Across fields, the median percentage of translations that were flows in Communist Europe was

58% in the pre period and 71% post; in Western Europe it was 78% in the pre period and 82%

post. The results presented here use the total number of translations, adjusted within each field

using the appropriate flow percentages.
33
     Our findings are robust to using other cutoffs such as 10, 20, or 30 years (results not

presented).


                                              31
language, not just the translation into additional Communist languages of titles

that had previously been translated into, for instance, Russian.

           We compile a list of titles that are considered particularly important in

Western Europe and the US. The titles are from the Central and East European

Publishing Project’s (CEEPP) list of the 100 books that have been most

influential in the West since 1945, the Modern Library’s list of the 100 best

non-fiction books of the 20th century published in English, and National

Review’s best 100 non-fiction books of the 20th century (see Appendix C for

further details). Similarly, we compile lists of influential authors and the titles

most translated in Western Europe.

           The first two columns of Table 3 show translations of influential titles

before and after the collapse of Communism.34 It shows that most of these titles

were not translated anywhere in Communist Europe in the pre-collapse period.

Specifically, only 30 of the 178 influential titles were translated into any

language in a Communist country pre-collapse, compared with the 116 that

were translated in Western European countries. After the collapse, 80 of these

titles were translated in Communist Europe. When we restrict attention in the

next two columns to those titles written by anti-Communist authors, this effect

is even more pronounced: only 4 of the 30 titles were translated pre collapse in

34
     Note we require a balanced panel of countries for the pre/post comparisons between different

regions to be meaningful. Because some countries are missing data in some years, we limit the

years included in Table 3 to 1980-1996, and the countries to those with data in each of these

years. In Appendix Tables B.5 and B.6, we present the results from two alternative samples of

countries with different sets of years. The patterns are similar.


                                                32
Communist Europe (compared with 19 in Western Europe), and this increased

to 20 post collapse. Translations of the most translated titles and influential

authors show similar increases.

           Importantly, this table demonstrates that the inflow of Western

translations published in the smaller Communist languages post collapse

represented a flow of new knowledge from Western into Communist Europe,

and did not merely duplicate titles that had previously been translated into

Russian.

           To control for other factors that affected translation of these titles over

time, we run difference-in-difference regressions at the title level, predicting

the number of Communist or Western countries that translated the title pre or

post collapse (details in Appendix C.35 Results are presented in Appendix

Table B.7 columns 1 to 3 present results for the influential titles, columns 4 to

6 for the most translated titles, and columns 7 to 9 for the influential authors.

The table shows that the average number of Communist countries translating

each influential title increased by about 70% post collapse (relative to Western

countries), suggesting the collapse indeed increased Communist access to

important Western ideas. Furthermore, we show that influential titles written

by Nobel laureates, those written by anti-Communist authors, and those first

published during the Communist period were both translated less pre collapse



35
     Specifically, we regress the log of 1 plus the number of Communist or Western countries

translating the title on a dummy for Communist countries and its interaction with post-1989,

and title fixed effects interacted with post.


                                                33
in Communist Europe and increased more post collapse. These patterns suggest

such titles were more threatening to the Communist regime, and faced higher

latent demand.



5.4. The collapse of Communism did not affect total publications of books

           One possibility is that the increases in Western translations post

collapse were driven by changes in the publishing industry that allowed a

larger total number of books to be published. If this were the case, then the

increase in translations could be mechanical rather than indicating an increased

openness to Western ideas.

           Table 4 presents OLS before/after and difference-in-differences

specifications with the total number of books published, including both

translations and original titles, as the dependent variable.36 The table shows that

the total number of books published in Communist countries did not increase

with the collapse of Communism, and may have actually declined.

Specifically, the coefficient of interest, which is the coefficient on Post in the


36
     Book publication data are from the Unesco Statistical Yearbooks for the years 1985-99 and

from Unesco’s online data on book production available at http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/.

They are available pre and post collapse for only a subset of our countries, namely the

Communist countries Belarus, Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania and the

Ukraine, and the Western European countries Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland,

Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Note, however, that

these data are only available at an aggregate level and a large number of years are missing,

which precludes using them to conduct more complex analysis.


                                              34
OLS specifications and on Post*Communism in the difference-in-differences

specifications, is negative and small in most specifications.



5.5. Further robustness checks and alternative specifications

Accounting for translations into countries’ secondary languages

           The vast majority of the population in many countries speaks natively

and uses for everyday interactions the same single language. However, some

countries have several widely spoken languages, and native languages may

differ from the language of education or commerce. As a robustness check,

here we also include translations into secondary languages.37 We include as

secondary languages all additional languages that are (de facto) official in part

or all of the country, or that are natively spoken by at least 5% of the

population. Note specifically that this includes Russian in many of the

Communist countries.

           Appendix Table B.4 presents the results from these regressions. The

main difference between these results and the results from our central

specification is that here the difference in the extent to which the Satellite and

Soviet countries increase their Western translations decreases in magnitude and

loses significance. However, the results remain that Satellite countries pre

collapse have significantly higher translations of Western titles than Soviet and

37
     We prefer not to include translations into secondary languages in our central specification

because any cutoff for which secondary languages should be counted for a particular country is

necessarily arbitrary, and by including multiple target languages in a country we double- (or

triple-) count titles that are translated into more than one of these languages.


                                                35
Baltic countries, but the Baltic countries experience a significantly (p<0.01)

larger increase in these translations than either the Soviets or the Satellites, and

as a result both Baltic and Satellite translations of Western titles converge to

Western levels, while Soviet translations do not.38



Number of pages translated as an alternative dependent variable

          For robustness, we use the number of pages translated as an alternative

dependent variable that captures the possibility that longer books contain more

ideas. Because we are concerned that some of the short publications might not

in fact be books, we limit translations to titles of 49 pages or longer (the

38
     In addition, despite the high level of isolation from Western Europe pre collapse, some

individuals in Communist Europe, particularly among the more educated, were able to read

Western European languages such as English or French. These individuals faced less than the

full increase in access to Western original titles suggested by the increase in translations,

because they had the potential to read Western originals pre collapse if these were available in

their countries. However, it is likely that most such individuals still faced lower costs of

reading Western titles in translation (post collapse) than in the original, so an increase in

translations of Western titles into their languages did represent some increase in access to

Western ideas. Appendix Table B.8 presents data from 1995 on ability to speak English or

French; knowledge of both languages was considerably higher in the Baltic and Satellite

countries than in the Soviet countries. This suggests a higher proportion of people in the Soviet

countries were “fully treated” by the increase in Western translations post collapse. On the

other hand, learning a Western European language is an alternative way to translations to

access Western European ideas, and as such indicates Western preferences. Thus it is

unsurprising that the countries that increase Western translations more, suggesting an eagerness

to embrace Western ideas, also show a higher aptitude in these languages.


                                               36
minimum length for a “book” as defined by Unesco). Appendix Table B.9

shows that the results are similar when using this alternative dependent

variable.



Comparing Communist countries that transitioned to different degrees

        We showed that the effect of the collapse of Communism was stronger

in the Western-oriented Satellites and Baltics, both of whose translations of

Western titles converged to Western levels. More generally, we expect the

countries that transitioned more into democratic market economies to have

experienced greater convergence to the West. We show in Appendix Table

B.11 that Communist countries that transitioned more away from Communism

increased more their translations of Western European titles into their main

language (the data and empirical strategy used in this analysis are described in

Appendix D). However, this finding doesn’t hold when including translations

into secondary languages. We note that a main disadvantage of using variation

in the degree of transition is that unlike the event of Communism collapsing,

these reforms were outcomes likely deriving from many of the same factors as

translations.



Accounting for Russian-speaking populations in other Communist countries

        Our main analysis shows Soviet countries lag behind Baltic, Satellite

and Western countries in their translations of Western titles post collapse. To

create a lower bound on these differences, we include translations into Russian



                                      37
in each of the Soviet countries in addition to translations into the country’s

main language. The results, presented in Appendix Table B.12, are very similar

to the specifications that include translations into secondary languages,

discussed above and shown in Appendix Table B.4.39

           A related consideration is that, given the populations of the Soviet

countries have a relatively high knowledge of Russian, titles translated into

Russian in Russia may have circulated in these countries as well. We deal with

this consideration in two ways. First, we aggregate the Soviet nations up to a

single Soviet bloc, and plot in Appendix Figure A.4 how translations per capita

in this Soviet bloc were affected by the collapse of Communism.40                      41
                                                                                            We

include translations into Russian and the main languages of the other Soviet

countries that were published in any of these countries.42 In fact, because of

the much larger Russian population and publishing industry, the effect here is

very similar to the effect on Russian translations in Russia alone. As in our

main specification, we see the increase in Western translations in the Soviet

39
     We note that the Satellite countries translate very few titles into Russian; including

translations into Russian as well as into the main language for all the Communist countries

instead of just the Soviet countries makes no difference (results not presented).
40
     The countries included are Russia, Belarus and Moldova. We omit the Ukraine because of

missing data.
41
     We do not duplicate our main regressions using this aggregation, because it only leaves us

with one Soviet observation for each original language and year.
42
     This approach double counts titles that were translated into multiple Soviet languages.

Alternatively, we include only titles that were translated into Russian in a Soviet country;

results (not presented) are very similar.


                                               38
countries was smaller and less lasting than the increase in the Baltic and

Satellite countries, though in this case Soviet translations of Western titles do

settle substantially above their pre-collapse level.

       Second, in Section 5.3 we study when and where specific titles were

translated and show that, even supposing all Communist countries had access

to all titles translated in any Communist country, the collapse of Communism

was still associated with a large increase in access to important Western titles.



Accounting for the possibility of Russia translating for other Communist

countries

       A potential concern is that many translations into Communist languages

might actually be published in Russia, the largest of the Communist countries

and the political center of Communist Europe, rather than in the home country,

in which case we would under-report the ideas flowing into the other

Communist countries. That is, the concern is that translations from, for

instance, English into Czech are published in Russia. To account for this

possibility, we ran specifications including Russia’s translations into other

Communist languages as translations in the appropriate Communist countries.

In fact, the number of such translations was very low and the results (not

presented) are effectively unchanged.




                                        39
6. The effect of the collapse by book field

           We next investigate how the effect of the collapse of Communism on

book translations varied by the type of ideas contained in the books. We

examine whether the collapse of Communism had a stronger effect on

knowledge that is more directly economically useful. We also examine whether

the effect was bigger for titles in more ideological fields, which were likely to

be more threatening, and smaller for titles in more objective fields.43

           We investigate the effects of the collapse on each of the eight book

fields Exact Science, Applied Science, Social Science, Arts, Literature,

Philosophy, Religion, and History using difference-in-difference regressions.

Further, we use keywords in the book titles to disaggregate each of the eight

fields into subfields such as mathematics, physics and chemistry, and test the

effect of the collapse of Communism on each subfield. Appendix Figure A.5

shows how translations in each aggregate field changed over time.

           Figure 3 presents graphically the results from difference-in-differences

regressions predicting log translations plus 1, which we run separately by

field.44    45
                 The figure shows considerable heterogeneity in the effect of the


43
     Note we do not have quantitative measures of the economic usefulness, ideological content,

or objectivity of the various fields, so our comparisons along these dimensions are qualitative

only and somewhat subjective.
44
     The independent variables are as in equation (2), plus the logs of population and GDP per

capita.
45
     For each field we also run two separate regressions, a probit regression predicting whether

the number of translations is positive (extensive margin), and an OLS regression that estimates


                                               40
collapse across fields.46 Communist translations of Applied Science and Social

Science, two fields likely to be particularly economically useful and important

for economic growth, converged especially strongly to Western translations. In

contrast, translations of Western titles in the more culture-specific fields of

History and especially Arts showed less convergence to Western levels, which

likely reflect consumer preferences that differ considerably between the two

halves of Europe.47

            We further disaggregate the fields by using keywords in the titles to

categorize them into subfields such as mathematics, physics and chemistry.48




the log number of translations given the number of translations is non-zero (intensive margin).

Appendix Table B.13 presents the coefficients on the interactions of interest in both

regressions. The results tell a similar story.
46
     When we look separately by field at Soviet, Baltic, and Satellite countries, we see similar

differences between fields, though the overall levels of translations differ as shown in our main

analysis.
47
     However, translations in Literature did show strong convergence. Literature differs from the

other fields in that the average age of titles translated is considerably older. There is also a

relatively thick tail of very old literature titles translated, suggesting that classics of literature

remain relevant, whereas classics in other fields are more likely to become outdated. The

convergence of literature may thus be driven largely by catching up on decades of missed

classics.
48
     We break down into subfields titles in Exact Science, Social Science, Applied Science and

Religion only; titles in the other fields are not named informatively enough to allow

categorization by keywords in their titles.


                                                 41
The details of the procedure are given in Appendix E.49 Within each broad field

we run a difference-in-differences regression that compares the effects across

constituent subfields.50 The coefficients of interest are the interactions of the

subfield fixed effects with the Post*Communist variable. The coefficients of

interest and their confidence intervals are shown in Figure 4 which suggests

that within the field of Exact Science the more objective fields (e.g.

mathematics) seem to jump less than the less objective fields (e.g. biology); in

Social Science economics jumped the most, in Applied Science, medical titles,

and in Religion, Christian titles.

           We note that the broad fields that were affected most and least by the

collapse, Religion and Natural Science, are both interesting cases. Religious

titles were translated relatively little in Communist Europe pre collapse and

saw large increases in translation post collapse, consistent with religion being

severely restricted in most Communist countries.51 At the other end of the

spectrum, the more objective field of Exact Science was relatively heavily

translated in Communist Europe pre collapse, and was thus less affected by the

collapse. This is consistent with research in Exact Science being encouraged by




49
     In order to consistently categorize books by keywords in their titles, we focus on titles

translated from English.
50
     Specifically, we regress the log of translations + 1 on the full interactions between a set of

sub-field dummies and a basic difference-in-differences specification, and control for log

population, log GDP per capita, and a set of country fixed effects.
51
     Riasanovsky and Steinberg (2005).


                                                 42
the Communist regime, probably because it was unthreatening to Communism

and was vital for Soviet power on the world stage.



7. Conclusions and discussion

       Idea flows have received limited empirical attention because they are

inherently difficult to measure. We tackle this empirical challenge by

introducing book translations as a measure of non-rival, disembodied

international idea flows. We use this measure to study how the flow of ideas

transmitted by translations was affected by the collapse of Communism in

Eastern Europe, which is an attractive setting to study how policy and

institutional changes affect idea flows.

       As reflected in book translations, we find a strong substitution of the

Baltic nations and Satellite countries away from Communist ideas and towards

Western ideas: the collapse of Communism resulted in a fourfold increase in

translations of Western European titles in the Satellite countries, and nearly an

ninefold increase in the Baltic countries, suggesting a huge increase in the

inflow of Western ideas, and a decrease of over 60% in translations of

Communist titles in both these regions, suggesting a decline in the flow of

ideas between Communist countries.

       Furthermore, we find evidence of rapid and strong idea convergence of

Baltic and Satellite countries to Western Europe. Our findings are consistent

with both catching up on the stock of ideas that were missed out on under

Communism and a convergence between the Baltic and Satellite countries and



                                           43
Western Europe in access to new Western ideas. In contrast, Western-to-Soviet

translations did not converge to Western levels, suggesting the diffusion of

Western ideas into these countries was limited.

           The degree of convergence to Western levels of translations varied

substantially across types of Western ideas. Whereas Communist countries’

translations of Western titles in the more scientific fields, which likely contain

knowledge that is more useful for economic development, reached their levels

in Western Europe post collapse, translations in Arts, a more cultural field, did

not converge.

           This study of the Communist regime and its collapse in Eastern Europe

is not only a natural context for the study of international idea flows, but it also

contributes to our understanding of this highly important episode in history.

First, this is the first study to empirically assess how Communism affected idea

flows.52 Second, while it is known that Communist Europe had low inflows of

Western knowledge and ideas (e.g. Garton Ash, 1995, Harrison, 2003, 2005),

the emphasis is typically on the stronger censorship of Western ideas in Eastern

Europe. Our empirical strategy sheds light on the roles of both repression and

preferences for ideas in determining translation flows. We conclude from the

52
     There is a literature that documents and explains the transition of Eastern European countries

from Communism into market economies (e.g. Blanchard 1994, 1996, 1997, Aghion and

Blanchard 1994, Frye and Mansfield 2003), and the transition away from socialism of Israeli

kibbutzim (e.g. Abramitzky 2008, 2011). Alesina and Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007) studies the

effect of the collapse of Communism on preferences). However, this paper is the first to test the

effect of the collapse of Communism on the flow of information and ideas.


                                                 44
greater increase in Western-to-Baltic translations than Western-to-Soviet

translations that preferences for Western ideas played an important role in

translation flows. From the lower initial level of Western-to-Baltic translations

relative to Western-to-Satellite translations, and the convergence of both to

Western-to-Western translations, we conclude repression played an important

role in shaping translation flows.

           More broadly, our paper sheds light how economic incentives shape the

international diffusion of knowledge, which economic historians view as one

of the most crucial economic phenomena of all (see various work by Joel

Mokyr). One wider lesson from our paper is that when these incentives are

seriously impaired by institutions, this can have severe effects that are only

remedied as institutional change occurs.

           Naturally, book translations have a number of limitations as a measure

of the flow of ideas. They only allow us to measure idea flows across language

barriers, which precludes measuring idea flows between countries that share a

language, or between linguistically similar groups within a country.

Furthermore, because of the length of time it takes to write a book, they tend

not to capture very new ideas. In addition, some people are able to read

multiple languages, so have access to ideas before they are translated.53 Finally,




53
     However, it is reasonable to assume that such a person finds it less costly to read in his own

language, thus an increase in translations into his native language implies a reduced cost of

access to information.


                                                 45
ideas in books must by definition be codifiable as opposed to tacit. That is, they

must be able to be expressed in words and written down.

       Despite these limitations, translations are an attractive measure of the

international flow of ideas because they capture flows of non-rival,

disembodied ideas, and their key purpose is to transmit written ideas,

information and/or knowledge between languages. Moreover, they are both

quantifiable and classifiable by field and specific content, and thus lend

themselves naturally to empirical work.




                                       46
Figure 1: Translations in Communist and Western Europe
Panel A: Linear scale
       Western original languages                Communist original languages




Panel B: Log scale
       Western original languages                                Communist original languages




This figure shows translations from Western European and Communist languages in the former Soviet countries
(excluding the Baltics), the Baltic countries, the Satellite countries, and Western European countries. The values
are averages over the countries in the regions.




                                                       47
Figure 2: The effects over time of the collapse of Communism on translations
Panel A: Translations from Western European languages published in:
             Soviet countries                            Baltic countries




             Satellite countries




                                           48
Panel B: Translations from Communist languages published in:
             Soviet countries                         Baltic countries




                  Satellite countries




The coefficients plotted are from the estimation of a version of equation (2) where effects in Communist countries
are allowed to differ for Soviet, Baltic, and Satellite countries. The post dummy and its interactions have been
replaced by year dummies (for 1981-2000) and their equivalent interactions. Controls for population and GDP per
capita are also included. The figure shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals on interactions of the year
dummies with Western (Panel A) or Communist (Panel B) translations in Soviet countries (excluding Baltics),
Baltic countries, and Satellite countries. The Western level line is the negative of the coefficient on Soviet, Baltic,
or Satellite interacted with Western (Panel A) or Communist (Panel B) original language.




                                                         49
Figure 3: The effect of the collapse of Communism on translations by field
Panel A: Western-to-Communist translations




Panel B: Communist-to-Communist translations




This figure plots the coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions predicting log translations plus 1 run
separately by subject as described in Section 6. In each panel, the x-axis plots the coefficient on the interaction
between Western (Panel A) or Communist (Panel B) original language and Communist translating country. The y-
axes plot the coefficients between the interactions between these variables and a post-1991 dummy.

                                                        50
Figure 4: Effect of the collapse of Communism on translations from English by subfield




The regressions that give rise to these coefficients are difference-in-differences regressions comparing Communist
with Western Europe, run by field as described in Section 6.




                                                       51
Table 1: Before/after and difference-in-differences analysis: The effect of the collapse of Communism on book translations
Dependent variable: log number of translations in a country, year and for an original language type (Western or Communist)
Coefficients of interest are fully interacted with Western original language (top panel) or Communist original language (lower panel)
                                                                                     OLS: pre vs post                                      Difference-in-differences: Communist vs West
Sample:                                                                         Communist countries only                                     Communist and Western European countries
                                                                                   (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)           (7)                   (8)
Translations from Western original languages in:
Communist country (Soviet, Baltic, or Satellite) * post                        1.761***          0.823**          1.897***        1.361***           1.428***            0.730         0.432                 0.535
                                                                                 (0.179)          (0.329)          (0.269)          (0.233)            (0.256)          (0.511)       (0.360)               (0.412)
Baltic country * post                                                                            1.701***                                                              1.995***      1.714***              1.636***
                                                                                                  (0.331)                                                               (0.342)       (0.318)               (0.325)
Satellite country * post                                                                         0.919**                                                               0.979**       0.937***              0.907**
                                                                                                  (0.330)                                                               (0.402)       (0.318)               (0.342)
Communist country (Soviet, Baltic, or Satellite)                                                                 -1.739***                                            -3.169***
                                                                                                                   (0.498)                                              (0.933)
Baltic country                                                                                                                                                           0.977
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.748)
Satellite country                                                                                                                                                     2.123***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.660)
Post                                                                                                                0.043          0.380**                               0.097        0.369**
                                                                                                                   (0.135)          (0.153)                             (0.146)       (0.154)
Translations from Communist original languages in:
Communist country (Soviet, Baltic, or Satellite) * post                        -1.160***        -1.405***        -0.582***        -1.095***          -1.009***          -0.837*      -1.332**               -1.224**
                                                                                 (0.186)          (0.449)          (0.206)          (0.267)            (0.292)          (0.465)       (0.490)                (0.515)
Baltic country * post                                                                              -0.188                                                                -0.117        -0.175                 -0.169
                                                                                                  (0.451)                                                               (0.320)       (0.442)                (0.422)
Satellite country * post                                                                           0.374                                                                 0.274         0.392                  0.351
                                                                                                  (0.514)                                                               (0.374)       (0.496)                (0.505)
Communist country (Soviet, Baltic, or Satellite)                                                                  2.583***                                             1.987***
                                                                                                                   (0.424)                                              (0.509)
Baltic country                                                                                                                                                           0.807
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.558)
Satellite country                                                                                                                                                        0.402
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.519)
Post                                                                                                              -0.437**           -0.084                            -0.383**        -0.095
                                                                                                                   (0.160)          (0.174)                             (0.170)       (0.173)
Other controls:
Western/Communist original language dummies                                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes           Yes                   Yes
Population and GDP controls                                                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes           Yes                   Yes
Country fixed effects * Western/Communist original language                        Yes              Yes                               Yes                Yes                            Yes                   Yes
Year fixed effects * Western/Communist original language                                                                                                 Yes                                                  Yes

R-Squared                                                                         0.869         0.888              0.673             0.921            0.928             0.774              0.928             0.935
Observations                                                                       511           511                964               964              964               964                964               964
An observation is a country, year, original language (Western or Communist)
Notes: Each column is a regression predicting the log number of translations published in the country, year, and from the original language (Communist or Western European). Columns 1 and 2 are OLS regressions
using annual data for the period 1980-2000, run for countries in Communist Europe (versions of equation (1) as described in Section 4). Columns 3-8 are difference-in-differences OLS regressions, with Communist
Europe as the region of interest and Western Europe as the comparison group (versions of equation (2) as described in Section 4).
Three types of Communist countries are distinguished in this analysis: the Soviet countries (Russia, Belarus, Moldova, the Ukraine), the Baltics (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania), and the Satellite countries (Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Slovakia). The Western European countries used are Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, and
Sweden. The Communist and Western original languages are given in footnote 15. Post is a dummy for 1991 onwards. Population and GDP controls are the logs of population and of real GDP per capita. Standard
errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the country level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                          52
Table 2: Access to new Western ideas: The effect of the collapse of Communism on translations of recent versus older Western titles
Dependent variable: log number of translations from a Western original language
                                              Recent titles (15 years old and newer)                Older titles (more than 15 years old)
                                            (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)

Post * Communist country                1.417***       2.114***     1.485***      1.408***    1.263***      1.960***     1.331***      1.254***
                                          (0.283)       (0.352)      (0.305)       (0.325)      (0.283)      (0.352)      (0.305)       (0.325)
Communist country                       -2.966***     -1.997***                               -2.029***      -1.061*
                                          (0.484)       (0.597)                                 (0.484)      (0.597)
Post                                     0.428***        0.119      0.530***                     -0.027      -0.335*       0.076
                                          (0.125)       (0.178)      (0.173)                    (0.125)      (0.178)      (0.173)
Population and GDP controls                               Yes          Yes          Yes                        Yes          Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects                                                  Yes          Yes                                     Yes           Yes
Year fixed effects                                                                  Yes                                                   Yes

R-Squared                                  0.478        0.610         0.934        0.943          0.269         0.453         0.908          0.920
Observations                                500           482          482          482            500           482           482            482
An observation is a country, year
Notes: Each column is a difference-in-differences regression predicting the log number of translations of recent titles (columns 1-4) or of older
titles (columns 5-8) from Western languages published in the country and year. Communist Europe is the region of interest and Western Europe is
the comparison group. Data are annual for the period 1980-2000 (see Section 5.2 for data construction). See the notes to Table 1 for the
Communist and Western countries used (note Iceland is also included in columns 1 and 5) and the Western original languages. Post is a dummy for
1991 onwards. Population and GDP controls are the logs of population and of real GDP per capita. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at
the country level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                       53
Table 3: Number of important titles and authors translated pre and post-collapse by country and region, 1980-1996

                                                            Anti-Communist
Translations of:                    Influential titles                             Most translated titles    Influential authors
                                                            influential titles
                                  Pre       Post              Pre        Post         Pre         Post         Pre         Post
Panel A: Translations into country's main language
Belarus                            0          1                0           1           2           5            1           5
Russia                             8         27                0           8           38          70           34          74
Soviet countries                   8         27                0           8           38          71           34          75
Estonia                               3           12           1           5           8           24           10          30
Baltic countries                      3           12           1           5           8           24           10          30
Bulgaria                             10           30           0          10           32          67           34          71
Czech Republic                       2            24           0          9            23          42           23          68
Poland                               16           53           3          15           52          94           58          97
Romania                              5            17           1          7            23          44           31          51
Slovakia                             2            7            0          2            23          29           15          31
Satellite countries                  29           72           4          20           71         134           89         122
Communist countries                  36           79           4          20           79         146           94         131
Austria                              12           2           5           1            37          25           30          20
Belguim                               8           0           2           0            43          13           29          9
Denmark                              24           21          8           3           111          84           58          55
Spain                                89           68          18          15          203         176          136         135
France                               57           31          9           9           116          80          118         133
Norway                                7           20          4           2            63          66           41          54
Western European countries           116          90          19          19          227         205          162         171
Panel B: Translations into any language
Belarus                            0              1            0           1           16          15           4           13
Russia                             8              27           0           8           38          71           34          75
Soviet countries                   8              27           0           8           38          72           35          75
Estonia                               3           13           1           6           8           24           10          30
Baltic countries                      3           13           1           6           8           24           10          30
Bulgaria                             10           30           0          10           32          67           34          71
Czech Republic                       2            24           0          9            23          42           23          68
Poland                               16           53           3          15           52          94           58          97
Romania                              6            18           1          8            31          45           32          51
Slovakia                             3            8            0          2            27          31           19          36
Satellite countries                  30           73           4          20           72         135           89         122
Communist countries                  37           80           4          20           80         148           94         131
Austria                               12           2            5            1          38          25          31          21
Belguim                                8           0            2            0          52          20          29          14
Denmark                               24          23            8            3         111          85          58          55
Spain                                 92          69           18           15         204         183         136         138
France                                58          32           10            9         118          82         118         134
Norway                                 7          20            4            2          63          68          41          55
Western European countries            118         91           19           19         228         215         162         172
Total possible                             178                        30                      240                    213
This table shows for a balanced panel of countries and years the number of titles of each type (influential, influential by an anti-
Communist author, or most translated) or the number of authors translated pre (1980-1988) or post-collapse (1989-1996).
Translations are also tabulated for the Soviet, Baltic, and Satellite regions as a whole, and for Communist and Western Europe.
Panel A counts translations into the main language of the country only, whereas Panel B counts translations into any language
published in the country. The countries included are those that provided data for each year 1980-1996.




                                                                54
Table 4: Size of the publishing industry: The effect of the collapse of Communism on total book publications
Dependent variable: log total number of books published
                                                      Pre vs post                             Difference-in-differences
                                            (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)

Post * Communist country                                                           -0.378*        -0.052       -0.084       -0.111
                                                                                   (0.218)       (0.149)      (0.122)      (0.113)
Post                                        -0.230       0.136          0.123       0.148        0.172*       0.216**
                                           (0.163)      (0.092)        (0.110)     (0.152)       (0.097)      (0.082)
Real GDP per capita (ln)                               0.729**          0.463                   0.547**        0.472*      0.423*
                                                        (0.287)        (0.267)                   (0.230)      (0.234)      (0.207)
Population (ln)                                        0.555***         -1.955                  0.572***       -0.897       -0.675
                                                        (0.121)        (1.521)                   (0.080)      (1.232)      (1.267)
Communist country dummy                                                              Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects                                                   Yes                                     Yes          Yes
Year fixed effects                                                                                                           Yes

R-Squared                                   0.037          0.580       0.884        0.234         0.788         0.948        0.958
Observations                                 131            131         131          339           327           327          327
An observation is a country, year
Notes: Each column is a regression predicting the log total number of books published in the country and year. All columns use annual
data for the period 1980-2000 (where available). Columns 1-3 are before/after OLS regressions using only the Communist countries;
columns 4-7 are difference-in-differences OLS regressions where the region of interest is Communist countries and the comparison
group is Western Europe. The Communist countries used are Belarus, Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania and the
Ukraine, and the Western European countries used are Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Post is a dummy for 1991 onwards. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the
country level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                  55
References

Abramitzky, Ran, (2008), “The Limits of Equality: Insights from the Israeli

   Kibbutz,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, pp. 1111-59.

Abramitzky, Ran, (2011), “Lessons from the Kibbutz on the Equality-

   Incentives Trade-Off,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, pp. 185-208.

Aghion, Philippe, and Olivier Blanchard, (1994), “On the Speed of Transition

   in Central Europe,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 9, pp. 283-

   330.

Alesina, Alberto, and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, (2007), “Good Bye Lenin (Or

   Not?): The Effect of Communism on People's Preferences,” American

   Economic Review, 97, pp. 1507-1528.

Bernstein, Robert, Mark Carroll, W. Bradford Wiley, and Robert W. Frase,

   (1971), Book Publishing in the USSR: Reports of the Delegations of U.S.

   Book Publishers Visiting the U.S.S.R. October 21 – November 4, 1970

   August 20 – September 17, 1962, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,

   Massachusetts.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, (2004), “How

   much should we trust differences-in-differences estimates?” Quarterly

   Journal of Economics, 119, pp. 249-275.

Blanchard, Olivier, (1994), “Transition in Poland,” The Economic Journal,

   104, pp. 1169-1177.

Blanchard, Olivier, (1996), “Theoretical Aspects of Transition,” The American

   Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 86(2), pp. 117-122.
                                  56
Blanchard, Olivier, (1997), The Economics of Post-Communist Transition.

   Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Fletcher, Erin, and Murat Iyigun, (2010), “The Clash of Civilizations: A

   Cliometric Investigation,” working paper, University of Colorado.

Frye, Timothy, and Edward Mansfield, (2003), “Fragmenting Protection: The

   Political Economy of Trade Policy in the Post-Communist World,” British

   Journal of Political Science, 33, pp. 635-657.

Garton Ash, Timothy (ed), (1995), Freedom for publishing, publishing for

   freedom: the Central and East European Publishing Project, Budapest:

   Central European University Press.

Greif, Avner, (1994), “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: a

   Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist

   Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, pp. 912-950.

Harrison, Mark, (2003), “Soviet Industry and the Red Army Under Stalin: A

   Military-Industrial Complex?” Les Cahiers du Monde russe, 44, pp. 323-

   342.

Harrison, Mark, (2005), “Economic Information in the Life and Death of the

   Soviet Command System.” In Reinterpreting the End of the Cold War:

   Issues, Interpretations, Periodizations, pp. 93-115. Edited by Silvio Pons

   and Federico Romero. London: Frank Cass.

Horst, Alexandra C., (2007), “International Property Rights Index (IPRI) 2007

   Report,” International Property Rights Index, Washington, DC.



                                      57
Jaffe, Adam, and Manuel Trajtenberg, (1999), “International Knowledge

   Flows: Evidence from Patent Citations,” Economics of Innovation and New

   Technology, 8, pp. 105-136.

Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, (1993),

   “Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent

   Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, pp. 577-598.

Jones, Charles, and Paul Romer, (2010), “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas,

   Institutions, Population, and Human Capital,” American Economic Journal:

   Macroeconomics, 2, pp. 224-245.

Klenow, Pete, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, (2005), “Externalities and

   Growth,” Handbook of Economic Growth, volume 1A, P. Aghion and S.

   Durlauf, eds., chapter 11, pp. 817-861.

Kuznets, Simon, (1966), Modern Economic Growth: Rate, Structure and

   Spread, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Maddison, Angus, (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris:

   OECD.

Mokyr, Joel, (2003), The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge

   Economy, Princeton University Press.

Mokyr, Joel, (2010), “The Contribution of Economic History to the Study of

   Innovation and Technical Change: 1750-1914,” in the Handbook of the

   Economics of Innovation, 1, pp. 11-50.

Mokyr, Joel, (2010), The Enlightened Economy: an Economic History of

   Britain 1800-1950, Yale University Press.
                                      58
Nunn,   Nathan,   (2009),   “The   Importance    of History   for   Economic

   Development,” Annual Review of Economics, 1, pp. 65-92.

Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon, (2011), “The Slave Trade and the

   Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American Economic Review, 101, pp. 3221-

   3252.

Riasanovsky, Nicholas V., and Mark D. Steinberg, (2005), A History of Russia,

   seventh edition, New York: Oxford University Press.

Romer, Paul, (1993), “Idea Gaps and Object Gaps in Economic Development,”

   Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, pp. 543-573.

Romer, Paul, (2010), “What Parts of Globalization Matter for Catch-Up

   Growth,” American Economic Review, 100, pp. 94-98.

Skelly, Eva, and Vladimir Stabnikov, (1993), Russia: a survey of the book

   market, The British Council.

Walker, Gregory, (1978), Soviet Book Publishing Policy, Cambridge University

   Press, Cambridge.




                                     59
