                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE (CHANGING) KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTION FUNCTION:
        EVIDENCE FROM THE MIT DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY FOR 1970-2000

                                         Annamaria Conti
                                         Christopher C. Liu

                                        Working Paper 20037
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20037


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2014




We are indebted to Adam Jaffe, Ben Jones, Paula Stephan, Marie Thursby, Fabian Waldinger, and
seminar participants at the NBER Changing Frontier Conferences (October 2012 and August 2013)
for their valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Annamaria Conti and Christopher C. Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The (Changing) Knowledge Production Function: Evidence from the MIT Department of
Biology for 1970-2000
Annamaria Conti and Christopher C. Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20037
April 2014
JEL No. D2,H41,I2,I20,I28

                                              ABSTRACT

Considerable attention has been focused, in recent years, on the role that graduate and postdoc
studentsplay in the production of academic knowledge. Using data from the MIT Department of
Biology forthe period 1970-2000, we analyze the evolution over time of four fundamental aspects
of their productivity: i) training duration; ii) time to a first publication; iii) productivity over the
training period; and iv)collaboration with other scientists. We identified four main trends that are
common to graduate studentsand postdocs. First, training periods have increased for later cohorts
of graduate and postdoc students.Second, later cohorts tend to publish their initial first-author article
later than the earlier cohorts. Third,they produce fewer first-author publications. Finally, collaborations
with other scientists, as measured by the number of coauthors on a paper, have increased. This increase
is driven by collaborations with scientists external to a trainee’s laboratory. We interpret these results
in light of the following two paradigms: the increased burden of knowledge that later generations
of scientists face and the limited availability of permanent academic positions.


Annamaria Conti
Georgia Institute of Technology
Scheller College of Business
800 West Peachtree Street NW
Atlanta, Georgia 30308
annamaria.conti@mgt.gatech.edu

Christopher C. Liu
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
Canada M5S 3E6
chris.liu@rotman.utoronto.ca
I. Introduction
       Knowledge has been recognized as a major contributor to technological change
and, more generally, to economic growth (Romer, 1990). In the knowledge production
function, one of the most important inputs is knowledge created by university
researchers. Indeed, a report by the National Science Board (2008) has revealed that
university researchers are responsible for more than 70% of all scientific articles.
Moreover, scholars have shown that academic knowledge is responsible for a large
percentage of industrial innovations (Jaffe, 1989; Mansfield, 1995).


       Academic knowledge has increasingly become a collective phenomenon. Seminal
studies have documented the increase in the size of scientific collaborations, with special
focus on the evolution of the geographic dispersion of team members (e.g. Adams et al.,
2005; Wuchty et al., 2007). Even though university scientists collaborate more and more
across research institutions, the scientific laboratory remains the major locus of
knowledge production (Stephan, 2012b). These laboratories are largely populated by
graduate students and postdocs, whose contributions to their laboratory’s knowledge
stock have been recognized in a number of studies (see, for instance, Stephan, 2012b;
Conti et al., forthcoming). These research trainees have coauthored an important
percentage of their laboratory’s papers and, moreover, have produced a considerable
share of the articles published in highly ranked journals (Black and Stephan, 2010).


       In this study, we use a unique database that allows us to examine the productivity,
training duration, and the collaborative behavior of graduate students and postdocs as
well as the extent to which these aspects have evolved over time. We interpret the
patterns we find in light of two paradigms: the increased burden of knowledge that
successive generations of scientists face (Jones, 2009 and 2010) and the limited
availability of permanent academic positions (Stephan, 1996; Freeman et al., 2001).


       Our data encompass the complete set of laboratories in the MIT Department of
Biology, observed from 1970 to 2000. This department has been a major locus of basic
and applied discoveries in the life sciences for the latter half of the 20th century. Through



                                                                                            2
the time frame of our dataset, the scientists working at the MIT Department of Biology
made discoveries as varied as the molecular mechanisms underpinning recombinant DNA
(e.g., the discovery of splicing and introns), cell death, aging, and the progression of
cancer. This work has resulted in six Nobel Laureates and 43 members of the National
Academy of Sciences between 1966 and 2000. MIT’s Department of Biology has roughly
doubled in size, from 27 laboratories in 1966 to 49 laboratories in the year 2000. Given
this department’s elite status, the findings in this paper may be difficult to extend beyond
other elite North American laboratories. With this caveat in mind, we follow in the
footsteps of other scholars and trade analytical depth with a focus on an elite setting
(Azoulay, 2010; Zuckerman, 1977).


        We collected a detailed set of information on the graduate students and postdocs
who populated these laboratories, including their publication output. For the purposes of
this study, we use this information to analyze the evolution over time of four fundamental
aspects of their productivity: i) training duration, ii) time to a first publication, iii)
productivity over the training period, and iv) collaboration with other scientists.


        We identified four main trends that are common to graduate students and
postdocs. First, training periods have increased for later cohorts of graduate students and
postdocs. Second, recent cohorts tend to publish their first article later than the earlier
cohorts. Third, they produce fewer first-author publications. Finally, collaborations with
other scientists, as measured by the number of coauthors on a paper, have increased. This
increase is driven by collaborations with scientists outside of a trainee’s laboratory.


        The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Section II describes the
empirical setting. Section III presents the scientific productivity trends for graduate
students and postdocs. Section IV concludes and discusses policy implications.




                                                                                              3
II. Empirical setting
       For the period under study, the MIT Department of Biology generated an Annual
Report, which serves as our core data source. The primary purpose of the Annual Report
was to, internally, distribute information about the department’s scientific activities. As a
result, the report includes technical summaries of ongoing projects as well as a list of
publications produced during the prior year. From 1966-1989, technical summaries were
at the project level and individuals could contribute to multiple projects. The size of the
Annual Report grew in accordance with the size of the department. After the Annual
Report reached 629 pages in 1987, summaries were limited to two pages per laboratory,
regardless of its size. Unfortunately, starting in 2001, even the summaries ceased to be
published and subsequent data have been lost to posterity.


       The Annual Report documents a roster of each laboratory’s members. We know
the names of every individual in each laboratory as well as the individual’s personnel
type (e.g., postdoc, graduate student, technician). As a result, we know the characteristics
of the department, its laboratories, and its individual members over the course of 35
years. Figure 1 provides an example of the data available for any given laboratory-year.
We know of no other data source that provides as detailed a view into the organization of
scientific work as this one.


                                   < Insert Figure 1 about here>


       We supplemented this departmental personnel roster with a number of other data
sources. To examine scientific outputs, we hand collected each principal investigator ‘s
(PI) paper output from Medline. We then matched each publication’s author list with our
personnel roster to examine the extent to which individual laboratory members
contributed to the scientific output. In instances where matching was ambiguous (e.g.
Liu), we examined the article directly. It is exceedingly rare for laboratory members to
publish scientific papers without their PI listed as an author. Hence we do not believe we
are missing any publications.




                                                                                              4
         Overall, our dataset comprises 1,494 laboratory-years and 20,324 laboratory
member-years that span 1966-2000. Within this dataset, there are 120 professors and
6,938 laboratory members who collectively produced 7,553 journal publications.


         We restrict our analysis to the 1970-2000 period as there was ambiguity in
personnel categories prior to 1970. We begin with a description of the laboratories and
their changes over time. We then turn our attention to examine the laboratory members
with a particular emphasis on two major types, postdocs and graduate students, who
comprise more than half of our personnel roster.


         Within our dataset, the average laboratory has 10 members of which 5 are
postdocs, 3 are graduate students, and 2 are technicians. Staff scientists are rare, but their
prevalence has increased over time. As shown in Figure 2, laboratories have grown in
size through the latter part of the 20th century, and this increase has been fostered by the
number of postdoctoral scientists. There is no change in the number of graduate students
or technicians over time, although the number of salaried staff (i.e., technicians and staff
scientists) appears to have increased in the late 1990s 4.


                                         < Insert Figure 2 about here>


         Figure 3 presents trends in scientific output for our laboratories. As shown, the
average number of articles has steadily increased over time, from an average of 4 articles
per laboratory-year in the 1970s to 6 articles per laboratory-year in the 1990s. We
observe a very similar trend in the number of impact factor-weighted publications.


                                         < Insert Figure 3 about here>




         4 A likely reason why the number of graduate students remained steady over the years is that
university departments in the US tend to set a limit to the number of students that can enroll in a PhD
program.




                                                                                                          5
       We restrict our analysis of laboratory members to graduate students and postdocs
for the following reasons. First, these individuals make large contributions to a PI’s
publication output. Their purpose is to directly produce scientific publications, rather than
to play a supporting role (e.g., technicians). Second, these two types are the most
prevalent personnel categories within the roster. Together they make up more than half of
the laboratory. Third, these two personnel types have been the focus of recent interest in
the literature because of their contributions to knowledge and technology production (e.g.
Dasgupta and David, 1994; Waldinger, 2010). A quick look at faculty websites convinces
one of the importance of these contributions, be it measured by publications, citations, or
grants. Lastly, we note that graduate students and postdocs are easily and unambiguously
identified, as opposed to less clear categories such as visiting scientists.


       Our sample is composed of 991 graduate students and 2,427 postdocs. Figures 4a
and 4b provide descriptive results of the distribution of graduate students and postdocs by
their publication count. Interestingly, a significant proportion of them (about 35%) did
not publish any articles during their training period. Conditioned upon having published,
the mean number of papers is about three articles for both graduate students and
postdocs.


                                   < Insert Figure 4a about here>
                                   < Insert Figure 4b about here>


III. Trends in scientific productivity of graduate students and postdocs
       This section explores the trends in four major dimensions of graduate student and
postdoc scientific productivity. First, we look at training duration. Second, we investigate
the timing to a first publication. Third, we examine scientific output. Finally, we explore
collaboration patterns.


       In analyzing these trends, we should keep in mind that while both postdocs and
graduate students are formally considered laboratory trainees, they fundamentally differ
in a number of aspects. Postdocs are more experienced that graduate students and have



                                                                                              6
accumulated a greater wealth of knowledge and skills. As a consequence, matching
between postdocs and PIs is based upon prior ability and experience, rather than the
future expectation of productivity as in the case of graduate students (Stephan, 2012b).


A. Training duration
        We begin this section by presenting descriptive statistics for the average training
duration of postdoc and graduate students over our sample period. We then investigate
whether the length of training has changed over time. Figures 5a and 5b show the
distribution of graduate students and postdocs by their training duration. The training
period for graduate students is longer than postdoctoral training. Indeed, the majority of
graduate students in our sample completed their training between five and seven years,
while postdocs tended to spend between two and four years in a PI’s laboratory 5.


                                       < Insert Figure 5a about here>
                                       < Insert Figure 5b about here>


        Figure 6 shows the evolution of training periods for graduate students (in red) and
postdocs (in blue) over the period 1970-1995. We exclude the years 1996 through 2000,
since students who enrolled in these years might not have completed their training by the
end of 2000. In line with previous studies 6, we find that training periods for recent
cohorts of students tend to be about one year longer than those for the earliest cohorts.
The training period increases from three to approximately four years for postdocs and
from five to six years for graduate students over our dataset.


                                       < Insert Figure 6 about here>




5  It is possible for postdocs to have worked in more than one PI’s laboratory before they are offered a
faculty position. However, from discussions with MIT PIs as well as from an examination of a CV sample,
it is evident that, at least for the period we examine, this is rarely the case for MIT postdocs.
6 See, for instance, the findings by the National Research Council (1990), Tilghman (1998), Jones (2009),
Jones and Weinberg (2011), and Freeman et al. (2001).


                                                                                                       7
       There are at least three reasons that can explain these trends. The first reason is
that as knowledge accumulates, earlier trainee cohorts face a greater educational burden
than do the older cohorts (Jones, 2009 and 2010). Second, it is also possible that the
recent cohorts of postdocs and graduate students tend to stay longer in their positions
because of the increased mismatch between the trainees’ supply and the availability of
permanent academic positions (Stephan, 1996; Freeman et al., 2001). Finally, one cannot
exclude the possibility that the increased pressure on PIs to publish and apply for grants
has led them to impose longer training periods on their students (Freeman et al., 2001).


       To more formally assess the evolution of training periods over time, we estimate
Poisson regression models, with robust standard errors, in which we relate the training
duration of graduate students and postdocs to whether these trainees had enrolled during
the following periods: i) 1970-1979; ii) 1980-1989; and iii) 1990-1995. The distribution
of students across enrollment periods is reported in Table 1.


       The equation we estimate is:


                    yi=exp(β1 D1980-1989+ β2 D1990-1995+ νi+ θi +εi)


where yi is training duration, measured in number of years. Moreover, D1980-1989 is an
indicator variable that equals one if trainee i enrolled during 1980-1989 and equals zero
otherwise. D1990-1995 equals one if trainee i enrolled during 1990-1995 and, similarly,
equals zero otherwise. We omit the 1970-1979 indicator variable and use it as a
reference. Hence, the coefficients of β1 and β2 should be interpreted as the change in
training duration relative to the duration of trainees enrolled in 1970-1979. When
investigating training duration, it is important to consider the scientific field in which a
laboratory operates (Galison, 1997). Different scientific fields use different tools and it is
likely that trends in training durations vary across fields. To account for field effects, we
include a series of indicator variables, νi, corresponding to the modal experimental
organism used in each laboratory. Specifically, we generated indicators for protein
biochemists, bacteriologists, unicellular systems (e.g., HeLa cells), genetic systems (e.g.,



                                                                                                8
yeast), rodents, and other (e.g., frog). Finally, we include a set of PI dummies, θi, to
capture variations in duration trends across laboratory heads.


        Table 2 presents the regression results for graduate student and postdoc training
duration. For each trainee category, we first include biology field fixed effects (column
I) and, subsequently, we add PI fixed effects (column II). We begin by describing the
results for graduate students and then for postdocs.


        As Table 2 shows, in the baseline model, the dummies D1980-1989 and D1990-
1995 have a positive and statistically significant coefficient. These results confirm the
descriptive evidence that later cohorts of students take longer to complete their PhD than
earlier cohorts (cohorts who enrolled during the 1970-1979 period). In the second
column, we add PI effects and the magnitude of the coefficients declines together with
their statistical significance. This last result suggests that PI characteristics are a source of
positive correlation between period dummies and training duration.


        We find similar results for postdocs. The coefficients of the 1980-1989 and 1990-
1995 period dummies are positive and statistically significant regardless of the model
specification, although the magnitude and significance is reduced with PI fixed effects.


        To summarize, the results in this section suggest that training periods have
increased in recent years for both graduate students and postdocs. While we cannot
precisely disentangle the mechanisms behind these trends, we believe that increasing
challenges imposed on recent trainees, in terms of increased educational burden or
reduced availability of permanent academic positions, may play an important role.


                                     < Insert Table 1 about here>
                                     < Insert Table 2 about here>




                                                                                               9
B. Time to a first publication
         In this section, we focus on the time it takes trainees to publish their first article.
We considered the time interval between a trainees’ enrollment and their first publication
as the time it takes them to acquire the knowledge to develop publishable findings. This
interval becomes then a measure of trainee distance to the existing knowledge frontier.
Figure 7 presents Kaplan-Meier estimates of the time to a first publication for postdocs
and graduate students. As shown, the probability of publishing a paper in each training
year appears to be higher for postdocs than for graduate students. This holds true even
when we focus exclusively on first-author publications, which we take as a proxy for
those projects to which trainees have given their greatest contribution 7.


                                          < Insert Figure 7 about here>


         Once more, we are interested in the evolution of time to a first publication over
our sample period, for both graduate students and postdocs. If the knowledge burden for
the more recent cohorts is larger than that for the oldest ones, then we should expect that
the time it takes to publish a first article has increased for the most recent cohorts. There
are other reasons to expect such a trend. One of these could be a lengthening of the
review process at scientific journals. While this is a documented trend in the economic
field (Ellison, 2002), there are grounds for believing that this phenomenon is not confined
to economic journals. By way of an example, statistics available for the EMBO journal
reveal an increase over time in the number of days from submission to final decision 8.


         Figures 8 and 9 display Kaplan-Meier estimates of the time it takes to publish a
first article, distinguishing between the following periods: i) 1970-1979; ii) 1980-1989;
and iii) 1990-2000. They provide evidence that the probability of publishing a paper at
any given period is higher for the oldest cohorts than for the more recent ones. These
trends seem to be more accentuated for postdocs than for graduate students. Moreover,


7 For the sake of brevity, we do not show the results for first-author publications, but they are available
upon request.
8 Statistics are available from http://www.nature.com/emboj/about/process.html



                                                                                                              10
for graduate students, they are more evident in first-author publications than they are in
other publications.


                                     < Insert Figure 8 about here>
                                     < Insert Figure 9 about here>


        What we need to understand is whether these trends persist once we take into
account field or PI characteristics, which are likely to be a source of correlation between
enrollment periods and time to a first publication. For this purpose, we estimate a series
of Cox proportional hazard models in which the hazard of publishing a first article is a
function of our period indicators and controls.


        Hence, we estimate the following equation:


                                     h(t|xi) =h0(t)exp(xiβx)


where h(t|xi) is the hazard of publishing a first article, h0(t) is the baseline hazard (i.e. the
hazard when all covariates are equal to zero), and xi is a matrix of covariates. As in our
previous equation, xi includes period indicator variables as well as field and PI dummies.
This time we also include in the sample trainees who had enrolled after 1995. Hence, the
last period indicator variable equals one for trainees who had enrolled during 1990-2000
and zero otherwise. The results for graduate students are presented in Table 3, while
those for postdocs are in Table 4. Standard errors are clustered around PI.


        We begin by presenting the results for graduate students, distinguishing between
the time to a first publication and the time to an initial first-author publication. Estimates
are presented in terms of their effect on the odds of publishing a first paper. Hence, a
coefficient smaller (larger) than one reflects a negative (positive) effect. When we only
include field fixed effects, the coefficients of the 1980-1989 and 1990-2000 period
dummies are smaller than one, as expected, but not statistically significant. They decrease




                                                                                               11
in magnitude and become significant once we introduce PI fixed effects. This result
indicates that trends in the time to a first publication vary across PIs.


         When we examine first-author publications, we find stronger evidence that the
time to a first publication has increased for later cohorts of graduate students relative to
earlier ones. Indeed, the coefficients of both period dummies are smaller than one and the
coefficient for the 1990-2000 indicator is statistically significant. The coefficient
magnitudes suggest that the hazard of publishing an initial first-author paper, for graduate
students who enrolled in the 1980-1989 period, is 0.9 times the hazard of those who
enrolled in the 1970-1979 period. It declines to 0.8 times for graduate students who
enrolled during 1990-2000. As before, once we introduce PI fixed effects the significance
of the coefficients improves and the magnitude declines.


                                          < Insert Table 3 about here>


         In the case of postdocs, both the time to a first publication and that to an initial
first-author publication appear to have increased for later cohorts relative to earlier ones.
Regardless of the regression specification, the hazard of publishing a first paper is lower
for postdocs who started in the 1980-1989 period, than for postdocs who enrolled during
1970-1979, and it is lowest for those who started during 1990-2000. Moreover, the
coefficients tend to be statistically significant with and without PI fixed effects 9.


                                          < Insert Table 4 about here>


         Overall, we provide evidence that the time to an initial first-author publication has
increased for both graduate students and postdocs and this result is strongest for trainees
in the most recent decade. Moreover, in the case of postdocs, results indicate that the time
to a first publication has increased even for non-first author articles. In general, these

9 In column three the coefficient for the 1980-1989 period dummy is not significant. However, a test of
joint significance of period dummies rejects the null hypothesis that they are (jointly) equal to zero with a
p-value of 0.00.




                                                                                                            12
results seem to be consistent with our previous findings that training periods have
increased over time. Taken together, these results may suggest that, at least in part, recent
cohorts of trainees use their extra training time to achieve first publishable results.


C. Publication trends
        In this section, we turn our attention to trends in the publication output of
graduate students and postdocs. The question we want to explore is whether recent
cohorts of graduate students and postdocs have become less productive than older ones.
Indeed, if one posits that recent cohorts of scientists face a larger learning burden or that
the reviewing process at scientific journals has increased over time, then we should
observe a declining trend in the publication output of graduate students and postdocs.


        To investigate this hypothesis, we estimate count regression models in which we
relate publication outputs that graduate students and postdocs had produced during their
training as a function of whether their enrollment year falls within the 1970-1979, 1980-
1989, or 1990-1995 periods. We adopt a Poisson specification with robust standard
errors. We measure publication output by counting the number of publications from the
moment a trainee joins a PI laboratory until two years after the trainee was last observed
in the laboratory. In this way, we account for the fact that there are lags between the
moment a research project is completed and the moment its results are published. As for
the analysis of training durations, we exclude the latest years because graduate students
and postdocs who enrolled in these years might not have completed their training by the
end of our sample period.


        The equation we estimate is:


                  yi=exp(β1 D1980-1989+ β2 D1990-1995+ β3 Durationi+
                                          +νi+ θi +εi)


where yi is either the total count of trainee i’s publications or the count of their first-
author publications. D1980-1989 is an indicator variable that equals one if trainee i



                                                                                              13
enrolled during 1980-1989 and equals zero otherwise. D1990-1995 equals one if trainee i
enrolled during 1990-1995 and, similarly, equals zero otherwise. Durationi is defined as
the number of years a trainee has spent in a laboratory. Finally, νi and θi are field and PI
fixed effects, respectively.


       The results for graduate students are displayed in Table 5, while those for
postdocs are presented in Table 6. When we consider the total publication count (column
I), we find that graduate students who enrolled in more recent periods are no less
productive than their colleagues who enrolled during 1970-1979. In fact, none of the
coefficients for the 1989-1990 and 1990-1995 period dummies are statistically
significant. Once we include supervisor fixed effects, the coefficient of the dummy for
student enrollment during 1990-1995 becomes statistically significant and has a negative
sign. While this last result suggests that there are some supervisor characteristics that are
correlated with productivity trends, we cannot conclude that there is a general declining
tendency in the graduate student paper count. In support of this conjecture, descriptive
evidence reported in Figure 10 does not reveal a decreasing trend for the annual
publication count. In regressions, not reported here (but available upon request), we find
very similar results when we use the impact-factor weighted publication count as the
output measure.


       We show different findings when analyzing first-author publications. In this case,
both period dummies have a negative coefficient and that the coefficient for the 1990-
1995 period variable is significant, regardless of whether we include PI fixed effects. One
might wonder whether this effect is driven by the fact that fewer graduate students are
publishing first-author papers in recent years. To investigate this possibility, we estimate
a linear probability model in which the dependent variable is an indicator that takes a
value of one if graduate students have published at least one article during their training.
The results are displayed in the last column of Table 5. The coefficient for the 1990-1995
period dummy is negative and statistically significant, independent of the regression
specification. These results suggest that at least part of the declining output trend is
explained by a lower publishing probability for the most recent cohorts. Overall, we find



                                                                                           14
that later graduate student cohorts produce fewer first-author articles than earlier ones
and, this time, regression results seem to be supported by descriptive evidence reported in
Figure 10.


                                    < Insert Table 5 about here>
                                   < Insert Figure 10 about here>


       When we turn our attention to postdocs (Table 6), we find strong evidence that
the postdoc cohorts enrolled during 1980-1989 and 1990-1995 produce less articles than
cohorts enrolled during 1970-1979. This result holds true regardless of whether we look
at total or first-author publication counts. Indeed, the coefficients of our period dummies
are negative and statistically significant, with and without PI fixed effects. When we
analyze the probability of publishing at least one first-author paper, we find that part of
the declining trend for the first-author paper count is explained by a lower publishing
probability for the most recent cohorts. Overall, these findings are consistent with the
descriptive trends presented in Figure 11, which shows an over-time decline in
publication outputs by postdoc students.


                                    < Insert Table 6 about here>
                                   < Insert Figure 11 about here>


       In analyses not presented here, for the sake of brevity, we attempted to analyze
whether the decline in the number of first-author graduate student publications was
correlated with larger time intervals between papers, for subsequent publications. Thus
we estimated hazard models for publishing a second first-author paper, conditioned on
having published an initial one, and for publishing a third first-author paper, conditioned
on having published a second. Because we have annual data, we cannot analyze the time
interval between two papers published in the same year. With this caveat in mind, we
find that the time intervals between first-author publications, subsequent to the first, are
not larger for the most recent graduate student cohorts. This seems to suggest that the
decline in the number of first-author papers for graduate students could be explained by



                                                                                              15
the fact that trainees take longer to publish a first article or they publish fewer articles per
year. Similar results were obtained when we estimated the hazard that postdoc students
publish a paper or a first-author paper, conditioned on an initial publication.


          To summarize, the results from this section lead us to infer that when we measure
graduate student productivity by their first-author publication count, later cohorts appear
to be less productive than earlier ones. As for postdocs, recent cohorts appear to be less
productive in terms of both first-author and total paper counts.


D. Collaboration trends
          We have analyzed the training period and productivity trends of postdoc and
graduate students in light of the challenges that recent cohorts of scientists face relative to
later ones. The question remaining to be answered is whether trainees have reacted to
these challenges by working in larger teams, in a similar fashion to other researchers.


          The benefits of teamwork have been extensively discussed in the economics
literature and include output gains derived from labor specialization (Becker and Murphy,
1992) and from the circulation of new ideas among team members (Adams et al., 2005).
In the economics of science, scholars have found that scientists increasingly work in
teams (Zuckerman and Merton, 1973; Wuchty et al., 2007) 10 and that team size has
expanded over time (Adams et al., 2005), largely due to an intensification of multi-
university collaborations (Jones et al., 2008).


          Figure 12 reports trends over time in the average number of coauthors per paper,
distinguishing between postdocs and graduate students. In line with previous studies, we
observe that for both trainee categories the average number of coauthors per paper has
increased over time from approximately 1.5 at the beginning of the 1970s to
approximately 3.5 by the second half of the 1990s. Interestingly enough, we also observe
that the increased collaboration size was mainly driven by an increase in the number of
outside laboratory coauthors.

10   See also Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008) and Forman and Van Zeebroeck (2012).


                                                                                             16
                                    < Insert Figure 12 about here>


        Overall, this suggests that trainees, similar to other scientists across a broad range
of disciplines, are increasingly working in teams and these teams tend to encompass
authors from outside the trainees’ laboratories.


IV. Conclusions and policy implications
A. Summary
        While knowledge production is considered one of the main determinants of
economic growth, there is no doubt that academic knowledge is one of the most decisive
inputs in the knowledge production function representing by far the largest source of
codified knowledge.


        This study focuses on the contributions to academic knowledge by postdocs and
graduate students. Using data from the MIT Department of Biology from 1970 to 2000,
we look at the evolution of four fundamental aspects of their productivity: i) training
duration, ii) time to a first publication, iii) productivity over the training period, and iv)
collaboration with other scientists.


        We identified four main trends that are common to graduate students and
postdocs. First, training periods have increased for later cohorts of research trainees.
Second, recent cohorts tend to publish their initial first-author article later than the earlier
cohorts. Third, they produce fewer first-author publications. Finally, collaborations with
other scientists, as measured by the number of coauthors on a paper, have increased. This
increase is driven by collaborations with scientists outside of a trainee’s laboratory.


B. Interpreting the results
        What are the mechanisms that drive our results? Our findings are consistent with
Jones’ educational burden story (Jones, 2009, 2010), which states that, as knowledge
accumulates, future generations of scientists require a greater effort to stand on a giant’s



                                                                                                 17
shoulders. Hence, they can either make a greater effort or they can specialize in a
narrower field and collaborate with other scientists. Our first three results –longer
training periods, longer time to publish, lower productivity for later trainee cohorts–
could be interpreted as an indication that the knowledge burden has increased. The final
result regarding increased trainee collaboration provides an indication that these cohorts
have become more specialized.


           While the educational burden story is indeed a compelling explanation, we
nevertheless think that other mechanisms might also be responsible for our results. One
of these mechanisms is the mismatch between the supply of trainees and the availability
of post-training academic positions that scholars have discussed in recent decades
(Stephan, 2012a; Freeman et al., 2001). Data from the NSF-NIH Survey of Graduate
Students & Postdoctorates in Science and Engineering, shows that enrollment into PhD
life science programs has increased by 80% between 1972 and 2005 11. While we do not
have information on the availability of post-training positions, it is plausible that
selection into (desirable) postdoctoral positions has become harder over time. Lastly, we
also should note that longer training periods certainly benefit and are encouraged by PIs.
Specifically, many PIs are reluctant to allow their most productive laboratory members
(i.e., high-tenure trainees) to depart. In fact, their compensation is, increasingly, assigned
according to the rules of a tournament model in which trainee contributions have become
key to making discoveries, first (Freeman et al., 2001).


           If market frictions were to be responsible for longer training periods, should we
also expect them to explain the lower productivity of recent trainee cohorts and their
increased propensity to work in collaboration with other scientists? Is it plausible to posit
that market disequilibria last for decades? Why is the market not redirecting the excess
supply of trainees to other fields?


           To answer the first question, one might consider that the excess supply of
scientists has led to an increase in academic journal submissions, without a corresponding

11   Data is available from https://webcaspar.nsf.gov/.


                                                                                               18
increase in the number of publications. If there is an excess supply of submissions, then
the direct consequence is that publishing becomes more difficult, which might explain the
lower productivity of recent trainee cohorts. Moreover, specialization and collaboration
become ways of dealing with market disequilibria and one wonders whether the reduction
in recent cohort productivity could have been even more accentuated had recent trainees
not worked with other scientists. This mechanism is not necessarily in contrast with the
educational burden explanation, rather, it offers a complementary perspective. In fact,
market imbalances might act as a stimulus for scientists to expand the knowledge frontier
in order to publish, thus increasing the burden on future generations.


           While the mechanisms we have highlighted seem to be plausible, one cannot
exclude the possibility that the mismatch between the supply of trainees and the
availability of academic positions has led the most brilliant students to shy away from
careers in the life sciences. Thus, the increase in training periods and the reduced
productivity of the most recent cohorts is a reflection of their lower quality skills.


           To answer the second and third questions regarding the duration of market
imbalances, we should refer to studies by Freeman et al. (2001) and Stephan (2012b) and
mention that, increasingly, PhD programs in life science, among others, tend to be
populated by foreign students. Indeed, while domestic students might be discouraged
from continuing their studies in the life sciences PhD programs, these remain attractive to
foreign students not only because of their prestige, but also because salary differentials
between foreign countries and the US are typically large. Clearly, if the average salary of
a PhD holder in Italy is about $2,000 per month, then Italian students will be attracted by
a US graduate degree because by the conclusion of their studies, they will potentially
earn more than they would have earned at home. To verify that the proportion of foreign
graduate students in the MIT Department of Biology has increased over time, we
examined our trainees’ first and last names. We then codified those who had a Chinese
last name as well as those with an Italian or French first and last name 12. We found that
the proportion of Asian, Italian, or French students has increased from 17% in 1970 to

12   Given the authors’ backgrounds, we found it easiest to codify these student ethnicities.


                                                                                                19
27% in 1995. While these figures are only suggestive, given that we cannot distinguish
between foreign or native-born students, they seem to provide an indication that foreign
trainees have recently become an important proportion of the graduate student
population. There are important policy implications arising from the interpretations of our
results. We will discuss them below.


C. Policy Implications
       Ultimately, this paper has served to document the mechanisms underlying two
important trends in the scientific community: the increasing duration of scientist trainees
and an increasing propensity for collaborative activity (e.g., Agrawal et. al, this volume;
Tilghman, 1998). Additionally, we have provided evidence of a decline in the scientific
output of recent trainees. What implications do these trends have for the scientific
community?


       First, regardless of the reasons for the observed trends, it is important to note that
the costs of science have increased (Jones, 2011). These costs are paid by the individual,
who must endure longer training and uncertain future prospects, as well as by society at
large, which does not recuperate the returns from its investment. As previous scholars
have highlighted (Jones, 2011; Stephan 2012a), costs can be reduced by ensuring that
graduate students and postdocs receive adequate pedagogical support during their training
period. This, in turn, improves the efficiency of trainee learning and may serve to offset
increases in learning burdens. Moreover, decision makers could cap the trainee teaching
load, thereby ensuring that the majority of their time is dedicated to research.


       It is also worth mentioning that, as the pre-PI career path for life scientists has
become incredibly long, talented scientists may increasingly choose to opt out. Our data
show that trainee duration creeps above 10 years and this evidence is not unique to the
MIT Department of Biology and to elite institutions, in general (Stephan, 2012b). Longer
training duration raises the opportunity costs of a scientific career and makes other
occupations more attractive. After all, if employment in other fields entails shorter
training periods, lower uncertainty and higher salaries, why would the most brilliant



                                                                                             20
minds opt for a career in the life sciences?


       The increase in the opportunity costs of a life science career is likely to affect
women more severely than men, further exacerbating issues of female participation in the
sciences (Ding et al., 2006). Women’s participation in academia has been found to be
very sensitive to considerations such as family constraints and career uncertainty
(Kaminski and Geisler, 2006). Certainly, longer training durations do not help ease these
concerns.


               We conclude with a final important issue that has attracted the attention of
recent scholars, namely the allocation of research credit in collaborations (Bikard et al.,
2013). Working in teams entails a tradeoff. On the one hand, teamwork seems to produce
more knowledge breakthroughs than solo work (Singh and Fleming, 2010). On the other,
it involves costs, some of which are related to the assessment of the team members’
contributions (Dasgupta and David, 1994). This tradeoff is especially relevant for trainees
given that access to tenure-track positions requires that they be able to prove their ability
to conduct impactful independent research.


References
Adams, J. D., Black, G. C., Clemmons, J. R., & Stephan, P. E. (2005). Scientific Teams
and Institutional Collaborations: Evidence from US universities, 1981–1999. Research
Policy, 34(3), 259-285.

Agrawal, A., & Goldfarb, A. (2008). Restructuring Research: Communication Costs and
the Democratization of University Innovation. American Economic Review, 98(4), 1578-
1590.

Agrawal, A., McHale, J., & Oettl, A. (Forthcoming). Collaboration, Stars, and the
Changing Organization of Science: Evidence from Evolutionary Biology. NBER
Changing Frontier Volume.

Azoulay, P., Zivin, J. G., & Wang, J. (2010). Superstar Extinction. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125(2), 549-589.

Becker, G. S., & Murphy, K. M. (1992). The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and
Knowledge. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1137-1160.



                                                                                            21
Bikard, M., Murray, F., & Gans, J. (2013). Exploring Tradeoffs in the Organization of
Scientific Work: Collaboration and Scientific Reward. NBER Working Paper, No. 18958.

Black, G. C., & Stephan, P. E. (2010). The Economics of University Science and the
Role of Foreign Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Scholars. In American universities in
a global market (pp. 129-161). University of Chicago Press.

Conti, A., Denas, O., & Visentin , F. (Forthcoming). Knoweldge Specialization in PhD
Students Groups. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.

Dasgupta, P., & David, P. A. (1994). Toward a New Economics of Science. Research
Policy, 23, 487–521.

Ding, W.W., Murray, F. & Stuart, T.E. (2006). Gender Differences in Patenting in the
Academic Life Sciences. Science, 313 (5787), 665-667.

Ellison, G. (2002). The Slowdown of the Economics Publishing Process. Journal of
Political Economy, 110 (5), 947-993.

Forman, C., & Van Zeebroeck, N. (2012). From Wires to Partners: How the Internet has
Fostered R&D Collaborations within Firms. Management Science, 58(8), 1549-1568.

Freeman, R., Weinstein, E., Marincola, E., Rosenbaum, J., Solomon, F. (2001).
Competition and Careers in Biosciences. Science, 294, 2293-2294.

Galison, P. (1997). Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics. University of
Chicago Press.

Jaffe, B. A. (1989). Real Effects of Academic Research. American Economic Review,
79(5), 957-970.

Jones, B. F., Wuchty, S., & Uzzi, B. (2008). Multi-University Research Teams: Shifting
Impact, Geography, and Stratification in Science. Science, 322(5905), 1259-1262.

Jones, B. F. (2009). The Burden of Knowledge and the Death of the Renaissance Man: Is
Innovation Getting Harder. Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(1), 283-317.

Jones, B. F. (2010). Age and Great Invention. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(1),
1-14.

Jones, B. F., & Weinberg, B. A. (2011). Age Dynamics in Scientific Creativity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(47), 1-5.

Jones, B. F. (2011). As Science Evolves, How Can Science Policy?. In Innovation Policy
and the Economy, Volume 11 (pp. 103-131). University of Chicago Press.




                                                                                       22
Kaminski, D, & Geisler C. (2006). Survival Analysis of Faculty Retention in Science and
Engineering by Gender. Science, 335 (6070), 864-866.


Mansfield, E. (1995). Research Underlying Industrial Innovations: Sources,
Characteristics, and Financing. Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(1), 55-65.

National Science Board (2008). Science and Engineering Indicators. Arlington, VA:
NSB.

National Science Foundation (2005). Industrial Research and Development Information
System, Table H-19, www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/iris/start.cfm.

Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy,
71-102.

Singh, J. & Fleming, L. (2010). Lone Inventors as Sources of Breakthroughs: Myth or
Reality? Management Science, 56(1), pp.41–56.

Stephan, P. (1996). The Economics of Science. Journal of Economic Literature, 34(3),
1199-1235.

Stephan, P. (2012a). Perverse Incentives. Nature, 484, 29-31.

Stephan, P. (2012b). How Economics Shapes Science. Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press.

Tilghman, S. (1998). Trends in the Early Careers of Life Sciences. Report by the
Committee on Dimensions, Causes, and Implications of Recent Trends in the Careers of
Life Scientists, National Research Council. Washington DC: National Academy Press.

Waldinger, F. (2010). Quality Matters: The expulsion of Professors and the
Consequences for PhD Student Outcomes in Nazi Germany. Journal of Political
Economy, 118(4), 787-831.

Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The Increasing Dominance of Teams in
Production of Knowledge. Science, 316(5827), 1036-1039.

Zuckerman, H. (1977). Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United States. New York,
NY: Free Press




                                                                                       23
Figure 1: Personnel composition of Professor Baltimore’s laboratory




Figure 2: Number of laboratory’s personnel by type

                                            6
                                                        Graduate Students
                                                        Technicians
 Laboratory's number of personnel by type




                                                        Staff Scientists
                                                        Postdocs

                                            4




                                            2




                                            0
                                                1970   1975       1980       1985   1991   1996
                                                                            Year




                                                                                                  24
Figure 3: Number of laboratory’s publications and impact factor-weighted publications
   Number of impact-factor weighted publications   70                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                    Number of publications
                                                   35                                                                           4




                                                    0                                                                           0
                                                        1970   1974     1978      1982      1987      1991      1995     1999

                                                                  Yearly number of impact factor-weighted publications
                                                                  Yearly number of publications




                                                                                                                                     25
Figure 4a: Distribution of graduate students by their number of papers


                                  400

          Number of individuals




                                  200




                                    0
                                        0   1   2   3   4      5      6    7     8   9   >10
                                                    Number of publications




Figure 4b: Distribution of postdocs by their number of papers


                      1200
         Number of individuals




                                  600




                                   0
                                        0   1   2   3     4     5      6     7   8   9   >10

                                                        Number of publications




                                                                                               26
Figure 5a: Distribution of graduate students by their training duration


                                                      250



                                                      200
                              Number of individuals




                                                      150



                                                      100



                                                      50



                                                       0
                                                                3       4         5       6        7       8       9        >9
                                                                                Training duration in years



Figure 5b: Distribution of postdocs by their training duration


                              500



                              400
      Number of individuals




                              300



                              200



                              100



                                                  0
                                                            2       3       4      5      6      7       8     9       >9
                                                                            Training duration in years



                                                                                                                                 27
Figure 6: Training duration for graduate students and postdocs over time

                                  7


                                  6
     Training duration in years




                                  5


                                  4


                                  3


                                  2
                                      1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995
                                                                       Entry year
                                                      Training period duration: Graduate students
                                                      Training period duration: Postdocs




Table 1: Distribution of graduate students and postdocs by enrollment period




                                                                                                     28
Table 2: Regression results for graduate student and postdoc training duration




Note: We estimated Poisson models. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p
< 0.05, * p < 0.10. For these analyses we only consider trainees who had enrolled before 1996.


Figure 7: Kaplan-Meier estimates of the time to a first publication: graduate students and
postdocs




                                                                                             29
Figure 8: Kaplan-Meier estimates of the time to a first publication: graduate students
over time




Figure 9: Kaplan-Meier estimates of the time to a first publication: postdocs over time




                                                                                          30
Table 3: Hazard models for the time to a first publication: graduate students over time




Note: We estimate Cox proportional hazards models with standard errors clustered around PI. We
report hazard ratios. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                                                           31
Table 4: Hazard models for the time to a first publication: postdocs over time




Note: We estimate Cox proportional hazards models with standard errors clustered around PI. We
report hazard ratios. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                                                           32
Table 5: Regression results for graduate student publications




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. For the Poisson models we use robust standard errors,
while for the linear probability model we cluster standard errors around PI. *** p < 0.01, ** p <
0.05, * p < 0.10. For these analyses we only consider trainees who had enrolled before 1996.


Figure 10: Publication output of graduate student cohorts

                 0.45                                                                          4.5




                                                                                                     Weighted publication count
                 0.35                                                                          3.5
 Publication count




                 0.25                                                                          2.5




                 0.15                                                                          1.5




                 0.05                                                                          0.5
                        1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995
                                                  Entry year
                                      Avg. yearly n. of publications
                                     Avg. yearly n. of first-author publications
                                     Avg. yearly n. of weighted publications
Note: Counts normalized by duration


                                                                                                33
                    Table 6: Regression results for postdoc publications




                    Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. For the Poisson models we use robust standard errors,
                    while for the linear probability model we cluster standard errors around PI. *** p < 0.01, ** p <
                    0.05, * p < 0.10. For these analyses we only consider trainees who had enrolled before 1996.


                    Figure 11: Publication output of postdoc cohorts

                    0.6                                                                                    6   Weighted publication count

                    0.5                                                                                    5
Publication count




                    0.4                                                                                    4


                    0.3                                                                                    3


                    0.2                                                                                    2


                    0.1                                                                                    1
                          1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995
                                                   Entry year
                                            Avg. yearly n. of publications
                                            Avg. yearly n. of first-author publications
                                            Avg. yearly n. of weighted publications
                    Note: Counts normalized by duration


                                                                                                                                            34
Figure 12: Average yearly number of coauthors per paper

                        4                                                                                           1.75




                                                                                                                           Number of laboratory coauthors
                       3.5                                                                                          1.5
 Number of coauthors




                        3                                                                                           1.25


                       2.5                                                                                          1


                        2                                                                                           0.75


                       1.5                                                                                          0.5
                             1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994
                                                                         Year
                                        Avg. yearly n. of coauthors: graduate students
                                        Avg. yearly n. of coauthors: postdocs
                                        Avg. yearly number of laboratory coauthors: postdocs or graduate students




                                                                                                             35
