NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID RAILROADS MAKE ANTEBELLUM U.S. BANKS MORE SOUND?
Jeremy Atack
Matthew S. Jaremski
Peter L. Rousseau
Working Paper 20032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20032
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

We thank William Collins, Robert Margo, Paul Rhode, David Wheelock and participants in the
“Enterprising America” NBER-Vanderbilt University conference, December 14, 2013. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jeremy Atack, Matthew S. Jaremski, and Peter L. Rousseau. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did Railroads Make Antebellum U.S. Banks More Sound?
Jeremy Atack, Matthew S. Jaremski, and Peter L. Rousseau
NBER Working Paper No. 20032
April 2014
JEL No. N21,N71
ABSTRACT
We investigate the relationships of bank failures and balance sheet conditions with measures of proximity
to different forms of transportation in the United States over the period from 1830-1860. A series of
hazard models and bank-level regressions indicate a systematic relationship between proximity to
railroads (but not to other means of transportation) and “good” banking outcomes. Although railroads
improved economic conditions along their routes, we offer evidence of another channel. Specifically,
railroads facilitated better information flows about banks that led to modifications in bank asset
composition consistent with reductions in the incidence of moral hazard.
Jeremy Atack
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
jeremy.atack@vanderbilt.edu
Matthew S. Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu

Peter L. Rousseau
Professor of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819, Station B
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
peter.l.rousseau@vanderbilt.edu

DID RAILROADS MAKE ANTEBELLUM U.S. BANKS MORE SOUND?*

Jeremy Atack
Matthew S. Jaremski
Peter L. Rousseau

1. Introduction
Before the Civil War and the passage of the National Banking Acts, banks in the United
States were governed by state laws. These laws varied across states and over time, but for the
most part shared the common characteristic that bank note issues, where permitted, were not
statutorily limited. Prior to the Bank War that ended the federally-chartered Second Bank of the
United States in 1836, however, the Second Bank could and did indirectly limit money creation
by individual banks through its policy of returning notes to the cashiers of banks for redemption
in gold and silver coins. This policy alone was insufficient to ensure universally sound banking
practices and the condition of banks and bank money only worsened after the Second Bank’s
demise. Indeed, the term “wildcat banking” is often used to describe the operation of some U.S.
banks during the period that followed until the passage of the National Banking Acts in 1863 and
1864 reformed and reshaped the system. The very idea of wildcat banking is premised on the
notion that such banks would tend to locate away from population centers ‒ “where the wildcats
throve” ((Quinn and Samad 1991) quoting from Luckett (1980)) ‒ so they could issue notes that
would circulate in more populated areas yet be difficult to redeem because of the issuing bank’s

*

We thank William Collins, Robert Margo, Paul Rhode, David Wheelock and participants in the
“Enterprising America” NBER-Vanderbilt University conference, December 14, 2013
1

remoteness. By the time such notes might appear for redemption at the bank of issue, so the
legend goes, the wildcat bankers themselves had disappeared.
While there are colorful stories of such instances in antebellum banking history, accounts
of this form of wildcatting are surely overstated (Rockoff 1974; Rolnick and Weber 1983).
Nevertheless, the American frontier was still quite vast throughout the antebellum period, and it
is in this sense that many (or most) banks outside of the eastern cities and a few population
centers elsewhere could be considered remote. They might thus have been tempted to take
advantage of their remoteness to act in ways that compromised the positions of their liability
holders. Even so, this type of “quasi-wildcatting” (for want of a better term) would have suffered
a serious setback as improved means of transportation and communications, especially the
railroads, diffused through the nation’s interior, connecting communities ‒ and their banks ‒with
providing better trading opportunities and faster means of communication that allowed for more
direct oversight. Railroads therefore would have made it increasingly difficult for bankers to seek
private gain through excessive risk taking as their economic potential improved. In this chapter,
we offer evidence that is consistent with and supportive of this hypothesis.
In the decades before the Civil War, the United States economy was transformed from an
outpost of the European Atlantic economy perched on the eastern seaboard to a rapidly growing,
dynamic domestic economy and continental power. Improvements in transportation were a
critical factor in this transformation, and made it possible for large segments of the population to
live at ever-increasing distances from natural waterways. Improvements in finance over the
period also provided a means of payment that promoted increasingly impersonal trade. To the
extent that the railroads drew new banks closer to the centers of economic activity and allowed
existing banks to participate in the growth opportunities afforded by efficient connections to

2

major population centers, railroads provided incentives for banks to serve their communities
while pursuing private profits. It is this sense that railroads may also have helped to align the
interests of bankers with their liability holders, providing bankers with a reason to acquiesce to
monitoring and to persist as ongoing businesses rather than settle for one-time gains.
The links between transportation improvements and banking were, in some cases, quite
explicit and direct. The Illinois legislature, for example, passed “an act to increase the capital
stock of certain banks, and to provide means to pay the interest on a loan authorized by an act
entitled ‘an act to establish and maintain a general system of internal improvements’” (1837;
quoted in Callender 1902).1 However, as we will show, the positive interaction between
transportation improvements and banking was more general and pervasive even where state
legislatures did not intervene directly. Specifically, in this chapter we examine the relationship
between internal improvements, particularly the railroad, and the survival rates and operating
characteristics of banks.
How could railroads have affected the operation of banks? Hitherto, answers to this
question have been limited to the suggestion that proximity to transportation routes limited bank
opportunities to engage in irresponsible and private rent-seeking (see, for example, Bullock
1900; Dwyer 1996; Economopoulos 1988). We, on the other hand, show in a series of
probability models that proximity to a railroad was associated with lower failure rates and better
balance sheet management. Moreover, these findings are more wide-reaching than the few
documented cases of traditional “wildcatting.”
Others have shown that the coming of the railroad was associated with a wide variety of
changes associated with economic growth and development. These range from increases in
1

Indiana and Tennessee also passed similar laws.
3

urbanization, higher farm land values, and greater agricultural productivity to the growth of large
scale manufacturing plants and more investment in education (Atack et al. 2010; Atack, Haines,
and Margo 2011; Atack and Margo 2011; Atack, Margo, and Perlman 2012). Each of these
changes separately and collectively should have increased the attractiveness of an area to banks.
Moreover, elsewhere, we have shown that nearly half of new Midwest banks established after
1840 opened within a few years of a railroad’s arrival in their county (Atack, Jaremski, and
Rousseau 2013).
Here, we describe a mechanism by which railroads not only affected finance on the
extensive margin, but also led to efficiency changes that enhanced the intensity of financial
intermediation. And, of course, it is the interaction of the intensity of intermediation along with
its quantity that seems most important for long-run growth (Rousseau and Wachtel 1998, 2011).
This relationship proves to be one that does not generalize to all types of transportation; rather,
railroads seem to have been the only transportation methods that affected banks in this way.
Our chapter is organized as follows. In Section 2 we offer some background on the nature
of antebellum banking. Section 3 describes our data. These make extensive use of geographic
information systems (GIS) technology for transportation and bank locations. Section 4 contains
estimates from a series of multivariate proportional hazard models that relate proximity to
transportation with lower bank failure rates and more sound balance sheet characteristics.
Section 5 concludes.

2. Antebellum Bank Failures
The key to understanding the operation of antebellum banks is to recognize their reliance
on bank notes rather than deposits as the dominant means of financing their operations. Unlike

4

today, deposits during the period were not demandable or subject to check writing, nor were they
a high priority debt. Therefore, to obtain liquidity and make investments, states gave banks the
right to issue bank notes. These notes functioned as a medium of exchange in the marketplace
but they were also dollar-denominated liabilities that promised to pay the equivalent in specie
when demanded by the noteholder at the bank of issue. They thus also served as a store of value.
Due to the importance of bank notes in the payments system, states generally mandated that each
note be fully backed by some form of collateral. Moreover, the state representative could close
and liquidate the bank to redeem all outstanding notes if so much as a single request for note
redemption went unmet.
Prior to 1837, each potential bank petitioned its state legislature for a unique charter and
approval thereof depended as much on political influence as on need.2 The terms of these
charters varied according to the whims of particular legislatures, but most states allowed almost
any asset to be used as collateral for a bank’s notes and even allowed the bank itself to hold the
collateral on site.3 But beginning in 1837 and gaining momentum in the early 1850s, a series of
“free banking” laws in some states replaced the need for legislative approval of each individual
bank with general enabling legislation that established instead a well-defined set of capital,
reserve, and note requirements.4 While reserve requirements and the like still varied by state, the

2

For convenience, we define “charter banks” to be any institution established by direct order of a
state legislature. This distinction is necessary because charter banks continued to operate even
after free bank laws were passed.

3

Most banks notes described the type of assets used as collateral somewhere on the note.

4

Three states adopted free banking in the late 1830s. One other, Alabama, would do so in the
(very late) 1840s. Eleven states, however, passed free banking laws between 1850 and 1853
with two others (Iowa and Minnesota) passing laws in 1858. See Rockoff (1975) and Rolnick
and Weber (1983).
5

new laws generally mandated that free banks purchase specific types of assets, often that state’s
(or federal) debt as collateral for each note.5 Moreover, this collateral was to be held by the state
in trust and only relinquished when the bank returned an equal amount in notes.
Despite this backing requirement, the assets of closed banks were not always sufficient to
cover their note circulations due to adverse market fluctuations in the price of the collateral
assets. In such cases, bank notes were redeemed at cents on the dollar, as would be the usual case
in bankruptcy actions. Rockoff (1974) and Rolnick and Weber (1983) show that some of the
losses were minimal (most Indiana banks, for example, redeemed at 95 cents on the dollar), but
in other cases losses were nearly total (e.g., Minnesota “railroad” banks repaid less than 35 cents
of each dollar issued).
Following Rolnick and Weber (1984), we consider “failed banks” to be those institutions
which did not redeem their notes at full value. “Closed banks,” on the other hand, simply ceased
operations but repaid their notes at par. Based on this distinction, 30 percent of the 861 free
banks that ever existed ended in failed. In comparison, only 19 percent of the 1,828 charter banks
failed, even though charter banks could back their notes with almost any type of asset.
Based on an examination of bank balance sheets over time, Jaremski (2013) reached two
conclusions about free bank failures. First, the highly-specific backing requirements for note
issues mandated in the various free banking laws seem to be the underlying cause of the free
banking system’s high failure rate relative to the charter banking system. Moreover, this
statistical relationship was not the result of general declines in bond prices. Rather, banks were
sensitive only to the prices of those bonds used as collateral. Second, solvent free banks seem to
have diversified their assets away from bonds (to loans, for example) and their liabilities away
5

Other assets were occasionally allowed to back notes, such as real estate in Michigan and
slaves in Georgia.
6

from note circulation (to equity or debt), and these actions seem to have at least partially shielded
those banks from bond price declines.
From both theoretical and empirical standpoints, however, other factors might also play
an important role in the success or failure of financial intermediaries, especially factors related to
the community and the environs that these banks served. Here, we examine the effects of
transportation and communications improvements on bank operations and survival. Such an
analysis was hitherto nearly impossible due to a lack of comprehensive data on bank locations
relative to means of transportation and communication, yet recent advances in the development
of historical geographic information systems databases have now removed this impediment.
As Table 1 shows, the distance of a bank from the nearest railroad was positively
correlated with the probability of bank failure for both charter and free banks—that is to say, the
further away that a bank was from a railroad, the more likely the bank would fail. Only 7.2% of
charter banks within 10 miles of a railroad failed compared to 34.5% of those located further
away.6 Failure rates among free banks are higher but show the same pattern. Whereas 15.8% of
free banks within 10 miles of a railroad failed, the rate among those located at a greater distance
was 60.2%. Plausible variations in the distance cut-off show the same pattern: banks located
closer to railroads were less likely to fail than those located further away. This pattern is
consistent with a central role for market forces in bank survival.
Canals, however, did not have the same stabilizing effect across either bank type. The
probability of failure is roughly the same for charter banks on and off a canal, whereas free banks

6

This is not to imply that those banks at a greater distance that failed should be considered
“wildcat banks.” Our choice of 10 miles is arbitrary but represents a distance that someone might
plausibly cover on foot to tend to important business and which could easily and routinely be
covered on horseback.
7

on a canal were more than 20 percentage points less likely to fail. One possible explanation for
the difference in pattern between charter and free banks with respect to canal proximity is that
free banks only began to be chartered after 1837, by which time most canals had already been
built or were under construction, thereby removing some of the uncertainties about local
development prospects and progress.
There are several possible explanations for why proximity to a railroad might have
affected the probability of bank failure for both free and charter banks. First, railroads brought
population and increased economic activity to an area (Atack et al. 2010; Atack, Haines, and
Margo 2011). These additions would have increased a bank's access to liquidity and increased its
return on loans. Moreover, since railroads often encouraged the development of larger scale
manufacturing, they might have allowed banks to diversify their loan portfolios more fully and
lower their exposure to agricultural shocks. Indeed, Bodenhorn (2003) shows that banks often
held loan portfolios matching the distribution of firms in the surrounding area.
Second, the arrival of a railroad would have increased the acceptability of bank notes by
enabling noteholders to reach the bank more quickly and cheaply while simultaneously
increasing local demand for the means of payment as trade and commerce expanded. Notes from
trusted banks would be discounted less and also travel further from the bank, but noteholders and
exchange centers in large cities could more easily return notes en masse if they thought the bank
was operating riskily. Indeed, Gorton (1999) and Jaremski (2011) show that the discount from
face value at which a bank's note traded at in New York City and Philadelphia was tied to the
transportation costs of returning the note as well as the bank's riskiness, whereas Bodenhorn
(1998) shows that bank discounts increased several quarters before banks actually failed,

8

suggesting that bank specific information was an important determinant of note values.7
Therefore, a railroad's arrival may have encouraged banks to hold less risky portfolios and adjust
their operations to reflect the new degree of community and noteholder oversight as it took
advantage of the increased acceptability of their notes.
Third, locations with a railroad might have simply attracted more stable bankers.
Certainly, statements by contemporaries suggested that “wildcat banks” tended to form in
wilderness areas where they could issue notes that they never intended to redeem. While such
accounts surely overstate the case, banks that wanted to take greater risks and avoid firsthand
oversight by regulators should have been less likely to locate along a transportation route.
As suggested by Table 1, however, the benefits of railroads would not necessarily have
translated to all forms of transportation. Access to the coastline would have expanded an area’s
ability to trade, but most of that trade tended to be centered in major ports (e.g., New York City,
Boston, and New Orleans, or Detroit and Buffalo on the Great Lakes). Rivers and canals were
more geographically specific, but they were slow and indirect, making them better suited to
transporting bulky, heavy goods rather than passengers and time sensitive goods (including
financial instruments). Moreover, other than the Erie Canal, most canals did not have much longterm financial success and were quickly displaced by railroads. Consequently, canals would not
have had the same effect on a location's urbanization and manufacturing activities as the railroad,
and certainly would not have enabled quick redemption of bank notes or increased the
opportunity for bank supervision and oversight.

7

While Gorton uses distance between cities, Jaremski calculated the specific travel cost using
travel guides that provided the specific cost of each railroad trip in 1836, 1851, 1856, and 1861.
9

3. Data
We restrict our analysis to those areas of the country that were a part of the United States
from 1840 onwards,8 and to those parts of the United States for which it is possible to get
consistent geographic boundaries that map into political units since we also use various census
county data as controls in our estimations.9 The county level information are from the Haines
(2010) update of the original ICPSR (1979) decennial census county database.
Using two antebellum bank databases originally assembled by Warren Weber (Weber
2008; Weber 2005), we construct a dataset that provides financial and biographical information
for almost every bank in operation in the United States between 1830 and 1862. Weber’s data
end in 1860, but Jaremski (2010) extends the bank census to the outbreak of the Civil War using
annual editions of the Merchants and Bankers’ Almanac (Merchant and Bankers' Almanac s.d.).
These provide comprehensive lists of U.S. banks in each year. This extension is important for
two reasons. First, over 120 banks failed in 1861 and 1862, and excluding these failures halves
the failure rate of free banks, thereby making them appear much more stable than they were.
8

Thus, for example, Texas which was not annexed by the United States until 1845 and
California which was ceded to the U.S. by Mexico in 1848 are excluded from the analysis.
9

This restriction excludes much of Iowa and the northern part of Wisconsin and all points north
and west thereof but retains all of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Missouri. Our procedure differs
from the “border fix” solution proposed by Hornbeck (2010) who essentially redistributes
population and economic production proportionately among counties based upon their loss or
gain of territory from adjacent counties. Instead, we adopt the GIS-based procedure used by
Atack, Jaremski, and Rousseau (2013) but broadened to encompass the entire settled area of the
United States by combining non-GIS identical counties within a state into contiguous areas made
up of variable numbers of individual counties in each year sharing a common external boundary.
We limited this linkage procedure to the period from 1840 onwards because extending it back
to 1830 would necessitate the combination of nearly all Midwest and Southern counties into
“super-counties.” Moreover, since the few banks existing in 1830 and 1835 were almost solely in
Northeast counties that did not change borders, it was more efficient to exclude those few
counties that changed boundaries in this period and then pick them back up in 1840. Our results
are similar if we eliminate observations from 1830 and 1835 or if we do not include census
variables but include all banks.
10

Second, because our empirics examine the failure of banks in subsequent years, we would either
have to assume implicitly that all banks in operation in 1860 survived (when they did not), or end
our analysis before then. Either choice would bias the findings. In the process of extending
Weber’s databases, we have also taken the opportunity to make a few other changes based upon
the directory listings and other contemporaneous information.10
The augmented database contains information on 2,689 banks of which 2,582 were
located within the geographic bounds for which we can define consistent political borders. Of
these, 156 banks were excluded from our analysis since they closed their doors before 1830.
Furthermore, we excluded banks with missing data, particularly balance sheet data.11 The final
bank database contains information on 1,818 banks. Collectively, these exclusions slightly bias
our sample towards more stable (possibly non-fraudulent) banks.
The transportation data come from a number of different GIS databases including three
covering transportation for the antebellum period that have been developed by Atack (2013)
from a variety of contemporary and retrospective sources. These include historic digitized maps,
modern topographical maps produced by the U.S. Geological Survey showing “old railroad
grade” and other features of the landscape (like the remains of a canal bed or a lock), reports by
various government agencies, compilations from travel guides, and the like. The databases
provide information on the location and operational dates for canals, steamboats on rivers, and
railroads.

10

The changes involved merging banks that “closed” in one year with those that “opened”
almost immediately thereafter under the same name. We believe that these reflect charter
renewals or mergers so that the “new” bank was not necessarily an entering bank. We also
dropped those banks with undefined start and end dates.
11

We also excluded, for example, banks which were opened and closed within one of the
quinquennia intervals that are our basic interval of analysis as described below.
11

The canal mapping was initially derived from those produced by Poor (1970) and by
Goodrich (1961) for 1860 but modified with respect to exact locations based upon USGS
topographical maps and histories of the various canals.12 These histories also provide a dating as
to when specific sections of each canal were first opened (and closed) to traffic. For rivers, we
defined navigability in terms of the river’s use by steamboats, ignoring earlier as well as
concomitant use of the waterway by other craft such as rafts, canoes, and bateaux because only
steamboats provided speedy and reliable service both upstream as well as down (Haites, Mak,
and Walton 1975; Hunter 1949). The dating and details of which communities were served by
steamboats is based upon sources such as Hunter (1949), contemporary gazetteers (Rowell Geo.
P. & Co. 1873), newspaper accounts, and reports by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers who
eventually assumed responsibility for maintaining and promoting navigation of the nation’s
rivers (U. S. Congress. House. et al. 1871). We also generated coastlines for the Great Lakes, the
Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico from the NHGIS shapefiles.13
Whereas the river and canal GIS databases provide annual information on the extent of
navigation, our railroad databases only provide snapshots at 5-year intervals because of the
difficulty of assembling a reliable annual series from the sources we have consulted.14 The

12

See especially Whitford’s (1906) history of the Erie Canal. Briefer discussions of other canals
have been produced by various historical societies. For example, http://www.indcanal.org/
regarding canals in Indiana and http://www.middlesexcanal.org/ or
http://www.winchestermass.org/canal.html on the Middlesex Canal.
13

This proved more complicated than the simple description suggests because of the extremely
high resolution of the TIGER files that underlie the NHGIS shapefiles and the complexity of
coastal features that include bays, headlands, inlets and estuaries as well as small islands.
14

Unfortunately, the most obvious source from which to produce a mapping—maps—cannot be
used to produce an accurate annual mapping because of uncertainty regarding dating (copyright
v. titling v. underlying data) and imprecision arising from factors such as the map scale,
imperfect surveying, and care with which the engraving was made. The work of Paxson (1914)
12

railroad GIS files also differ from those for water transportation in so far as they are (currently)
less precisely located. Today, we can map exact locations using satellite imagery and GPS.
Historically, however, the railroad network was much more extensive than that which we have
today but much of the old roadbed has been recycled and reused (for example, by highways),
obscuring its earlier use. For example, according to Historical Statistics, miles of main railroad
track essentially plateaus between 1916 and 1930 at around 260,000 but had declined to under
183,000 miles by 1980 (a decline of about 30%) and there are substantially fewer miles today
(Carter et al. 2006, Series Df932). Track has also been realigned and straightened due to
improvements in civil engineering and the advent of higher speed trains on some routes, thereby
changing the historical railroad route.
Atack’s mappings of historical railroads are, instead, based on small scale, state-level
maps of the rail system in 1911 by Matthews Northrup Co. for the “New Century Atlas”
(Whitney and Smith 1911). Where railroad lines are still in operation today or appear on USGS
topographical maps, these 1911 maps have proved to be very accurately and carefully drawn,
especially taking into account the limitations created by their small scale. These maps were georeferenced against NHGIS state boundary shapefiles using the ArcGIS 10 software, and the rail
lines shown were then traced into their own shapefiles. These shapefiles thus define the location
and extent of railroads in 1911. Mappings for earlier years were created by working backwards
in time, based upon what Atack thought to be the “best” mapping of the rail system in a
particular year and then deleting lines from the later shapefile that did not appear on the earlier

for the five midwestern states of the Old Northwest before the Civil War, however, shows that
such a goal may ultimately be attainable given sufficient time to cull through literary sources
such as the American Railroad Journal (1832), annual reports of various railroads and the
American Railway Guide (see, for example,Cobb 1945; 1850).
13

map.15 For our purposes, the map for year t is based upon the map for year (t+5) working
backwards from Atack’s (2013) 1860 mapping of the rail system, generated by the procedure
described above.16
Using these various GIS and geocoded databases, we are able to measure the distance
between each bank and its nearest railroad, canal, steam navigable river, ocean, and Great Lake
every five years starting in 1830.17
Our analysis includes a number of controls. In particular, we add a bond price index to
control for the value of a bank’s collateral against notes from Jaremski (2010). For each bank,
this index is the average fraction of par value for those bonds eligible as note collateral. While
most states allowed any state or federal bonds paying full interest to be used in this way, some—
Alabama, New Jersey, New York, and Ohio—only allowed their banks to use specific bonds.
The bond price index in states not subject to a specific bond constraint consists of the average for
the 14 available state bonds. However, per state law, the index for Alabama and New Jersey
banks contains only the U.S. Treasury bonds, while Ohio banks were limited to holding only
Ohio state bonds.18 The situation in New York was more complex. Prior to the 1842 change in its

15

The specific maps underlying each shapefile are generally those drawn by the most respected
mapmakers of the time including Colton and Rand McNally both of whom published topical and
frequently updated travel guides. See reader guides from the Library of Congress (1984; 1975)
16

The “base” map for the 1860 mapping (subject to the procedures detailed in the text) was by J.
H. Colton (Colton 1860).
17

Distances are measured by ArcGIS using the Toolbox function, “Near” from the
Analysis/Proximity toolbox for use in our panel. These are “as the crow flies” distances and the
GIS mappings are projected in Albers equal area.
18

States that did not pass a free banking law are assumed to face no bond constraint.
14

free banking law, the index for New York banks is the average of the 14 state bonds as for most
other states but the index thereafter contains only New York state bonds.
Figure 1 shows the decennial coevolution of banks and railroads between 1830 and 1860.
It also shows the geographical bounds of our analysis. In 1830, banks tended to be concentrated
in the Northeast and along the eastern seaboard. The few railroads then in existence were
generally short, such as the Baltimore and Ohio which had 14 miles of track stretching towards
Washington DC or the Tuscumbia Railway Company in Alabama which operated 2 miles of
track reaching to the Tennessee River.19 Consequently, in 1830, relatively few banks –33 by our
count—were “on a railroad,” that is, operated within 10 miles of one. This is fewer than 10
percent of all banks (Table 2). During the ensuing decades, banks—and railroads—spread into
the Midwest, but spread much more slowly in the South, especially during the 1850s. During the
1830s, however, the railroad system expanded rapidly primarily east of the Appalachians.
Consequently, by 1840, the fraction of banks within 10 miles of a railroad had grown sevenfold
to almost two-thirds of all banks. By 1850, more than 80 percent of banks were within a 10
miles of a railroad.
There was also a marked increase in the percentage of banks within 10 miles of a canal as
Pennsylvania and New York built out their state canal systems and Ohio began to follow suit. As
a result, the fraction of banks located close to canals peaked around 1850. For navigable rivers,
the peak was in 1840 and a majority of banks never was located in close proximity to either
canals or navigable rivers. However, the geographic association between banks and other modes
of transportation was much weaker than it was for railroads despite antebellum improvements in
these means of transportation. Moreover, the declining fraction of banks located within 10 miles

19

See, for example, the database (and related notes) for 1830 at http://oldrailhistory.com.
15

of the coast (and changes with respect to proximity to the Great Lakes) reflect shifts in the locus
of economic activity and population as U.S. economic development pushed westwards.

4. Empirical Analysis
The empirical analysis uses the multivariate proportional-hazard model with time varying
covariates proposed by Cox (1972; Cox and Oakes 1984), and models the probability of failure
of bank i given survival to the period t as:

where T is the failure date,

is the baseline hazard function common to all banks, and the

exponential function captures the effects of the explanatory variables,

. Cox’s method

estimates the equation using a semi-parametric “partial likelihood” approach that requires the
specification of the scale function but not the baseline hazard. Moreover, and of particular
relevance for our use here, the model takes account of a bank’s specific entry and exit dates even
though we might only observe the bank at a few specific moments, identifying the s from
variation across starting and failure dates.20 Because our railroad data are only observed at 5-year
intervals, each observation covers a 5-year period and the

coefficients should be interpreted as

effects of the variables on the probability of failure over the following 5 years.
Like a panel probit or logit model, the hazard function treats each period that a bank was
open (t) as a unique observation linked to the individual bank (hence the 5,636 observations
although our dataset contains only 1,818 individual banks for which we have all the necessary

20

The model treats banks which were solvent at the end of 1862 or which closed during the
period as censored observations.
16

information). However, it gains efficiency over other binary choice models by explicitly taking
into account survival through that period. The hazard model also explicitly accounts for bank
age. Therefore, even if we do not observe a bank early in its operation, the hazard model does
not mistakenly consider it as a new bank.
On the other hand, a drawback of the model is the need to make additional assumptions
regarding the initial hazard function in order to calculate the marginal effect of each variable.
Absent good information, we are reluctant to make assumptions regarding those initial
conditions, and instead report the raw coefficients. These provide information on the direction
and relative size of an explanatory variable's effect on the probability of failure but not on its
marginal effect.
We measure the impact of transportation using a series of dummy variables that indicate
whether a particular transportation method (i.e., railroad, canal, ocean, river, or Great Lakes
coastline) was within 10 miles of the bank, which we think of as close enough to enter a user’s
choice set. We will show later that the results are not sensitive to reasonable variations in this
distance.
Our choice of other explanatory variables is motivated by modern bank regulatory practice
that was implemented in 1979 under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System (Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation 1997) and the information available on each bank from 19th
century balance sheets. In particular, we lack information on a bank’s income or the quality of its
assets and management, and thus are unable to estimate the full set of CAMELS measures that

17

modern regulators use to assess a bank’s soundness. Instead, we follow Jaremski (2010) and
construct as many CAMELS metrics as possible.21 Specifically,


The average value of the state’s allowable fraction of par or market value on bonds
used as collateral measures the bank’s “Sensitivity to market risk”;



log(Assets) measures size differences among banks but is not a metric that modern
regulators consider in their CAMELS rating;



Capital (defined as the ratio of Capital to Total Assets) measures “Capital adequacy”;



Specie (defined as Specie divided by Total Assets) is an index of bank “Liquidity”,
measuring the bank’s capacity to meet bank runs in specie;



Deposits (defined as the ratio of Deposits to Total Assets) measure the bank’s liability
diversity;



Loans (defined as the ratio of Loans and Discounts to Total Assets) and Bonds (defined
as the ratio of state and U.S. government assets on the bank’s balance sheet to Total
Assets) measure asset diversity and quality;22



Circulation (defined as the ratio of Circulation to Total Assets) measures the level of
potential future redemptions.

Moreover, we include fixed effects for states to account for heterogeneity across them such as
regulatory enforcement and for individual years to account for the periodic financial panics and
specie suspensions during the period from 1830 to 1860.23
21

The CAMELS ratings are a modern measure of a bank’s quality. Each letter stands for a factor
in rating: C for Capital adequacy, A for Asset quality, M for Management quality, E for
Earnings, L for Liquidity, and S for Sensitivity to market risk.
22

Unlike modern studies where government debt is generally considered safe, Loans can also be
thought of as a crude measure of “Asset quality” due to their relatively high return and short
maturity compared to bonds of the period.
18

4.1. The Effects of Proximity to Railroads on Bank Failure Rates
The first column in Table 3 presents estimates of Equation (1) with only the
transportation variables, a dummy variable for free banks24, year fixed effects, and state fixed
effects. The second column then adds bank balance sheet variables and the average bond price to
the specification. As access to transportation could have altered the composition of a bank’s
balance sheet, the first column provides the full effect of transportation on bank stability,
whereas to measure the full effect of transportation in the second column we must include
something about how balance sheets changed in response to transportation.
The results show a tendency for free banks to be less stable than chartered banks over the
five-year intervals we examine. However, once we control for balance sheet variables, the
positive coefficient loses its statistical significance and even becomes negative.
Railroads are the only transportation type that has a negative impact on bank failure.25
Moreover, that effect is statistically significant. While the coefficients do not represent marginal
effects, the underlying hazard ratios indicate the effect of having a railroad nearby was quite
large. This effect becomes smaller when we add balance sheet variables to the specification but
remains statistically and economically significant, suggesting that railroads may have pushed
23

Given the small number of banks in most counties, county-fixed effects would degrade the
model into a bank-fixed effect and limit us from comparing stable banks that did not fail to those
that did.
24
When we estimate the hazard functions separately for free and charter banks, the railroad
coefficient is significantly negative for free banks and insignificantly negative for charter banks.
The insignificance for charter banks, however, seems to be the result of banks that entered after a
railroad. Once these late entering charter banks are dropped, the coefficient regains its
significance and grows in magnitude.
25

The results for railroads are similar when we include banks outside the consistent and constant
1840 boundaries. The only change is that the coefficient on the Great Lakes dummy is not then
statistically significant.
19

bankers to reduce the riskiness of their portfolios. Alternatively, banks that were close to rivers
and the Great Lakes actually seem more likely to fail. The fact that the other transportation
methods do not stabilize banks indicates that railroads were special. Not only did they bring
greater economic diversity and population to the area, but they also would have enabled sudden
note redemption and greater noteholder oversight.
Several of the other variables also have a statistically significant effect on bank failure.
The value of bond collateral is negatively and significantly related to the probability of failure.
While the size of the coefficient is based on the large declines in bond prices during the early
parts of the Civil War, the coefficient remains significant for other periods due to the declines in
bonds just prior to the Panics of 1837, 1839, and 1857. Larger banks with more reserves, loans,
and deposits and fewer bank notes were less likely to fail. These results are consistent with
Jaremski (2010) despite our inclusion of the transportation variables.
While railroads seem associated with bank stability, this raises the obvious question of
how they might have affected bank operations. The most obvious answer is that the railroads
brought about greater urbanization (Atack et al. 2010) and other changes associated with
economic development thus generating more banks deposits and greater scrutiny. To capture
this, we add the log of population and the fraction of population living in an urban area to the
hazard model to the final two columns of Table 3.26 While the additions slightly reduce the
railroad coefficient, it remains both statistically and economically significant. To the extent that

26

We implicitly assume that population and urbanization grew at constant rates between
successive decennial censuses. While we would like to include measures of manufacturing and
agriculture, these are not included in the Census until after 1830. See Wright (1900).
20

railroads were exogenous to existing bank stability, they made banks less likely to fail through
changes in balance sheet variables and urbanization as well as through other channels.27
While urbanization tends to reduce the probability of bank failure, this factor is not
statistically significant when we include the balance sheet variables—probably because the size
of the bank was in part dependent on the size of its customer base. While the inclusion of the
census variables lowers the effect of railroads, it actually increases the effect of being on a
navigable river and on the Atlantic Coast. The lower positive coefficients on these variables
when we do not control for urbanization thus might be due to the tendency for most urban areas
before 1830 to be located along water routes, and especially those close to the coast. Once the
stabilizing effect of urbanization is removed, water transportation is associated with a higher
probability of bank failure.

4.2. Controls for Potential Endogeneity of Railroad Entry
To interpret the coefficient on railroads as causal, the timing and the location of the
railroad must be exogenous, and there are reasons why the route chosen by railroads (especially
in the Northeast) would not have been related to the stability of banking.28 While we cannot fully

27

Some banks were clearly endogenous to internal improvements such as railroads. For example,
the 1837 Illinois law “to increase the capital stock of certain banks, and to provide means to pay
the interest on a loan authorized by an act entitled ‘an act to establish and maintain a general
system of internal improvements’” (1837; quoted in Callender 1902). Even more directly, some
banks and railroads were chartered jointly, such as the Erie and Kalamazoo Railroad Bank and
the Benton and Manchester Railroad and Banking Co. in Mississippi. To the extent that bank
officers held wealth and influence in the local community, it is likely that they also acted as
“boosters.” As such, they would have been actively solicited as investors in any railroad
promotion. We discuss these and other endogeneity issues in Sec. 4.2.
28

We have also estimated two stage least squares models using the number of miles that a bank
was away from the nearest straight line linking the nation’s 15 largest cities as an instrument. As
railroads were costly to build, a straight line between cities was the most likely ex ante path
regardless of banks. In the 2SLS models, the coefficient on the railroad dummy loses its
21

control for this type of endogeneity, we can control for two other possible sources. First,
railroads were attracted to populated areas and sources of economic activity because these
generated people and cargo to carry. This economic opportunity also attracted banks. Many of
these attractions are captured by the other transportation media and by the county population
variables, but other economically meaningful metrics such as production data are not available
before 1840 for the entire country.29
In Table 4, we truncate the earlier years of our sample period so that we can control for
manufacturing capital (1840-1860) and agricultural capital per person (1850-1860). This
approach not only captures the endogeneity of railroads but also captures the effect of railroads
on economic activity. Even when we include these variables, the coefficient on the railroad
variable remains negative and statistically significant. This is consistent with railroads affecting
banks through note redemptions, population, economic activity, and possibly other factors. It
also should be noted that the stabilizing effect of railroads seems to grow over time as the
coefficient is larger for the 1840s and 1850s than for the longer period. This is likely due to the
spread of banks and rails into the undeveloped Midwest and the emergence of a more
interconnected and extensive transportation system.
Second, it is possible that only stable banks entered an area after the arrival of railroad
transportation because only relatively conservative, conventional banks could survive in the
statistical significance but remains negative. When banks that entered after a railroad are dropped
from the sample, the 2SLS estimate for the railroad dummy becomes more negative and
statistically significant. Consequently, we believe the results are not driven by endogeneity of
existing stable banks and might be slightly biased downward banks that followed railroads (a
result that is confirmed in Table 5).
29

There was a census of manufactures in 1820 but virtually nothing is recorded for the Midwest
or South despite the fact that we know there were flour milling everywhere and quite
sophisticated machine shops and foundries in Cincinnati and Louisville. Moreover, the county
level tabulations are seriously flawed (See United States. Census Office. 1990).
22

more transparent, connected environment associated with the railroad. The results in the previous
tables thus could partially reflect this reverse causation because the railroad forced structural
changes in the way that existing banks operated. However, this type of behavior does not detract
from our story. In fact, it might even be the more important aspect of railroads’ effects on bank
survival and performance given the charges of wildcat banking. To check on this, we examine
whether railroads had the same effect on existing banks as on new entrants. In Table 5, we
present two additional types of specifications: (1) eliminating observations for banks that entered
after a railroad was in operation in the local area, and (2) removing banks that were present
before and after a railroad came within 10 miles. In all cases, the coefficient on the railroad
dummy is negative and significant, showing that railroads seem to have stabilized both existing
banks and new banks. Comparing the two sets of coefficients, the largest (and seemingly more
consistent) effect seems to come from banks that were present before a railroad entered—that is
to say we believe that banks changed their behavior when the railroad came close.

4.3. Sensitivity to Different Mileage Cutoffs
Thus far we have treated “close to a railroad” as being within 10 (“as the crow flies”)
miles of a railroad. Our choice of cutoff reflects our view that this was a reasonable distance that
contemporaries routinely covered by horseback or wagon. It can also be traversed on foot albeit
with more effort. Our results, however, are not particularly sensitive to reasonable and plausible
variations in this cutoff. Specifically, we have re-estimated the model specifications including
the balance sheet variables from Table 3 for even mileage cutoffs between 4 and 20 miles. The
resulting coefficients and standard error bands for the railroad dummy both with and without the
county variables are shown in Figure 2. This shows that banks within 14 miles of a railroad,
absent county controls, are significantly less likely to fail. Such a distance is at the limit of a
23

day’s (laden) wagon ride and generally beyond what one might consider walking except in
unusual circumstances. Accounting for county-to-county differences narrows the band to
between 6 and 10 miles of a railroad. Outside of these ranges, railroads have no statistically
significant effect on bank failure. Moreover, it is worth noting the coefficient on the railroad
dummy variable was largest for a cutoff of 6 miles, meaning our use of a 10-mile cutoff slightly
biases the results towards zero.

4.4. The Effects of Proximity to Railroads on Bank Balance Sheets
The introduction of the balance sheet variables into the model consistently reduces the
size of the railroad coefficient. We take this to suggest that banks altered the composition of their
assets in response to proximity of the railroad and this made them financially stronger and less
likely to fail. We test this possible explanation using the following model:

where the dependent variable

represents the several balance sheet variables discussed above,

is the logarithm of a bank's age,
effect, and

is a free bank dummy,

is a time fixed

is either a bank fixed or a state fixed effect. Depending on which fixed effects are

included, the translation of the railroad coefficient changes. When the fixed effects are not
included, the coefficient would at least be partially identified relative to other banks, whereas
when it is included, it will only be identified relative to the bank's own time series.
It is important to note that this analysis also provides insight into how railroads were
affecting banks. As previously argued, population growth along the rails might have increased
the liquid funds a bank would have access to, manufacturing growth might have increased the
profitability of loans, or the threat of sudden note redemption might have pushed banks to

24

decrease their circulations. Therefore, by seeing which aspects of a bank's balance sheet change,
we can gain some understanding of how railroads influenced bank behavior.
The results in Table 6 show that the arrival of a railroad made for larger banks relative to
other banks. This is consistent with the findings of others regarding the economic impact of
railroads on urbanization and various kinds of economic activity (Atack et al. 2010; Atack,
Haines, and Margo 2011; Callender 1902). The railroad dummy coefficient is only statistically
significant for assets when not including bank-fixed effects.
When looking at the balance sheet ratios, banks decreased the amount of their excess
reserves and made more loans after the arrival of a railroad, possibly because more profitable
opportunities now existed for these potentially loanable assets. These are the only two variables
for which the railroad coefficient is statistically significant in both columns. On the other hand, a
bank seems to have decreased its circulation and bond holdings relative to surrounding banks and
decreased its deposits after the arrival of a railroad.30 Decreased note circulation is consistent
with a presumed increase in the ease and likelihood that notes would be presented for payment
when the railroad made travel easier and faster. The overall pattern of results indicates that one
of the key effects of railroads on banks was through the increased economic impact rather than
through population or increased monitoring.
Putting these results in the context of bank failure, railroads seem to lowered failure rates
by encouraging banks to operate more safely through increased loan as well as lowered bond
holdings and circulations, yet also relate to lower holdings of reserves. The latter could simply
reflect a greater sense of confidence in banks among the public when located near a railroad, and

30

The combined decline in deposits and circulation suggests that either profit or interbank
deposits rose after a railroad entered as these were the remaining two large liability items.
25

this allowed them to reduce primary and secondary reserves because of the repeat trades in
which they engaged.31

5. Conclusion
The decades before the Civil War witnessed the transformation of the United States
economy into a rapidly growing, dynamic domestic economy and continental power. The
nation’s bourgeoning financial system was one of the factors at the heart of this transformation
(Rousseau and Sylla 2005). However, it was not a smooth development. The financial system
was subject to periodic panics and crises, and as a result, nearly a third of all banks created
before 1862 closed with their noteholders sustaining losses. Some important changes taking
place contemporaneously in the economy may have mitigated these losses. By linking detailed
bank and transportation data, we show that the arrival of railroads may have helped stabilize the
system despite the association of financial crises with investment cycles and the speculative
internal improvements that came with them.
The data indicate the railroads were positively correlated with bank stability even after
controlling for local economic activity and population, whereas other means of transportation
were either uncorrelated or negatively correlated with bank stability. The effect is apparent not
only for banks existing before the railroads went through, but also for new banks that opened up
after the rails. Moreover, the arrival of a railroad seems to have encouraged banks to hold safer
portfolios consisting of fewer bonds and banknotes and more loans. These changes would well
have driven local investment in the local economy, which implies that railroads could have had
important indirect effects on local economic growth through the longevity of banks and the
31

This seems reasonable given that findings of Gorton (1999) and Jaremski (2011) as banks that
could be more quickly reached had lower bank note discounts.
26

stability of longer-term finance. These effects reach beyond the traditional arguments about
agglomeration of economic activity usually associated with the arrival of the railroad.

27

Bibliography
An Act to increase the capital stock of certain banks...establish and maintain a general system of
internal improvements. Tenth General Assembly, March 4, 1837.
American Railroad Journal. 1832. American railroad journal, and advocate of internal
improvements. New York: s.n.
Atack, Jeremy. 2013. "On the Use of Geographic Information Systems in Economic History: The
American Transportation Revolution Revisited." Journal of Economic History no. 73
(2):313-38.
Atack, Jeremy; Fred Bateman; Michael Haines, and Robert A Margo. 2010. "Did Railroads
Induce or Follow Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the
American Midwest, 1850-1860." Social Science History no. 34 (2):171-97.
Atack, Jeremy; Michael Haines, and Robert A Margo. 2011. "Railroads and the Rise of the
Factory: Evidence for the United States, 1850-1870." In Economic Evolution and
Revolutions in Historical Time, edited by Paul Rhode, Joshua Rosenbloom and David
Weiman. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Atack, Jeremy; Matthew Jaremski, and Peter L. Rousseau. 2013. American Banking and the
Transportation Revolution Before the Civil War. Nashville TN and Hamilton, NY:
Vanderbilt University and Colgate University.
Atack, Jeremy; Robert A Margo, and Elizabeth Perlman. 2012. The impact of railroads on school
enrollment in nineteenth century America. Boston: Boston University.
Atack, Jeremy and Robert A. Margo. 2011. "The Impact of Access to Rail Transportation on
Agricultural Improvement: The American Midwest as a Test Case, 1850-1860." Journal
of Transportation and Land Use no. 4 (2).
Bodenhorn, Howard. 1998. "Quis Custodiet Ipsos Custodes." Eastern Economic Journal no. 24
(1):7-24.
Bodenhorn, Howard. 2003. State banking in early America : a new economic history. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Bullock, Charles Jesse. 1900. Essays on the monetary history of the United States, The citizen's
library of economics, politics, and sociology. New York, London,: Macmillan and Co.
Callender, G. S. 1902. "The Early Transportation and Banking Enterprises of the States in
Relation to the Growth of Corporations." The Quarterly Journal of Economics no. 17
(1):111-162.
Carter, Susan B.; Scott Sigmund Gartner; Michael R. Haines; Alan L. Olmstead; Richard Sutch;
Gavin Wright, and Louis P. Cain. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States
Millennial Edition Online. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cobb, Charles. 1945. American railway guide and pocket companion for the United States :
containing correct tables for time of starting from all stations, distances, fares, etc. on all
the railway lines in the United States : together with a complete railway map : also many
principal steamboat and stage lines running in connection with railroads. Milwaukee,
Wis.: Kalmbach Pub. Co.
Colton, J. H. 1860. Colton's new railroad & county map of the United States and the Canadas
&c. New York: Joseph Hutchins Colton.
Cox, D. R. 1972. "Regression Models and Life-Tables." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological) no. 34 (2):187-220. doi: 10.2307/2985181.

28

Cox, D. R. and David Oakes. 1984. Analysis of survival data, Monographs on statistics and
applied probability. London ; New York: Chapman and Hall.
Dinsmore, Curran. 1850. "American railway guide, and pocket companion for the United States
... together with a complete railway map." In. S.l.: C. Dinsmore,.
http://proxy.library.umkc.edu/login?url=http://infotrac.galegroup.com/itweb/univmomille
r?db=SABN.
Dwyer, Gerald. 1996. "Wildcat Banking, Banking Panics and Free Banking in the United
States." Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review no. 81:1-20.
Economopoulos, Andrew J. 1988. "Illinois Free Banking Experience." Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking no. 20 (2):249-264.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, . FDIC Law, Regulations, Related Acts. 62 Fed. Reg.
752, January 6, 1997, effective January 1, 1997, September 16, 2013 1997 [cited
11/25/2013. Available from http://www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/5000-900.html.
Goodrich, Carter, ed. 1961. Canals and American economic development. New York,: Columbia
University Press.
Haines, Michael R and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. 2010.
Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) [distributor].
Haites, Erik F.; James Mak, and Gary M. Walton. 1975. Western river transportation : the era of
early internal development, 1810-1860, The Johns Hopkins University studies in
historical and political science. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2010. "Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development."
Quarterly Journal of Economics no. 125 (2):767-810.
Hunter, Louis C. 1949. Steamboats on the Western rivers; an economic and technological
history, Studies in economic history. Cambridge,: Harvard University Press.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. 1979. Historical, Demographic,
Economic, And Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970.
Jaremski, Matthew. 2010. "Free Bank Failures: Risky Bonds versus Undiversified Portfolios."
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking no. 42 (8):1565-1587. doi: 10.1111/j.15384616.2010.00354.x.
Jaremski, Matthew. 2013. "State Banks and the National Banking Acts: Measuring the Response
to Increased Financial Regulation, 1860–1870." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
no. 45 (2-3):379-399. doi: 10.1111/jmcb.12006.
Library of Congress. and Andrew M. Modelski. 1984. Railroad maps of North America : the first
hundred years. Washington: Library of Congress : For sale by the Supt. of Docs., U.S.
G.P.O.,.
Library of Congress. Geography and Map Division. and Andrew M. Modelski. 1975. Railroad
maps of the United States : a selective annotated bibliography of original 19th-century
maps in the Geography and Map Division of the Library of Congress. Washington: The
Library : for sale by the Supt. of Docs., U.S. Govt. Print. Off.
Luckett, Dudley G. 1980. Money and banking. 2d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Merchant and Bankers' Almanac. s.d. The Merchants and Bankers' almanac. New York: J. S.
Homans.
Paxson, Frederic L. 1914. "The Railroads of the "Old Northwest" before the Civil Wat."
Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters no. 17 (Part
1):247-274.
29

Poor, Henry Varnum. 1970. History of the railroads and canals of the United States of America,
Library of early American business & industry, 34. New York,: A. M. Kelley.
Quinn, Stephen F and A Samad. 1991. "Wildcat Banking in Illinois: A Look into Our Financial
History." Illinois Business Review no. 48 (4):16-17.
Rockoff, Hugh. 1974. "The Free Banking Era: A Reexamination." Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking no. 6:141-67.
Rockoff, Hugh. 1975. The free banking era : a re-examination, Dissertations in American
economic history. New York: Arno Press.
Rolnick, Arthur J. and Warren Weber. 1984. "The Causes of Free Bank Failures: A Detailed
Examination." Journal of Monetary Economics no. 14:269-91.
Rolnick, Arthur J. and Warren E. Weber. 1983. "New Evidence on the Free Banking Era." The
American Economic Review no. 73 (5):1080-1091.
Rousseau, Peter L. and Richard Sylla. 2005. "Emerging Financial Markets and Early U.S.
Growth." Explorations in Economic History no. 42 (1):1-26.
Rousseau, Peter L. and Paul Wachtel. 1998. "Financial Intermediation and Economic
Performance: Historical Evidence from Five Industrialized Countries." Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking no. 30:657-78.
Rousseau, Peter L. and Paul Wachtel. 2011. "What is Happening to the Impact of Financial
Deepening on Economic Growth." Economic Inquiry no. 49 (1):276-88.
Rowell Geo. P. & Co. 1873. Geo. P. Rowell & co's gazetteer, containing a statement of the
industries, characteristics, population and location of all towns in the United States and
British America, in which newspapers are published. New York,: G.P. Rowell & co.
U. S. Congress. House.; U. S. Army. Corps of Engineers; U. S. War Department, and U. S. War
Department. Engineer Department. 1871. Engineer's report of certain rivers and harbors.
Letter from the Secretary of War, transmitting reports of the Chief Engineer upon the
improvement of certain rivers and harbors. February 21, 1871.
United States. Census Office. 1990. Digest of accounts of manufacturing establishments in the
United States and of their manufactures : made under direction of the Secretary of State,
in pursuance of a resolution of Congress, of 30th March, 1822. Edited by Publishing
Norman Ross, Norman Ross Publishing series ; v. 6. New York, N.Y.: Norman Ross
Publ.
Weber, Warren. 2008. Balance sheets for U.S. Antebellum State Banks. edited by Minneapolis
Federal Reserve.
Weber, Warren E. 2005. Census of State Banks. edited by Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank.
Whitford, Noble E. 1906. History of the Canal System of the State of New York, Together with
Brief Histories of the Canals of the United States and Canada . Supplement to the
Annual Report of the Engineer and Surveyor of the State of New York. Vol. Two. Albany:
Brandow Printing Co.
Whitney, William Dwight and Benjamin E. Smith. 1911. The Century dictionary and cyclopedia,
with a new atlas of the world. Rev. and enl. ed. 12 vols. New York,: The Century co.
Wright, Carroll D. 1900. History and Growth of the United States Census. Washington DC:
GPO.

30

Table 1: Proximity to Transportation and Bank Outcomes
Number of Banks

% Fail

% Close

Charter Banks
On Rail
Not on Rail

1014
203

7.2%
34.5%

11.0%
39.9%

On Canal
Not on Canal

517
700

10.7%
12.6%

12.6%
18.1%

493
108

15.8%
60.2%

21.9%
27.8%

279
322

11.8%
34.2%

25.8%
20.5%

Free Banks
On Rail
Not on Rail
On Canal
Not on Canal

Notes: Banks are denoted as being on a rail or canal if they were within 10 miles of
one at any time between 1830 and 1862.

31

Table 2: The Expanding Transportation Web and Percentage of Banks Located Near
Specific Forms of Communication and Transportation
% within 10
% within 10 % within 10
miles of a
% within 10
% within 10
Number
miles of a
miles of a
navigable
miles of the
miles of the
Year of banks
railroad
canal
river
Great Lakes
coast
1830
343
9.6
34.1
31.2
1.7
58.9
1835
557
38.6
45.4
35.2
2.9
53.0
1840
711
62.3
47.7
36.1
5.2
47.1
1845
611
71.4
48.9
31.3
5.2
47.8
1850
738
82.2
49.7
29.3
6.4
43.5
1855
1226
88.1
47.1
32.0
6.5
38.1
1860
1353
91.4
44.3
33.3
5.5
36.7
Note: Percentages in any year add to more than 100 because a bank could be in close proximity to two or
more different modes of transportation.

32

Table 3: Determinants of Bank Failure (1830-1860)
Free Bank Dummy

0.729**
[0.295]

-0.148
[0.339]

0.662**
[0.295]

-0.158
[0.340]

-0.598***
[0.130]

-0.279**
[0.128]

-0.354***
[0.137]

-0.227*
[0.137]

Within 10 Miles of Canal

0.050
[0.155]

0.187
[0.155]

0.287*
[0.160]

0.243
[0.160]

Within 10 Miles of River

0.057
[0.130]

0.246*
[0.128]

0.22
[0.135]

0.289**
[0.128]

Within 10 Miles of Great Lakes

0.198
[0.245]

0.614***
[0.217]

0.535**
[0.244]

0.731***
[0.224]

Within 10 Miles of Atlantic Coast

-0.221
[0.228]

0.234
[0.246]

0.231
[0.277]

0.337
[0.261]

Ln(Population)

-0.039
[0.068]

0.047
[0.072]

Fraction Urban

-1.673***
[0.460]

-0.629
[0.465]

Within 10 Miles of Railroad

Bond Value

-0.022***
[0.008]

-0.021***
[0.008]

-0.398
[0.657]

-0.281
[0.667]

Circulation/Assets

2.704***
[0.872]

2.517***
[0.888]

ln(Assets)

-0.358***
[0.080]

-0.334***
[0.082]

Capital/Assets

1.720**
[0.836]

1.671**
[0.831]

Specie/Assets

-10.426***
[2.429]

-10.144***
[2.472]

Loans/Assets

-1.038**
[0.436]

-1.081**
[0.438]

Deposits/Assets

-2.705**
[1.242]

-2.704**
[1.245]

Bonds/Assets

Observations
Pseudo R-squared

5,539
0.140

5,539
0.178

5,539
0.145

5,539
0.178

Notes: The model is a proportional-hazard partial likelihood model. The dependent variable is the
whether the bank failed during the following five-year period. The model treats each five-year period
a bank was open as a unique observation but links them under the individual bank. Fixed effects for
state and each five-year period have been added to all specifications. Robust standard errors are listed
below the coefficients in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

33

Table 4: Tests of the Effect of Railroads on Bank Failure Including Additional County Controls
1840-1860
1850-1860
Free Bank Dummy
0.621**
0.529*
-0.239
-0.251
-0.444
-0.614 -1.755*** -1.826***
[0.298]
[0.298]
[0.338]
[0.339]
[0.554]
[0.601]
[0.650]
[0.669]
Within 10 Miles of Railroad

-0.646*** -0.369*** -0.321**
[0.132]
[0.140]
[0.130]

-0.268*
[0.139]

-0.789*** -0.437**
[0.149]
[0.180]

-0.390**
[0.163]

-0.406**
[0.198]

Within 10 Miles of Canal

0.029
[0.158]

0.285*
[0.162]

0.131
[0.156]

0.187
[0.161]

-0.262
[0.235]

0.031
[0.235]

-0.023
[0.239]

0.082
[0.248]

Within 10 Miles of River

0.073
[0.131]

0.232*
[0.138]

0.282**
[0.129]

0.318**
[0.131]

0.127
[0.161]

0.279*
[0.162]

0.216
[0.159]

0.300*
[0.157]

Within 10 Miles of
Great Lakes

0.243
[0.240]

0.561**
[0.239]

0.655***
[0.211]

0.739***
[0.221]

-0.926*
[0.501]

-0.181
[0.491]

-0.384
[0.535]

0.130
[0.534]

Within 10 Miles of
Atlantic Coast

-0.350
[0.246]

0.050
[0.301]

0.095
[0.262]

0.164
[0.277]

-0.436
[0.376]

0.097
[0.444]

0.174
[0.388]

0.301
[0.419]

Ln(Population)

-0.009
[0.069]

0.063
[0.075]

0.036
[0.087]

0.126
[0.097]

Fraction Urban

-1.312**
[0.523]

-0.387
[0.527]

-3.034***
[0.721]

-1.624**
[0.673]

Ln(Mfg. Capital P.C.)

-0.225**
[0.104]

-0.100
[0.105]

-0.010
[0.115]

0.146
[0.122]

-0.127
[0.226]

0.224
[0.259]

Ln(Farm Capital P.C.)
Bond Value

-0.030*** -0.030***
[0.008]
[0.008]

Bonds/Assets

0.011
[0.020]

0.011
[0.020]

-0.671
[0.677]

-0.620
[0.690]

-0.196
[1.065]

0.297
[1.069]

Circulation/Assets

3.031***
[0.914]

2.811***
[0.934]

2.509**
[1.137]

2.286**
[1.147]

ln(Assets)

-0.358*** -0.337***
[0.080]
[0.082]

Capital/Assets

1.839**
[0.886]

Specie/Assets

-0.713*** -0.662***
[0.124]
[0.128]

1.785**
[0.880]

1.187
[1.153]

-10.099*** -9.736***
[2.505]
[2.551]

1.169
[1.169]

-15.128*** -14.991***
[4.216]
[4.338]

Loans/Assets

-1.030**
[0.441]

-1.076**
[0.442]

-0.421
[0.614]

-0.507
[0.622]

Deposits/Assets

-2.894**
[1.318]

-2.926**
[1.320]

-2.345
[1.489]

-2.326
[1.513]

4,639
0.163

4,639
0.164

3,317
0.215

3,317
0.219

Observations
Pseudo R-squared

4,639
0.120

4,639
0.126

3,317
0.170

3,317
0.181

Notes: The model is a proportional-hazard partial likelihood model. The dependent variable is the whether the bank failed
during the following five-year period. The model treats each five-year period a bank was open as a unique observation but
links them under the individual bank. Fixed effects for state and each five-year period have been added to all specifications.
Robust standard errors are listed below the coefficients in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at
1% level.

34

Table 5: Additional Tests of the Effect of Railroads on Bank Failure (1830-1860)
Dropping Banks that Were Present When
Dropping Banks that Entered After Railroad
Railroads Entered
Free Bank Dummy
1.103***
1.121***
0.368
0.390
0.872**
0.786**
-0.381
-0.421
[0.412]
[0.412]
[0.565]
[0.563]
[0.364]
[0.369]
[0.364]
[0.368]
Within 10 Miles
of Railroad

-1.258***
[0.293]

-1.131***
[0.302]

-0.868***
[0.280]

-0.881***
[0.300]

-0.805***
[0.141]

-0.538***
[0.153]

-0.445***
[0.145]

-0.388**
[0.157]

Within 10 Miles
of Canal

0.276
[0.231]

0.314
[0.231]

0.356
[0.223]

0.345
[0.227]

-0.013
[0.175]

0.197
[0.174]

0.161
[0.181]

0.208
[0.179]

Within 10 Miles
of River

-0.158
[0.162]

-0.093
[0.167]

-0.015
[0.165]

-0.007
[0.166]

0.014
[0.139]

0.143
[0.147]

0.180
[0.135]

0.223
[0.137]

Within 10 Miles of
Great Lakes

0.544
[0.423]

0.578
[0.437]

0.537
[0.405]

0.572
[0.414]

0.136
[0.241]

0.439*
[0.249]

0.455**
[0.217]

0.586**
[0.228]

Within 10 Miles of
Atlantic Coast

-0.114
[0.357]

0.066
[0.389]

0.203
[0.356]

0.230
[0.370]

-0.340
[0.291]

0.180
[0.347]

0.090
[0.307]

0.242
[0.327]

Ln(Population)

0.029
[0.091]

0.069
[0.100]

-0.050
[0.073]

0.057
[0.077]

Fraction Urban

-0.975
[0.729]

0.051
[0.776]

-1.644***
[0.547]

-0.718
[0.518]

Bond Value

-0.001
[0.009]

-0.001
[0.009]

-0.034***
[0.009]

-0.033***
[0.009]

Bonds/Assets

-0.443
[0.907]

-0.415
[0.914]

-0.556
[0.683]

-0.394
[0.696]

Circulation/Assets

0.752
[1.370]

0.842
[1.411]

2.913***
[0.880]

2.674***
[0.895]

-0.420***
[0.125]

-0.420***
[0.131]

-0.431***
[0.080]

-0.413***
[0.081]

Capital/Assets

0.877
[1.242]

0.884
[1.252]

1.813**
[0.818]

1.746**
[0.814]

Specie/Assets

-3.610
[3.255]

-3.754
[3.265]

-9.376***
[2.592]

-9.159***
[2.656]

Loans/Assets

-0.417
[0.599]

-0.404
[0.607]

-1.442***
[0.475]

-1.483***
[0.481]

-5.477***
[2.086]

-5.484***
[2.057]

-1.905
[1.201]

-1.937
[1.211]

3,161
0.238

3,161
0.238

2,981
0.178

2,981
0.179

ln(Assets)

Deposits/Assets
Observations
Pseudo R-squared

3,161
0.218

3,161
0.219

2,981
0.139

2,981
0.143

Notes: The model is a proportional-hazard partial likelihood model. The dependent variable is the whether the bank failed during
the following five-year period. The model treats each five-year period a bank was open as a unique observation but links them
under the individual bank. Fixed effects for state and each five-year period have been added to all specifications. Robust standard
errors are listed below the coefficients in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

35

Table 6: Effect of Transportation on Level of Bank Balance Sheets - Five Year Periods (1830-1860)
Ln(Assets)
Capital/Assets
Deposits/Assets
Circulation/Assets
Ln(Bank Age)
0.027*** 0.019***
0.001
-0.002***
0.001*** 0.003***
-0.003*** -0.003***
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]

Loans/Assets
0.001*** 0.003***
[0.001]
[0.001]

Bonds/Assets
-0.001*** -0.001
[0.001]
[0.001]

Free Bank
Dummy

-0.170***
[0.015]

0.038***
[0.010]

-0.325***
[0.076]

0.041***
[0.010]

0.026
[0.016]

-0.040***
[0.012]

Specie/Assets
-0.001
-0.001**
[0.001]
[0.001]
-0.022***
[0.003]

Within 10 Miles
of Railroad

0.028*
[0.015]

0.004
[0.019]

-0.006
[0.004]

-0.008
[0.006]

-0.002
[0.003]

-0.012***
[0.004]

-0.016***
[0.004]

0.005
[0.005]

0.018***
[0.005]

0.014*
[0.008]

-0.003**
[0.001]

-0.001
[0.001]

-0.004***
[0.001]

-0.006***
[0.002]

Within 10 Miles
of Canal

0.252***
[0.030]

0.026
[0.058]

0.005
[0.006]

-0.047**
[0.021]

0.037***
[0.008]

0.036*
[0.019]

-0.061***
[0.006]

-0.025
[0.016]

0.027***
[0.007]

0.030
[0.026]

0.002
[0.004]

0.008
[0.009]

0.007***
[0.002]

0.018***
[0.007]

Within 10 Miles
of River

0.249***
[0.039]

0.013**
[0.006]

0.025***
[0.008]

-0.052***
[0.007]

0.040***
[0.008]

-0.005
[0.007]

0.001
[0.002]

Within 10 Miles
of Great Lakes

0.045
[0.068]

-0.008
[0.011]

0.028*
[0.015]

-0.064***
[0.013]

0.040**
[0.016]

-0.030**
[0.013]

0.002
[0.004]

Within 10 Miles
of Atl. Coast
Fixed Effect
Observations
R-squared

0.565***
[0.044]
State
5,636
0.305

0.001
[0.006]
State
5,636
0.2183

0.083***
[0.008]
State
5,636
0.1649

-0.094***
[0.007]
State
5,636
0.1926

0.005
[0.008]
State
5,636
0.0701

0.002
[0.003]
State
5,636
0.0135

0.015***
[0.002]
State
5,636
0.0193

Bank
5,636
0.312

Bank
5,636
0.223

Bank
5,636
0.167

Bank
5,636
0.202

Bank
5,636
0.071

Bank
5,636
0.014

Bank
5,636
0.022

Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is described in the column heading. Each observation is a bank-half decade. Dollar values are deflated to 1860 using Officer
(2008). Fixed effects for each five-year period have been added to all specifications. Robust standard errors are listed below the coefficients in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and ***
at 1% level.

36

Figure 1: The Spread of Railroads and Banks, 1830-1860, by decade

1830

1840

1850

1860

Notes: Figures display the location of railroads in banks in each year.

37

Figure 2: Coefficient on Railroad Dummy Using Other Cutoffs
Panel A: Without County Variables
0.1

0
4 mi.*

6 mi.*

8 mi.*

10 mi.* 12 mi.* 14 mi.*

16 mi.

18 mi.

20 mi.

18 mi.

20 mi.

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

Panel B: With County Variables
0.1

0
4 mi.

6 mi.*

8 mi.*

10 mi.*

12 mi.

14 mi.

16 mi.

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

+1 S.E.

-1 S.E.

Coefficient

Notes: Figures present the coefficient on the railroad dummy for various mileage cutoffs. Each coefficient comes
from an equation similar to those in columns (1) and (3) of Table 3. The stared mileage cutoffs denote coefficients
that are statistically significant at the 10% level or greater.

38

