NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PLACE-BASED POLICIES
David Neumark
Helen Simpson
Working Paper 20049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20049
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

We are grateful to Gilles Duranton, Vernon Henderson, Patrick Kline, Stephen Ross, Kurt Schmidheiny,
and Will Strange for very helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by David Neumark and Helen Simpson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Place-Based Policies
David Neumark and Helen Simpson
NBER Working Paper No. 20049
April 2014, Revised August 2014
JEL No. H23,H71,J23,J38,R12
ABSTRACT
Place-based policies commonly target underperforming areas, such as deteriorating downtown business
districts and disadvantaged regions. Principal examples include enterprise zones, European Union
Structural Funds, and industrial cluster policies. Place-based policies are rationalized by various hypotheses
in urban and labor economics, such as agglomeration economies and spatial mismatch – hypotheses
that entail market failures and often predict overlap between poor economic performance and disadvantaged
residents. The evidence on enterprise zones is very mixed. We need to know more about what features
of enterprise zone policies make them more effective or less effective, who gains and who loses from
these policies, and how we can reconcile the existing findings. Some evidence points to positive benefits
of infrastructure expenditure, and also investment in higher education and university research – likely
because of the public-goods nature of these policies. However, to better guide policy, we need to know
more about what policies create self-sustaining longer-run gains.
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
Helen Simpson
Department of Economics
University of Bristol
8 Woodland Rd
Bristol, BS8 1TN
United Kingdom
Helen.Simpson@bristol.ac.uk

1. INTRODUCTION
Broadly speaking, place-based policies refer to government efforts to enhance the economic
performance of an area within its jurisdiction, typically in the form of more job opportunities and higher
wages. Best known, perhaps, are place-based policies that target underperforming areas, such as
deteriorating downtown business districts, or within the European Union, relatively disadvantaged areas
eligible for regional development aid. Alternatively, place-based policies may seek to enhance even
further the economic performance of areas that are already doing well.
Ladd (1994) distinguishes a subset of place-based policies or strategies that she labels “placebased people strategies.” These are policies that are geographically targeted, but with the intent and
structure of helping disadvantaged residents in them – for example, enterprise zone programs that seek to
create jobs in or near areas where poor people live and job prospects are weak. In contrast, some placebased policies target areas irrespective of whether there are disadvantaged people living in those areas, or
even many people at all, such as efforts to revitalize a downtown business district including real-estate
development, or initiatives to help strengthen an industrial cluster in a region.
Place-based people strategies, in particular, can be contrasted with “people-based” policies that
try to help the disadvantaged without regard to where they live or how concentrated they are. Examples
include welfare and working tax credits (such as the Earned Income Tax Credit in the United States).
People-based policies are the more traditional purview of public finance, and are not covered in this
chapter. Rather, the chapter focuses on a wide range of place-based policies – including pure place-based
policies as well as place-based people policies.
Place-based policies that also focus on people can be categorized as direct or indirect. Direct
forms of place-based policies seek to increase economic activity and strengthen labor markets where
disadvantaged people currently live, while indirect policies may instead seek to increase access of those
people to locations where labor markets are stronger. Enterprise zones can be viewed as direct, since they
typically create incentives for hiring, or economic activity more generally, in or near areas where
disadvantaged people live. The Gautreaux and Moving to Opportunity programs in the United States, as
well as transportation-based policies intended to increase access to jobs outside of areas where the
disadvantaged tend to reside (in the United States, the urban core) – that is, intended to reduce spatial
mismatch – are examples of indirect policies. This chapter focuses on direct policies. 1
Place-based policies targeting the disadvantaged, including indirect policies, are often
rationalized in part by hypotheses that seek to explain the overlap between areas with poor economic

1

There are many excellent summaries of the details of both the Gautreaux and MTO program designs, and a number
of comprehensive reviews of findings of studies of either or both programs; see, e.g., Duncan and Zuberi (2006),
Rosenbaum and Zuberi (2010), and Ludwig et al. (2013).

1

performance and disadvantaged residents, coupled with market failures of one form or another. The
standard arguments considered in the urban economics literature to rationalize pure place-based policies
are generally efficiency arguments pertaining to the existence of agglomeration externalities. But this
literature also calls into question whether policies that aim to stimulate economic activity in one place
rather than another deliver any aggregate benefits, and whether place-based people policies will
ultimately help those individuals they target.
In our view, other market imperfections that have been highlighted in the labor economics
literature may also justify place-based policies of both types. One is the spatial mismatch hypothesis,
according to which minorities or low-skilled workers in some urban areas may face long-term
disadvantage spurred by declines in employment opportunities as manufacturing jobs left the cities,
coupled with housing discrimination or other constraints that restrict their mobility to locations with
better employment opportunities. A second is positive externalities stemming from network effects,
whereby employment of residents can help other residents find jobs (e.g., Hellerstein et al., 2011). Either
the externalities from network effects or the mobility constraints implied by spatial mismatch can
potentially justify geographically targeted policies to increase employment. This chapter reviews evidence
on these labor-market hypotheses that can potentially rationalize place-based policies, with a more
cursory discussion of the standard urban economics hypotheses regarding agglomeration and spillovers,
on which plenty of work already exists.
The majority of the chapter focuses on the research evidence on impacts of place-based policies,
and discusses issues arising in the empirical identification of causal effects in this setting. 2 In the
remainder of this introduction, we provide more detail on the types of place-based policies we consider,
and emphasize the intended recipients and the stated goals of these policies. Later in the chapter, in both
the context of the theoretical basis for these interventions and the evidence on their effects, we consider
whether these goals are met. Due to space constraints, we limit our coverage throughout to place-based
policies in the United States and in Europe. This focus allows us to contrast evidence on similar types of
policies implemented in both locations, and where the evaluation literature has examined comparable
outcomes using similar empirical approaches, enables us to draw conclusions that are more general. In
turn, this means that we necessarily exclude interventions in developing countries, such as Special
Economic Zones in China (see Wang, 2013 and Alder et al., 2013) and India’s National Manufacturing
and Investment Zones.

2

Kline and Moretti (forthcoming) provide a very useful complementary review article on place-based policies,
which focuses largely on a theoretical discussion of the welfare economics of local economic development
programs, with a very limited discussion of the evidence. In contrast, our goal is to provide a comprehensive
overview and evaluation of the evidence base.

2

We also exclude policies that result from political or fiscal decentralization and which apply
across whole jurisdictions (and, therefore, without regard to the characteristics of the areas where the
incentives apply, or the people who live in them), rather than to areas within a jurisdiction. Examples
include discretionary programs, such as the Michigan Economic Growth Authority (MEGA) program,
which provides tax credits to businesses in the state’s export industries (Bartik and Erickcek, 2010), and
broader policies on which jurisdictions may compete to attract businesses. There is large literature on tax
competition between areas to attract firms – such as through research and development tax credits (e.g.,
Wilson, 2009; Chang, 2013), covered by Brülhart et al. in this Handbook. And states and cities are often
viewed as competing on a number of dimensions including taxes, regulations, quality of life, etc., which
are often captured and summarized in business climate indexes (Kolko et al., 2013). Bartik (2003) also
discusses the potential role of customized economic development services for businesses. Because these
kinds of policies and dimensions of competition fall outside of the usual definition of place-based policies
that try to reallocate economic activity across areas within a jurisdiction, or stimulate activity in very
specific areas within a jurisdiction, they are not covered in this chapter.
The place-based policy that has attracted the most attention from researchers is enterprise zones.
In the United States, these exist at both the federal and state level.3 For example, under the federal
Empowerment Zone Program in the United States, authorized in 1993, local governments could submit
proposals for zones made up of relatively poor, high-unemployment Census tracts. 4 The federal
Enterprise Community program, also authorized in 1993, had the same criteria. Far more Enterprise
Communities than Empowerment Zones were created. The former had much smaller benefits – grants of
just under $3 million, versus $100 million ($40 million) for urban (rural) Empowerment Zones (U.S.
Government Accountability Office, 2006) – as well as much less generous hiring credits. 5 Spending in the
first round of the federal enterprise zone program, through 2000, totaled nearly $400 million in block
grants and $200 million in employment credits. Federal expenditures via hiring credits and block grants
for the first six years of the program are estimated at about $850 per zone resident.
There is a plethora of state enterprise zones programs in the United States – 40 as of 2008 (Ham

3

Bartik (2003) notes that earlier related programs focusing on distressed communities include “Urban Renewal” in
the 1940s and 50s, “Model Cities” during the War on Poverty, and Community Block Development Grants.
4
All tracts in the zone had to have poverty rates above 20 percent, 90 percent above 25 percent, and 50 percent
above 35 percent. In addition, unemployment rates in each tract had to exceed the 1990 national average of 6.3
percent (Busso et al., 2013; U.S. General Accounting Office, 2006).
5
The Enterprise Communities were created among applicant areas that did not receive Empowerment Zone
designation, leading Busso et al. (2013) to characterize the Enterprise Communities as “consolation prizes.” The
rejected status of these areas figures prominently in research discussed later. In 2000, an additional program
(Renewal Communities), with related but different criteria, was established, offering a hiring credit and other
benefits. See http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=19132_actof2000.pdf (viewed July 11, 2013).

3

et al., 2011). These vary in size (some even cover the entire state!), the number of zones in each state, and
the benefits available. As an example of targeting, however, consider the case of California, whose state
enterprise zone program has been studied most extensively. In California, enterprise zones are supposed
to be areas with job-creation potential that are near and can overlap with Targeted Employment Areas
(TEAs), consisting of Census tracts where more than half the population earns less than 80 percent of
median area income, according to the 1980 Census.6 The most significant benefit is a hiring credit to
businesses located in zones. A worker living in a TEA qualifies for the hiring credit regardless of their
characteristics. Clearly both federal enterprise zone programs as well as this state program (and the same
is true of many others) target areas based on the characteristics of people who live in them.
Enterprise zone policies are also used in some European countries. France introduced an
enterprise zone program in 1997 (Zones Franches Urbaines, or ZFUs), targeting municipalities or groups
of municipalities facing acute unemployment, as well as high poverty and other economic challenges. The
criteria used to define these areas included population, population aged under 25, unemployment rate,
fraction of the population with no skills, and the fiscal potential of the area, which is related to income
(Gobillon et al., 2012). The policy offered relief on property taxes, corporate income taxes, and wages,
and aimed to increase local employment by making the wage tax relief conditional on hiring at least 20
percent of employees locally. The United Kingdom ran a program of enterprise zones from 1981 to the
mid-1990s covering areas of derelict industrial land in locations that had been hit by industrial decline
(Papke, 1993), and which aimed to create local jobs through new businesses and inward foreign direct
investment. The policy offered incentives for business investment including more generous tax
allowances for capital investment, exemptions from business rates (a local tax on commercial property),
and relaxation of planning regulations. 7
A quite different type of place-based policy that also targets economically disadvantaged areas is
a larger-scale government effort to help economic development through infrastructure investment. A
prime example is the Tennessee Valley Authority, a federal initiative to modernize the economy of the
Tennessee Valley region, encompassing most of Tennessee as well as parts of Kentucky, Alabama, and
Mississippi. The program entailed large public infrastructure spending with an emphasis on hydroelectric
dams to generate power sold locally to encourage manufacturing, as well as other spending on, for
example, schools and flood controls (Kline and Moretti, 2014). Another example is the Appalachian
Regional Commission (discussed by Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008), provided assistance focused on

6

Other studies describe similar types of criteria for federal programs (e.g., Hanson, 2009), and programs in other
states (e.g., Lynch and Zax, 2011).
7
During the 1980s Spain implemented a re-industrialisation zone policy and Belgium a program of employment
zones. France also operated an earlier enterprise zone policy in the late 1980s.

4

transportation for a large swath of states extending from Mississippi to New York, beginning in 1963.
Within the European Union (EU), Structural Funds – comprising the European Regional
Development Fund (ERDF) and European Social Fund (ESF) – support a wide range of initiatives aimed
at economic development and increasing labor market participation and skills; these policies also
generally target disadvantaged areas. 8 Expenditure under the ERDF can include investment in transport or
telecommunications infrastructure, or investment linked to innovation, the environment, or energy. The
ESF is used to provide funding for programs aimed at reducing unemployment, increasing human capital,
and increasing social integration of disadvantaged groups. The bulk of Structural Funds expenditure flows
to the so-called Objective 1 Areas. These are regions within EU member states with GDP per capita less
than 75 percent of the European Community average. For 2007-2013, many new member countries such
as Poland and Romania were entirely classified as Objective 1 areas. Other examples include peripheral
regions such as in Southern Italy, Southern Spain, and Portugal, as well as some lagging regions in the
United Kingdom and (former East) Germany.
Under EU legislation, European governments can also offer subsidies to private-sector firms
within these areas. Since the 1970s, the United Kingdom has run a number of discretionary grant schemes
(e.g., Regional Selective Assistance, Regional Development Grants, and Enterprise Grants) which
subsidize new capital investment with explicit aims of creating or safeguarding jobs and attracting inward
investment. The grants are available in designated, relatively disadvantaged “Assisted Areas” within the
United Kingdom, with area eligibility determined by GDP per capita and unemployment rate indictors
relative to the EU average. The subsidy rate allowable varies with area characteristics, with Objective 1
areas eligible for the highest subsidy rates. 9 A similar grant program has been in operation in France (the
Prime d’Aménagement du Territoire), and the Italian government operates a scheme known as Law 488.
Although on paper the direct recipients of these subsidies are businesses, the ultimate intended
beneficiaries are individuals residing in these lagging regions; hence these programs have a people-based
flavor.
There are other European place-based policies, directly aimed at firms, which do not necessarily
have a people-based component: for example, support for industrial clusters outside of relatively deprived
areas. The current U.K. enterprise zone policy, which began in 2011, aims to increase new business startups and growth, and to create new jobs. Within England there are now 24 designated areas offering some
of the same tax incentives as the previous scheme, but also aiming to promote clusters of businesses
8

For 2007-2013, expenditure on Structural Funds was €278 billion, a significant fraction of the European
Community budget. (See http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/glossary/structural_cohesion_fund_en.htm, viewed
January 6, 2014.)
9
Eligible areas are revised every seven years. The precise set of economic indicators and geographic units used to
define eligible areas have varied over time.

5

within the same industrial sector, and emphasizing location-specific amenities including access to
transport infrastructure such as rail and ports. The motivation for clusters policies often comes from
evidence on productivity benefits arising from industry localization, or on the observed co-location of
some high-tech clusters with higher-education institutions. In Sweden, the government has explicitly tried
to use the location of new universities as a regional policy tool to both increase local labor force skills and
potentially exploit knowledge spillovers from university research as a means of attracting private-sector
activity to an area and boosting local productivity.
As this discussion suggests, there is a large variety of policies that can be considered under the
general rubric of place-based policies. Table 1 provides summary information on the general types of
place-based policies that exist, as well as some details on specific examples. Some have been mentioned
already, and others will be discussed in the sections that follow.
[Table 1 here]
2. THEORETICAL BASIS FOR PLACE-BASED POLICIES
In assessing the welfare effects of place-based policies, theory highlights some important factors,
which in turn can be used to direct empirical analysis of policy effects. Key questions include: Can policy
exploit agglomeration externalities or solve other market failures to generate long-term gains for targeted
areas? If so, does intervention come at a cost to other areas, and are there any aggregate, national benefits
of location-specific interventions? Does policy that targets specific places create distortions to capital and
labor mobility, lowering efficiency by reducing incentives of firms or individuals to move to other more
productive locations? And how does geographic mobility affect outcomes for those originally resident in
the targeted areas, as well as the eventual incidence of a place-based policy? In short, can intervention be
justified, and what potential effects of place-based policies should empirical analysis aim to identify?
Before considering potential efficiency rationales for intervention, it is worth starting from the
benchmark of the absence of market failures. With perfect labor mobility combined with inelastic housing
supply in the targeted area, theory implies that, as a result of in-migration and increased demand for
housing, landowners benefit from a location-specific policy, rather than local residents, with the benefits
being capitalized into rents. With less than perfect labor mobility, local residents may benefit, but these
benefits should be weighed against any costs to non-targeted areas, and the deadweight costs of taxation.
Place-based policies may be justified in the context of market failures that have a spatial dimension. In the
rest of this section, we outline possible arguments why place-based policies may help overcome specific
market imperfections or take advantage of externalities, and consider the case for redistribution, or equitymotivated policies that target disadvantaged areas, and not just disadvantaged people.
2.1. Agglomeration economies
The efficiency-related argument for place-based policies that is most central to urban economics

6

is that there are agglomeration economies, in which the dense population of urban areas has an
independent effect on the productivity of resources. Agglomeration economies may arise via a number of
mechanisms, which Duranton and Puga (2004) categorize as “sharing, matching and learning.” Moretti
(2010) emphasizes the role of thick labor markets, which can lead to better worker-firm matches,
inducing more investment by workers and firms. Thick labor markets can also provide better insurance
against local demand shocks by reducing the risk or cost of unemployment, which can act as a
compensating differential that lowers labor costs. Moretti also emphasizes thick markets for intermediate
inputs, especially those that are specialized and non-tradable. Examples are professional services, such as
computer programming, legal support, or venture capital.10 If a firm needs these inputs from other
companies, it has an incentive to locate in a city with other firms that use the same inputs.
Agglomeration economies imply positive externalities, because bringing additional people or
firms to an urban area increases the productivity of other individuals or firms in that area, but these gains
are not captured by those deciding whether to move to that location. Thus, there may be a rationale to
subsidize in-migration or growth, to raise the private returns closer to the social returns. 11 Moretti (2010)
argues that the rationale for place-based policies to exploit agglomeration economies may be quite strong,
especially in a dynamic setting with multiple equilibria, in which externalities can generate benefits from
drawing economic activity to any single one of a set of ex ante similar locations. In such cases the gains
from moving from a low-employment, low-density equilibrium to a high one at a particular location may
far exceed the costs of the policy (such as a temporary, but large-scale intervention as in Kline, 2010).
Hence, there may be a case for place-based policy to jump-start growth in a specific area. Nevertheless,
two further questions need to be addressed: Which areas should policy target? And will the gains to those
areas be offset by losses to others?
As Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) emphasize, in choosing between locations in which to encourage
growth, policymakers should do so in areas where the elasticity of productivity with respect to
agglomeration is higher (which may well not be the most deprived areas), exploiting spatial variation in
the relationship between productivity and size or density. In practice, they argue – given the challenges in
estimating how the magnitude of agglomeration economies varies across regions – policymakers may
have little or no knowledge of how this elasticity varies spatially, and hence little basis for preferring one

10

Zhang (2007) suggests that venture capital, which might be thought as supplying capital in a national market,
actually tends to favor local industry – looking at the specific context of Silicon Valley.
11
Place-based policies that aim to address a co-ordination failure and target city size may still only be a second-best
response, even in the best-case scenario in which policy makers know the optimal size to capture, for example, the
externalities between firms from co-location in the same area. It is more difficult to imagine a policy that fully
addresses inefficiencies conditional on location, for example due to un-internalized increasing returns such as
through spillovers, which may depend on the scale or type of firms’ investment.

7

place over another. In addition, if there is no variation in the elasticity across areas, then there will be no
aggregate benefits from re-distributing activity geographically. Moretti, however, suggests that when
there is spatial heterogeneity in the value of this externality, competition among local governments can be
an efficient source of place-based policies. He argues that when local governments know the value of the
local externality and set locally-financed incentives based on it, competition to attract businesses may
increase national welfare, despite the potential zero-sum game of attracting businesses to one location
rather than another. The reason is that this local policy competition may ultimately arrive at the correct
valuation of the externality. Of course, there may be reasons for scepticism about local government
motivations and incentives to attract businesses, as other factors – such as the salience of attracting new
businesses for winning elections – can easily come into play.
2.2. Knowledge spillovers and the knowledge economy
A frequently posited source of agglomeration externalities, which has a long history in urban
economics (e.g., Marshall, 1890; Jacobs, 1961), is knowledge spillovers – or learning in the Duranton and
Puga (2004) typology. The hypothesis is that densely populated, diverse urban areas foster
experimentation and innovation, and facilitate face-to-face interactions that aid the spread of new ideas.
More generally, the human capital of others in close proximity can raise everyone’s human capital and
increase firm productivity, through sharing of knowledge and faster adoption of innovations (Moretti,
2010). Because knowledge is more likely to spill over from more highly-educated workers, due to the
knowledge they possess and perhaps the work they do, knowledge spillovers can have more specific
predictions than agglomeration economies per se – in particular, that locations more dense in educated
workers will be more successful. 12
Knowledge spillovers can provide a rationale for local policymakers to try to produce or attract
skilled workers – for example, through creating or supporting educational institutions, perhaps in
particular universities. The public-good characteristics of basic knowledge rationalize public subsidies to
research universities in general, but the potential for local knowledge spillovers can rationalize placebased policy. If spillovers increase with geographic proximity, and firms are aware of this, then
investment in universities may serve to attract innovative firms to the locality. Local governments may
take additional steps to increase knowledge spillovers from publicly financed research, such the creation
of business incubators and science parks near research universities, or encouraging interactions between
universities and businesses, potentially overcoming information or coordination failures.
In addition to the potential value of generating knowledge spillovers from attracting high-skilled
workers, Moretti (2012) argues that attracting skilled workers in the knowledge-intensive high-tech sector
12

In that sense, knowledge spillovers are viewed as a particular type of agglomeration externality. But the
hypothesis has received enough attention in the literature that it merits separate consideration.

8

has large local multipliers relative to other industries. This can occur because of high pay in these jobs,
because of demand for business services from this industry, and because high-tech firms appear to attract
other high-tech firms. Moreover, there are gains to earnings of others, according to Moretti, from human
capital externalities, faster technology adoption, and complementarity with less-skilled labor.
Echoing the discussion of agglomeration economies generally, Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) raise
questions about the aggregate welfare implications of policies to try to exploit knowledge spillovers by
encouraging moves of educated workers from one place to another, or the creation of educated workers in
one place rather than another. The argument is similar; there has to be a non-linear relationship between
the density of skilled workers and productivity, so that moving skilled people from one location to
another increases productivity more in the target area than it decreases productivity in the origin area, and
policymakers must know the nature of this relationship. In addition, worker mobility can dissipate the
effects of some local policies to exploit human capital spillovers, such as subsidizing education. This may
be particularly problematic for higher education as more-educated workers are more mobile. 13
2.3. Industry localization
Many of the arguments about matching, sharing, and learning can be applied, and may even be
more persuasive, at the industry level, in particular since the localization of industry employment has
been systematically documented for specific tradable sectors for a number of countries. For example,
knowledge spillovers may actually have to do more with the presence of workers in the same, or related
industries, rather than skilled workers, per se, in the locality. Other sources of agglomeration economies
may be stronger within industries, because the thick labor markets or thick intermediate input markets that
may be the engine of agglomeration may operate more within than across industries. Such industry-level
externalities may rationalize government policy to try to establish or enhance industry clusters. 14
However, the observation that such industrial clusters exist, and the potential presence of
externalities, is not sufficient to justify intervention. For example, for some sectors access to natural
resources rather than the presence of agglomeration economies may drive the location of clusters.
Duranton (2011) analyzes the theoretical basis for industrial cluster policies, and questions the magnitude
of the returns to clustering for local welfare. His argument that the case for policy is weak rests on the
complex nature of the agglomeration externalities, as well as on the costs and benefits of intervention in
practice (i.e., on the potential weakness of policy levers if firm and worker mobility is limited, and on the

13

In this chapter we do not review the evidence on general education subsidies (see, e.g., Bound et al., 2004, and
Bartik, 2009). One might imagine mobility to be less of a problem for education policies that target provision of
skills specific to a local industry, such as at the community-college level.
14
Bartik (2003) and Matouschek and Robert-Nicoud (2005) discuss market imperfections in investment in training
that might occur when firms are clustered, noting that in some cases government involvement in the provision of
(industry-specific) training may be justified.

9

evidence of only small-scale effects of clustering on local productivity and wages). Moreover, the optimal
size of a cluster, which policy would want to target, is hard to determine in practice and would require
knowledge of both the higher benefits from increasing returns as the cluster grows and the increased costs
due to limits on land availability and externalities such as congestion. On the other hand, if a cluster
policy were to be pursued, then competition for plants between localities may be more likely to lead to an
improved spatial distribution of industry activity, paralleling the argument in Moretti (2010).
2.4. Spatial mismatch
Other types of market imperfections, such as frictions in labor or housing markets resulting in
involuntary unemployment and reduced mobility, can sometimes rationalize place-based policies,
although these may not serve as the standard motivations. One prominent example is the spatial mismatch
hypothesis, which – as applied to the United States – argues that the lower employment rate of
disadvantaged minorities in urban cores is in part attributable to there being fewer jobs per worker in
these areas (Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist, 1998, p. 851). This can emerge because of the exit of jobs from these
areas with the changing industrial structure (Wilson, 1987), and can persist because of exogenous
residential segregation attributable at least in part to discrimination in housing markets. 15
Issues of residential segregation of minorities, immigrants, and the economically-disadvantaged
generally in areas with diminished job opportunities are hardly limited to the United States, although we
know less about this in other countries. Recent studies point to a link between residential segregation and
employment or unemployment in France (Gobillon and Selod, 2007), Belgium (Dujardin et al., 2008),
Sweden (Åslund et al., 2010), and the United Kingdom (Fieldhouse, 1999).
The segregation of disadvantaged groups in areas with fewer jobs implies that the wage net of
commuting costs for these groups is more likely to be below their reservation wage, so fewer residents of
such areas will choose to work, especially among the less-skilled for whom commuting costs represent a
larger share of earnings. Customer discrimination against minorities, employer discrimination that deters
employers from moving to urban minority areas where wages are lower, and poor information about jobs
in other areas (Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist, 1998) can reinforce the effects of spatial mismatch.
The gist of the spatial mismatch hypothesis is that the mobility usually assumed in urban
economics may be restricted; hence, out of equilibrium behavior may persist for a long time. This lack of
mobility may undermine some of the concerns expressed in the urban economics literature that placebased policies – often motivated by equity concerns (discussed more below) – can be harmful by inducing
poor people to remain in poor areas, if they are likely to remain there anyway.
2.5. Network effects

15

Gobillon et al. (2007) review theoretical models and hypotheses regarding spatial mismatch.

10

Network effects in labor markets may influence the impact of place-based policies. In network
models, employment of some residents increases the flow of information about job opportunities to other
residents, or the flow of information about workers, reducing search costs and increasing employment
(e.g., Montgomery, 1991). Networks are likely to have a spatial dimension – for example, connecting
neighbors. Hellerstein et al. (2011, 2014) and Bayer et al. (2008) report evidence suggesting that network
connections between co-residents (of the same Census tract or even smaller areas) are important.
Residence-based labor market networks can exacerbate the adverse effects of residential segregation on
labor market outcomes for some groups: for example, when social networks are racially (or ethnically)
stratified, or stratified based on skills.
Network effects do not conventionally arise in discussions of place-based policies. Part of the
motivation for a broader perspective that considers this factor is that it may counter some of the criticisms
of place-based policies, such as the argument (discussed more below) that these policies discourage the
migration of the disadvantaged to areas with better economic opportunities, and that many of the benefits
may go to commuters and new residents who have the skills to take advantage of newly-created
employment opportunities (Glaeser, 2007).
Coupled with spatial mismatch, network effects may strengthen the case for place-based policies
focusing on areas of concentrated disadvantage, because the multipliers that network effects create can
amplify the effects of these policies, more so in areas with low employment, and perhaps also more so in
minority areas where stratification of labor market networks may imply particularly poor labor market
information. 16 However, even absent the constraints on mobility assumed by the spatial mismatch
hypothesis, high concentrations of low-employment areas may help justify policies targeting these areas.
For example, one could imagine that in an area with low employment and high crime, utility is not
necessarily low enough to induce outward mobility to higher-employment, low-crime areas. But that
crime surely imposes costs on others, and hence subsidizing employment of one person to exploit the
positive externalities on others’ employment (and on crime) – because of networks, for example – can be
prudent policy, and more cost-effective in areas with low employment.
This strikes us as a common-sense rationale for place-based policies. Because of crime spillovers
between neighborhoods and the location of consumption of urban amenities, many city (and suburban)
residents – and not only residents of targeted neighborhoods – may be made better off by policies that

16

Peer or neighbourhood effects can also imply externalities between individuals (see Topa and Zenou in this
Handbook). For example, the presence of non-employed residents might lead other residents to remain nonemployed by changing norms of behaviour (Wilson, 1987), and, conversely, creating some employment can have
virtuous effects on others. Network effects could diminish the effects of place-based policies. For example, a policy
that leads employers to relocate to an area may do little to boost employment opportunities of local residents if the
employees of the relocating companies are not networked to local residents.

11

increase job opportunities in disadvantaged areas. In addition, if network (or peer or neighborhood)
effects are important, it may be efficient to target such policies to areas with large concentrations of nonemployed people so that the multipliers from these effects can have a greater impact. Viewed this way,
network effects may offer a public good that many can take advantage of when some employment
opportunities are created. This dovetails with other arguments that place-based policies can in part be
justified by the need to correct under-provision of public goods in poor areas, often because the tax base
is insufficient to provide these goods (Crane and Manville, 2008).
2.6. Equity motivations for place-based policies
The equity motivation for many place-based policies is to redistribute jobs and income to places
where jobs are scarce and incomes are low. Urban economics teaches us that the success of such policies
in redistributing jobs and income are complex. It may seem natural, for example, that a state that is
concerned with low job opportunities in a specific urban area would try to spur job creation there by using
tax or other incentives – such as enterprise zones. However, mobility of people and capital can complicate
the effects and potentially undo most or all of the gains from such redistributive policies.
Moretti (2010) develops this argument in some detail. If we think about an enterprise zone type of
policy, the subsidies to employment will result in higher wages unless labor supply is infinitely elastic. If
labor is mobile, some workers will move to the subsidized area, and as long as housing supply is not
infinitely elastic, housing prices and rents will increase, offsetting at least some of the gains to the original
residents. 17 Of course, some people in the targeted areas may own property, and for them the increase in
housing prices is a gain. In the extreme case of perfect mobility of labor, utility of each individual is
equated across locations both before and after the policy intervention, and the only effect is on land prices
that capitalize the place-based subsidy. However, we probably should not consider landowners as the
target population for place-based policies based on equity goals.
Thus, other than unlikely knife-edge cases – like infinitely elastic labor supply that implies no
wage increases, infinitely elastic housing supply that implies no change in housing prices, or perfect
mobility that undoes all gains from place-based policies – mobility probably will partly but not fully
undermine the effects of redistributive place-based policies. Nonetheless, the welfare effects can be other
than intended. For example, if we rule out perfect mobility of labor and assume that some people have
geographic preferences for location, then it is only the marginal workers for whom utility is equated
across locations. However, in this case who gains from the policy may have little to do with the intended
effects. Inframarginal workers in the target area gain and those in the other areas (that are taxed) lose,
while marginal workers are unaffected. Depending on who these inframarginal workers are, the
17

Although policy may or may not require workers to live in the area where the subsidies apply, the subsidies will
presumably generate some mobility of people into or near those areas.

12

redistributive effects in terms of welfare may or may not be what policymakers intended. For example,
there may be no good reason to believe that the inframarginal workers in the targeted area are the lowestincome individuals.
This echoes a broader concern about the targeting of benefits to the disadvantaged via placebased policies. As Crane and Manville (2008) emphasize, given mobility and land-price responses, the
jobs created (if they are created) may go to non-poor residents or migrants, and the gains from land prices
seem unlikely to accrue to the poor. At the same time, they suggest that it may be possible (if somewhat
utopian) to create institutional arrangements so that the increase in land values is captured by the public
and redistributed, to some extent, to the intended beneficiaries. They refer to “Community Based
Agreements” that specify, for example, that developers who capture the higher land values devote
resources to higher wages, affordable housing, social services, etc.
Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) raise the issue of whether it makes sense to put incentives in place
that encourage poor people to stay in poor areas, rather than migrating to places with better economic
opportunities. For example, they say, “it is not clear why the federal government spent over $100 billion
after Hurricane Katrina to bring people back to New Orleans, a city that was hardly a beacon of economic
opportunity before the storm” (p. 197). This, however, might be an unusual case. If we think, instead,
about people living in a poor area who have preferences to stay in that area, then if we could determine
that these inframarginal people are the ones we want to help through a place-based policy, one could in
principle justify such a policy on equity grounds. Nonetheless, aside from the difficulties of knowing who
is and who is not inframarginal, it is not clear that such a policy would be more efficient than subsidizing
migration to other areas, and perhaps doing more to break down the kinds of barriers to residential
mobility emphasized by the spatial mismatch model – if indeed such barriers are important.
2.7. Summary and implications for empirical analysis
Two comprehensive reviews of the economics underlying place-based policies, by Moretti (2010)
and Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008), disagree to some extent on the efficiency-based rationales for placebased policies, with Moretti taking more a favorable view under some circumstances. In addition, we
have suggested some additional efficiency-based arguments that may rationalize place-based policies. But
both of these extensive reviews raise serious questions about the equity arguments for place-based
policies, with Moretti, for example, concluding that “from the equity point of view, location-based
policies aim[ed] at redistributing income from areas with high level of economic activity to areas with
low level of economic activity … are unlikely to be effective” (2010, p. 1242). When workers are mobile
it may be better to target people rather than places. It is also important to recognize that equity and
efficiency goals in place-based policymaking can end up in conflict. For example, Glaeser and Gottlieb
(2008) present some evidence suggesting that the non-linearities with regard to knowledge spillovers may

13

be convex, so that subsidizing human capital investment (or in-migration) may be most effective where
human capital is already high. Such a policy would tend to increase income disparities between areas.
The preceding discussion highlights some lessons for empirical research even if theory cannot
fully pin down a single rationale for the existence of place-based policies. A first test of whether a policy
results in welfare gains is whether it generates benefits for the targeted area, and in addition for the
targeted residents. The discussion above points out that the effective incidence of a policy can depend on
factors such as the degree of in-migration to an area and the degree of slack in local housing markets.
Hence, evaluation should look beyond evidence of effects on local employment to evidence on local
unemployment and whether local residents have moved into jobs or whether there have been changes in
commuting patterns. We also need to look beyond effects on local wages, to effects on rents and house
prices, to better assess impacts on individuals’ welfare, and further, whether there are heterogeneous
effects according to whether people are homeowners or renters, or more generally, by skill or income
level. As discussed below in Section 4, the fact that policy can affect the location incentives of both firms
and workers also has practical implications for evaluation methods and the choice of control areas, since
displacement can potentially lead to biased estimates of policy effects as well as being of interest as a
policy response in its own right.
Two further points emerge that can help guide empirical work. First, local welfare effects might
differ substantially from those at an aggregate level. Exploiting agglomeration externalities in one
location might come at the expense of (possibly greater) losses from agglomeration benefits in other
areas, and distortions to the efficient location of economic activity. Second, any local benefits themselves
might not be long lasting. While theory suggests policy could induce a location to shift to a new higher
productivity equilibrium, whether this works in practice, or whether areas revert to their previous steady
state is an important question.
However, it is questionable – based on our own experience with policymakers – that
comprehensive welfare statements or calculations carry significant weight in many if not most policy
decisions. Rather, policymakers are more likely to start with a goal such as “bring jobs to Detroit.” If we,
as urban economists, can simply provide them with rigorous evidence on whether a given policy achieves
its stated goal, and what other trade-offs – including distributional ones – it entails, we are doing a
valuable service and can still help winnow out many policies that do not achieve their goals or have
adverse consequences that policymakers do not intend. As a result, most of the rest of this chapter focuses
on estimating the causal effects of place-based policies on their targeted outcomes. However, we touch on
evidence on the broader effects of such policies where possible, and highlight areas where evidence on
the wider welfare implications of these interventions is available.
Even ignoring explicit welfare estimates and calculations, however, there is a potentially

14

significant disconnect between the focus of much empirical research (and, we suspect, policymaker
attention) on jobs, versus the importance of effects on wages for delivering welfare gains to residents of
places targeted by place-based policies, because a larger employment response can imply greater
deadweight loss from distortions in behavior (Busso et al., 2013). As the theoretical discussion earlier
noted, it is when labor is immobile – and hence there is less scope for employment increases in targeted
areas – that the welfare gains are more likely to accrue to residents (workers, specifically), rather than
property owners. This disconnect may, of course, simply reflect the fact that policymakers place a priority
on job creation in specific areas. Alternatively, as Kline and Moretti (forthcoming) point out, when there
are labor market frictions that generate spatial heterogeneity in unemployment, place-based policies like
hiring subsidies in certain locations can increase employment (lower unemployment) in the targeted area
and increase welfare, so the focus on job creation may be better aligned with effects on welfare.
3. EVIDENCE ON THEORETICAL MOTIVATIONS AND BEHAVIORAL HYPOTHESES
UNDERLYING PLACE-BASED POLICIES
Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) and Moretti (2010) provide reviews of evidence regarding the
conventional urban economics arguments such as agglomeration economies and knowledge spillovers.
We outline some recent evidence briefly, but focus on new evidence on the other hypotheses that we
believe should be considered in the context of place-based policies, including spatial mismatch and
network effects.
3.1. Evidence on agglomeration economies
There is now a considerable body of evidence in support of the idea that increased density of
economic activity both across and within industries generates positive externalities. Rosenthal and
Strange (2004) provide a summary of the evidence on the underlying sources of agglomeration
economies. A range of papers have sought to estimate the elasticity of productivity with respect to a
measure of the density of employment, and generally find elasticities ranging from around 0.01 to 0.10
(see Melo et al., 2009, for a meta-analysis of a wide set of findings). Some recent, but quite distinct,
contributions in this area are Combes et al. (2010), Combes et al. (2012) and Greenstone et al. (2010).18
Combes et al. (2010) carry out a careful analysis addressing identification problems in estimating
the relationship between the density of economic activity and productivity. They address the issues that a
positive relationship between productivity and density may be driven, at least in part, by omitted variables
correlated with both the density of employment and productivity, by workers choosing to locate in more
productive regions, and by those workers that choose to do so being disproportionately high-skill. Hence,

18

Much work addresses productivity differences across cities, but some considers agglomeration economies within
cities (Fu and Ross, 2013; Rosenthal and Strange, 2003). Some evidence suggests agglomeration economies can
attenuate quite rapidly with distance, which is relevant for place-based policies that target small areas.

15

both the quantity and quality of labor are likely to be endogenous. To address the possibility that the
quantity of labor may be endogenous, they employ an IV strategy, instrumenting population with
historical measures of population density dating back to 1831 and with measures of local geological
features including characteristics of the soil, and of the terrain measured by variation in altitude – features
which might be expected to have determined where population settlements occurred and how successful
they were. To deal with the endogeneity of the quality of labour they use individual panel data on wages
that allows them to separate location effects from both observed and unobserved worker characteristics.
Starting from a benchmark elasticity of around 0.05 between wages and density, they find that controlling
for both of these factors leads to an estimate of 0.027. In addition, including a measure of market potential
(an inverse distance-weighted measure of density across all other areas), to allow for the fact that
agglomeration effects may spill across area boundaries, results in their preferred estimate of 0.02, with an
elasticity of total factor productivity (TFP) with respect to density of around 0.035.
Combes et al. (2012) examine the extent to which firm selection drives the observed positive
relationship between city size and productivity. If competition is increasing in city size, we might expect
that low-productivity firms are less likely to survive in larger cities, leading to a positive correlation
between city size and average firm productivity, due to greater truncation of the lower tail of the
productivity distribution in larger cities. Agglomeration externalities, on the other hand, might be
expected to lead to a shift of the observed firm productivity distribution outward as city size increases, as
all firms benefit from agglomeration economies, and, if the most productive firms also derive the largest
gains, a widening of the distribution at the upper tail.
Their empirical approach estimates the differences in observed firm productivity distributions
along these dimensions across more and less dense areas. Their main finding is that selection does not
seem to be an important factor in explaining TFP differentials across areas with different employment
densities. In addition, they find evidence that firms that are more productive gain more from being in
denser environments. Defining denser areas as those with above median employment density, they find
that compared to less dense areas, the productivity gains for firms in the top quartile of the log TFP
distribution are approximately 14.4 percent. In contrast, the gains to firms in the lower quartile from being
in denser areas are only 4.8 percent, implying heterogeneity at the firm level in the degree to which firms
might benefit from urbanization externalities. They also find a very similar elasticity of TFP with respect
to employment density to Combes et al. (2010), of 0.032.
Greenstone et al. (2010) provide estimates of the magnitude of agglomeration externalities by
exploiting a subsidy policy aimed at attracting very large new plants to specific locations in the United
States. We discuss the implications of their findings for this category of place-based policy later. Their
estimation strategy uses information on runner-up locations as control areas, and their estimates imply

16

that the plant openings resulted in very large productivity spillovers, with TFP in incumbent plants 12
percent higher than in plants in control areas after five years. Of course, as the authors acknowledge, these
estimates come from a very specific setting, the opening of a very large new manufacturing plant, for
which the winning county may have made the highest bid in anticipation of significant spillover benefits.
Effects of this magnitude are therefore not necessarily applicable outside of this policy setting, but are
certainly of relevance to the debate about the effects of this type of place-based policy. Greenstone et al.
also find evidence of considerable heterogeneity in the magnitude of these externalities both across
different locations and across industries. In particular, productivity spillovers are found to be greater in
industries that are more similar to the new plant in terms of technologies and human capital requirements,
suggesting a role for worker flows between firms and knowledge spillovers (potentially as a result of the
former) as sources of agglomeration economies.
Finally, with regard to whether the magnitude of the elasticity of productivity with respect to
density varies with the degree of density of economic activity, and hence varies spatially, the evidence
described in Section 5.5 – using an intervention that is perhaps more generalizable (the Tennessee Valley
Authority) – does not support this kind of heterogeneity in agglomeration externalities across locations
that theory suggests can rationalize place-based policies.
3.2. Is there spatial mismatch?
Research testing spatial mismatch in the U.S. context tries to incorporate direct information on
access to jobs that is related to either travel time or the extent of jobs (or job growth) nearby (e.g.,
Ellwood, 1986; Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist, 1990; Raphael, 1998; Weinberg, 2000). These studies tend to
show that blacks live in places with fewer jobs per person, and that this lower job access can help explain
lower black employment rates, perhaps through the mechanism of blacks facing longer commute times to
jobs and hence lower net wages (although Ellwood suggests the differences may not be large). Evidence
of longer commute times for blacks does not necessarily point to spatial mismatch, as simple employment
discrimination against blacks can imply fewer job offers and hence on average longer commute times for
blacks even if they live in the same places as whites. Overall, two comprehensive reviews argue that there
is a good deal of evidence consistent with the spatial mismatch hypothesis (Holzer, 1991; Ihlanfeldt and
Sjoquist, 1998), although Jencks and Mayer (1990) provide a more negative assessment of the hypothesis.
Recent work raises questions about the spatial mismatch hypothesis (Hellerstein et al., 2008). In
relation to race, the pure spatial mismatch hypothesis implies that it is only the location of jobs,
irrespective of whether they are held by blacks or whites (but perhaps conditional on skill), which affects
employment prospects. However, if race affects employment – through, for example, discrimination or
labor market networks in which race matters – then even if an area is dense with jobs, black job
opportunities may be low. An urban area with large concentrations of black residents, for example, may

17

also be one into which whites tend to commute to work and employers are less likely to hire blacks. In
this case, employment problems of low-skilled blacks may not reflect an absence of jobs where they live
so much as an absence of jobs available to blacks, which Hellerstein et al. term “racial mismatch.”
The authors estimate models for employment including measures of job density by location and
skill, but also by race, using confidential Census information on place of residence and place of work. 19
The evidence is far more consistent with racial mismatch than with simple spatial mismatch. Black job
density (the ratio of local jobs held by blacks to black residents) strongly affects black employment,
whereas white job density (the ratio of local jobs held by whites to black residents) does not. In addition,
the own-race relationship is stronger at low skill levels. In a number of specifications, the estimated
coefficient on the black job density measure is larger than that of the non-black or white job density
measure by a factor of about 10; the magnitudes are, respectively, about 0.001 and 0.01, with the latter
implying that a 10 percentage point increase in black job density raises the employment rate of black men
by one percentage point. This evidence indicates that for blacks, the spatial distribution of jobs alone is
not an important determinant of black urban employment, but rather it is the interaction of the spatial
distribution of jobs combined with a racial dimension in hiring, or “racial mismatch,” that matters. In
other words, even if blacks reside in areas that are dense in jobs (or dense in jobs at their skill level, as
other analyses reveal), if whites tend to hold these jobs the employment of black residents can be quite
low. Reflecting this, descriptive statistics reported in Hellerstein et al. (2008) show that the density of jobs
where blacks live is in fact quite high, even at blacks’ skill levels, suggesting that what is more important
is which group is more likely to get hired. And a simple simulation they report shows that if low-skilled
blacks were geographically distributed to live where low-skilled whites lived, the black-white
employment rate differential would be only marginally smaller (by 0.025, relative to a gap of 0.231). This
is precisely because the effect on black employment of white job density – which is the density that would
increase most sharply if blacks lived where whites lived – is so small. 20 More recent research establishes
that the results are very similar for Hispanics in the U.S. labor market (Hellerstein et al., 2010).21
19

These regressions are not plagued by the classic reflection problem that would arise if individual employment
were regressed on the local employment rate, because the numerators of the job density measures include both
residents and non-residents (who work but do not live in the area).
20
In a structural model of labor and housing markets focusing on black-white unemployment rate differences in the
United States (and African-French differences in France), Gobillon et al. (2013) suggest that spatial factors explain
only 10 to 17.5 percent of the unemployment rate gap between blacks and whites.
21
Andersson et al. (2014) study the relationship between unemployment duration of workers who experienced mass
layoffs and measures of job accessibility, finding that greater job accessibility is associated with shorter durations.
The focus on mass layoffs is intended to reduce the correlation between unobserved characteristics of individuals
and the accessibility to jobs where they live. The study compares estimates for blacks (for example), using either a
general or a race-specific job density measure. The estimated strength of the relationship between accessibility and
search duration is similar for both measures. However, it does not estimate a specification including both measures
of accessibility simultaneously, as in Hellerstein et al. (2008), without which there is no way to tell whether the race-

18

There is evidence for European countries, in the studies cited in Section 2.4, which is consistent
with spatial mismatch. One of the more compelling studies is Åslund et al. (2010), who study a refugee
settlement policy in Sweden that generates exogenous variation in location, finding that employment rates
were lower among those allocated to areas with lower employment rates. However, this evidence
typically does not separately consider the density of jobs where people live and the density of jobs for a
particular group, as in the racial mismatch analysis. If evidence consistent with spatial mismatch is largely
generated by low hiring for minority or ethnic groups, rather than low job availability per se, the case for
place-based policies may be weaker than is implied by the spatial mismatch hypothesis. It would therefore
be informative to have evidence on spatial versus racial (or ethnic) mismatch for other countries.
3.3. Are there important network effects in urban labor markets?
Bayer et al. (2008) present evidence of labor market network connections among nearby residents
in urban areas. They find that individuals living on the same Census block in Boston are more likely to
work on the same Census block than are individuals living who do not live on the same block but live in
the same block group (a small set of blocks). Because people within block groups are quite homogeneous,
their interpretation is that the higher likelihood of working on the same block for those who live in the
same block reflects informal labor market networks based on network connections between those living
on the same block (rather than sorting by place of residence and place of work).
Hellerstein et al. (2011) look instead at whether neighbors work in the same establishment, to test
the conjecture that neighborhood labor market networks operate in part via referrals of neighbors to the
employers of those in their network. The method compares the share of an individual’s co-workers who
are residential neighbors, relative to the share that would result if the establishment hired workers
randomly from the geographic areas where all individuals who work in the Census tract reside, using
matched employer-employee data at the establishment level for the United States (Hellerstein and
Neumark, 2003). Labor networks based on place of residence would imply a higher share of neighbors
among a worker’s co-workers than would result from the random hiring process, which in turn simply
reflects the likelihood that neighbors tend to work near where they live and hence near other neighbors,
irrespective of any connections between them. This difference is normalized by an upper bound for the
clustering of neighbors in the same establishment, which arises because, given the size distribution of
establishments, perfect sorting by residence-based networks across establishments typically cannot occur.
The evidence indicates that residence-based labor market networks play an important role in
hiring. The “excess clustering” of neighbors in establishments – which is measured as the percent of the
maximum systematic sorting of neighbors into the same establishment that could occur that is actually

specific accessibility measure dominates the generic measure.

19

observed – is about 10 percent for blacks and whites. Controlling for establishment size, this network
measure is nearly twice as large for blacks as for whites. Residence-based networks are considerably
more important for Hispanics, with the measure rising to 22 percent, and around 40 percent for Hispanic
immigrants and those with poor English skills who are less integrated into the labor market, and about
whom employers may have less reliable information.22
Labor market networks that are stratified by race or ethnicity could help explain the racial
mismatch evidence, and be relevant for place-based policies. Hellerstein et al. (2011) test for this
stratification by constructing the network measure two different ways: first, treating the relevant set of a
black worker’s neighbors and co-workers as including either blacks or whites, and hence measuring the
extent to which black workers are clustered in establishments with black or white neighbors; and second,
doing the same computations using only neighbors of the same race. If networks are racially stratified,
then the likelihood that a black works with a neighbor regardless of race should be smaller than the
likelihood that a black works with a black neighbour – exactly what the evidence suggests. Specifically,
the network measure is 40 percent lower when disregarding the race of neighbors and co-workers,
suggesting that labor market information is less likely to flow between, e.g., black and white co-residents
than between co-residents of the same race.
Hellerstein et al. (2010) present a different kind of analysis, showing that Hispanic job density is
most predictive of Hispanic employment in cities in which the Hispanic immigrant population has arrived
and grown recently. These are cities in which network contacts may have been especially important in
securing employment for new migrants, given that the local economies did not have long histories of
Hispanic employment and employers in these areas did not have much experience with Hispanic workers,
especially poor English speakers. This study provides further evidence of stratified networks, and
illustrates how stratified networks can generate evidence of racial or ethnic mismatch.
There is other evidence consistent with ethnically stratified networks. Kasinitz and Rosenberg
(1996) study the Red Hook section of Brooklyn, an area of high unemployment that is populated largely
by low-income blacks (and to some extent Hispanics), but with a large number of local jobs in the
shipping industry. They find that many local employers hire workers almost exclusively from outside of
Red Hook, recruiting employees via social networks within specific (non-black) ethnic groups. Turning to
other countries, Patacchini and Zenou (2012) find that, in the United Kingdom, the probability that one
finds a job through social networks is higher if there is a larger share employed among an individual’s
ethnic group living nearby (accounting for sorting in couple of ways). Damm (2012), taking advantage of

22

Evidence reported in the paper indicates that place of residence can be treated as predetermined, potentially
influencing place of work, rather than being determined by people who work together choosing to live near each
other.

20

a quasi-experiment involving the settlement of refugee immigrants in Denmark, finds that those who were
settled in areas with higher overall employment rates of non-Western immigrants and co-nationals had a
greater probability of finding employment, and had higher annual earnings if employed. 23
The implications for place-based policies are potentially complex, because racial mismatch or
racially stratified networks imply that job creation policies, per se, may do little to help residents in target
areas. Effective place-based policies may need to do more to exploit linkages between residents and
workers in targeted areas. 24
4. IDENTIFYING EFFECTS OF PLACE-BASED POLICIES
Empirical research on place-based policies focuses, naturally, on estimating the causal effects of
these policies on the outcomes of interest. In many respects, the econometric challenges to reliably
estimating these effects are similar to the standard program evaluation literature, such as the choice of
counterfactuals, and the potential endogeneity of where policies are adopted. 25 However, there are also a
number of issues that are more specific to the analysis of place-based policies. In this section, we discuss
these challenges and provide examples of how researchers have addressed them.
4.1. Measuring local areas where policies are implemented, and economic outcomes in those areas
One unique challenge is that place-based policies often apply in geographic locations that do not
directly map into geographic areas delineated in existing data sources. This issue poses a particular
challenge in research on enterprise zones. In California, for example, enterprise zone boundaries do not
follow boundaries of Census tracts, zip codes, etc., but are defined by streets and addresses. But because
of data availability, tracts or zip codes have often been used to approximate enterprise zone boundaries
(e.g., Bondonio and Greenbaum, 2007; O’Keefe, 2004). This introduces measurement error by incorrectly
assigning areas (and the workers or businesses in them) as inside or outside the zones (Papke, 1993).
Elvery (2009) notes that in California and Florida, if enterprise zones are defined as the areas
encompassing all zip codes that overlap with enterprise zones, then the resulting definitions are six times
larger than the actual zones, and less than half of the population residing in Census tracts that include
enterprise zones actually live in enterprise zones. Random incorrect classification of locations creates a
bias towards finding no effect of enterprise zones.
Neumark and Kolko (2010), in a study of California’s enterprise zones, develop a method of
23

Recent research on residential labor market networks using Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)
data, however, finds less evidence of this kind of ethnic stratification of residence-based labor market networks in
the United States (Hellerstein et al., 2014).
24
Ananat et al. (2013) suggest a potential link between racial mismatch or racially-stratified labor market networks
and agglomeration economies – presenting evidence that wages rise more with the density of employment in one’s
industry in the local labor market when measured in terms of workers of the same race and ethnic group.
25
See Baum-Snow and Ferreira, in this Handbook, for an overview of identification strategies used to uncover
causal effects in urban economics research.

21

precisely identifying enterprise zones boundaries over time. They start with official lists of street address
ranges and the years they were included in the zone, and then use GIS software to precisely identify the
location of enterprise zones (and appropriate control groups) in each year of their sample.
Once boundaries are defined, data are needed on outcomes of interest within those boundaries
and in control areas. Again, this can pose a challenge depending on the geographic information available
on workers or firms. Estimating effects for California requires identifying the location of business
establishments as inside or outside enterprise zones, because enterprise zone benefits for businesses are
based on this location. Neumark and Kolko use a new data source – the National Establishment TimeSeries (NETS) (see, e.g., Neumark et al., 2005a) – which provides exact street addresses for
establishments in every year. These addresses are then geocoded to obtain precise longitude and latitude,
which permits the placement of these establishments in quite exact locations within their enterprise zone
(and control area) maps.
4.2. Accounting for selective geographic targeting of policies
A second challenge is selecting appropriate control groups for place-based policies. Again, the
research on enterprise zones, in which there are three approaches used, is instructive. The first is to
identify control areas that are similar to the enterprise zones but where enterprise zone policies did not
apply. The second is to use areas that were targeted for enterprise zone designation, but where enterprise
zones were either not created or were created at a future date. And the third is to try to deal more
explicitly with the endogenous selection of areas for zone designation.
Some studies have used broad control areas where enterprise zone policies did not apply, such as
the remaining area of states that are not in enterprise zones (Peters and Fisher, 2002; Lynch and Zax,
2011). However, such broad control areas seem unlikely to provide a valid counterfactual for enterprise
zone designation. Others have matched enterprise zone areas to control areas based on characteristics of
the zones or simply nearness to the zone. O’Keefe (2004) and Elvery (2009) match Census tracts that
approximate enterprise zone boundaries to other Census tracts using propensity score matching based on
residential and employment characteristics. Of course, propensity score matching does not account for
unobservable sources of differences in job growth that may underlie zone designation. None of these
studies makes use of comparisons of areas observed both before and after enterprise zones were
established, while other studies use these matching strategies with before and after comparisons. 26
More recent research tries to construct more reliable control groups by using more detailed
geographic information on narrow areas. Billings (2009) uses a spatial discontinuity model, looking at
employment growth in Colorado’s enterprise zones within ¼ mile of the zone boundary and using the

26

See Papke (1994), Greenbaum and Engberg (2004), and Ham et al. (2011).

22

area outside the zones within ¼ mile of the zone boundary as the control group.27 Neumark and Kolko
(2010) use their detailed GIS maps of California’s enterprise zones to pick out a very narrow control ring
(1,000 feet wide) around the zone, on the presumption that economic conditions, aside from the effects of
the enterprise zone, are likely to be very similar in the treated enterprise zone area and the closely
surrounding control area. However, nearby and narrow control areas could be subject to displacement
effects relative to enterprise zones; this issue is discussed in Section 4.4.
Geographic proximity of control areas does not preclude unobserved differences relative to
treatment areas that were the basis of zone designation in the first place. For example, zone areas could
have been selected based on responsiveness to zone incentives, in which case the estimation may identify
the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT), rather than the average treatment effect (ATE), and the
ATT may provide much less reliable guidance to policymakers about the effects of extending the policy
to untreated areas. Of course invalid controls could imply that even the ATT is not identified.
A second approach that may better account for selection of zones on unobservables is to use as
controls geographic areas that were considered or qualified for the treatment, or even designated as zones
in other periods. For example, Neumark and Kolko (2010) exploit the expansion of zones in their data to
compare changes in employment when an area of a zone is designated relative to contemporaneous
changes in areas that were designated earlier or will be designated later. To illustrate, Figure 1 is an
example from Neumark and Kolko’s study, showing the map for the Santa Ana enterprise zone,
displaying the initially-designated streets, the expansion streets, and the 1,000-foot control ring discussed
earlier. Identifying effects from comparisons to areas designated at other times can be more reliable than
using close areas as controls because it has been demonstrated through the policy process that the areas in
the control groups that were included in the zone at some point during the sample period were appropriate
for enterprise zone designation. Busso et al. (2013) use similar strategies, comparing residential
employment outcomes in Census tracts that became part of federal Empowerment Zones with outcomes
in Census tracts that submitted unsuccessful applications to be designated Empowerment Zones, and –
paralleling Neumark and Kolko more closely – doing comparisons with areas that become parts of zones
in the future.
[Figure 1 here]
Hanson (2009) also compares employment outcomes in federal Empowerment Zones with
unsuccessful applicant areas. However, he also instruments for zone applicant success based on the
political influence of the zone’s Congressional representative. The potential advantage of this approach is
that nearby control areas or areas that applied for but were not awarded Empowerment Zone status may

27

Freedman (2012) exploits a discontinuity based on poverty eligibility thresholds for tracts.

23

differ in unmeasured ways that bias the estimated effects. An instrumental variable that predicts which
zones succeeded, but does not directly affect the outcomes of interest, mitigates this problem.
4.3. Identifying effects of specific policies when areas are subject to multiple interventions simultaneously
Place-based policies like enterprise zones may cover areas that are also affected by other
geographically-targeted policies, sometimes run by different levels of government, and these need to be
separated out to estimate the effects of any one policy. Many U.S. cities, for example, have city- or statedesignated redevelopment areas that encourage property development to remove urban blight. In
California, as an example, hundreds of city and county redevelopment areas overlapped with or were
adjacent to enterprise zones in the period covered by the Neumark and Kolko study, and hence could
affect both treatment and control areas. In addition, the three federal programs – Renewal Communities,
Enterprise Communities, and Empowerment Zones – with a variety of benefits similar to those in state
enterprise zones, overlapped with state enterprise zones.
To address this problem, the study also used digitized maps of the areas affected by
redevelopment policies and federal enterprise zones, and incorporated separate identification of these
areas into the analysis to isolate the effects of state enterprise zones. Some other studies of enterprise
zones pay attention to overlapping federal and state zones, but not redevelopment areas.
4.4. Accounting for displacement effects
A potentially serious problem in studying the effects of place-based policies is spillover effects
between areas. For example, evidence that enterprise zone designation led to job growth might be
regarded quite differently depending on whether the zone created new jobs, or employers moved from one
area to another to take advantage of enterprise zone credits – which reflects negative spillovers on other
areas. Earlier research on U.K. enterprise zones found that between 50 and 80 percent of enterprise zone
businesses had relocated into the zones, prompting the British government to phase out the program
(Papke, 1993). Of course, relocation does not necessarily imply that a program has not succeeded,
because there may have been a number of reasons – reviewed earlier – to try to increase employment in a
particular area even at the expense of other areas. Regardless, policymakers should value information on
whether job creation in target areas comes at the expense of other areas, or via net job creation.
There can also be positive spillovers. For example, an enterprise zone may increase traffic in a
geographic area, spurring demand and hence job growth in nearby areas. In this case, for some research
designs we might find no effect of enterprise zones on employment – or the estimate may simply be
biased towards zero – because we are comparing enterprise zones to neighboring areas that were
positively affected.
It is difficult to obtain estimates net of spillovers. The usual difference-in-differences approach
captures relative effects of a policy on treatment versus control groups, with the assumption that the

24

change over time in the control group was not due to the effect of the policy. One way to garner evidence
on spillover effects is to posit differences across control areas in the likelihood of these effects arising.
For example, it seems plausible that positive spillovers are confined to a very narrow geographic area
near enterprise zone boundaries. Neumark and Kolko (2010) therefore compare results using a 2,500-foot
control ring instead of a 1,000-foot control ring, to see if the estimates of employment effects are stronger
using the larger ring in which positive spillovers should be less apparent. Similarly, they revert to the
1,000-foot control ring but exclude a 100-foot buffer (in any direction) from the enterprise zone
boundary. It is less clear, though, that these kinds of approaches are useful in ruling out negative
spillovers, since these spillovers may also come from further away, with employers making longerdistance moves (although still perhaps within the same city) to take advantage of zone benefits.
4.5. Studying effects of discretionary policies targeting specific firms
Some place-based policies have a discretionary nature – for example, providing subsidies to
specific firms to boost investment and employment. Such interventions may be restricted to businesses
within targeted geographic areas, but the key characteristic – that not all businesses within the area
receive the support – poses an additional identification problem. One question is whether such subsidies
are effective in generating additional activity in recipient firms. However, comparisons to non-recipient
firms can be problematic because both the decision to apply for subsidies and the award decision can be
endogenous. Those firms that apply may be performing poorly or anticipating a future deterioration in
performance, or non-recipient firms may be judged by government officials to offer less scope for
generating additional investment or employment. Hence, non-applicant and non-recipient firms will likely
have different characteristics than recipient firms, some of them unobservable.
A second question is whether discretionary policies generate benefits external to the recipient
firm at the area level. Again, it may be difficult to find suitable controls outside the eligible areas, if those
areas in which discretionary subsidies are available have been selected based on specific economic
characteristics. In addition, there may be spillovers (positive or negative) from the policy to nonsubsidized firms both within and outside the eligible areas.
Criscuolo et al. (2012) analyze the effects of a discretionary subsidy policy – Regional Selective
Assistance (RSA) in Great Britain. The authors exploit the fact that the set of areas eligible for
discretionary subsidies are revised every seven years according to European Union (EU) state aid rules.
Under these rules subsidies could only be provided in designated areas, and then only up to an areaspecific maximum subsidy rate. Area eligibility is based on a set of criteria such as GDP per capita, which
are measured relative to the EU average. A range of indicators of economic characteristics are used, and
hence areas can change eligibility status due to changes in the prevailing economic conditions in an area,
changes in the indicators used by the European Union to determine eligibility, and changes in economic

25

conditions in other EU member states which will affect the EU average used as a benchmark. The final
two of these reasons can be considered exogenous with respect to unobserved characteristics of the areas.
To address the issue that firm eligibility is endogenous with respect to the characteristics of the
area in which it is located, the authors use specific features of the eligibility rules as instruments for
receipt of an RSA grant. In the estimation, they instrument a post-treatment plant- or firm-level indicator
of participation in the program (i.e., grant receipt) with an area-time varying measure of the maximum
subsidy rate allowable under EU regulations. They also include plant- or firm-level fixed effects to try to
deal with the endogeneity of participation, although this will not deal with problems of time-varying
unobservables. This IV strategy likely provides estimates of the ATT, for example in terms of the effects
of the subsidy on investment and employment. They also estimate reduced-form specifications, for
example regressing log employment at the plant level on the instrument – the maximum subsidy rate at
the area level – providing an estimate of the intention to treat effect (all plants in an area where the
maximum subsidy rate is non-zero being in principle eligible to apply).
The authors also use data aggregated to the area level, for example on employment, to capture
any effects due to net entry, in addition to any changes in plant employment at the intensive margin, or
due to spillovers across plants within areas. To do this they regress area-level outcomes on the maximum
grant rate determined by the policy rules. They also address the issue of between-area spillovers, for
example due to a geographic shift in area eligibility that might lead to displacement of employment to
newly eligible areas from contiguous locations, by using a broader geographic aggregation of the data.
Greenstone et al. (2010), as discussed above, provide evidence on the magnitude of
agglomeration externalities generated by the opening of a new manufacturing plant. The paper provides a
partial evaluation of the benefits of discretionary subsidies offered by local governments in the United
States, by examining effects on incumbent plants’ TFP growth, net plant entry, and area labor costs. As a
novel identification strategy to deal with the endogeneity of the location decision, they exploit
information on runner-up localities that narrowly lost out on each plant opening, and use these as a
counterfactual paired with the winning location. In terms of observed, pre-plant opening trends, the
treated and counterfactual sites are highly comparable, much more so than a comparison to all other
possible locations. They argue that the use of these near-miss locations as controls should eliminate
problems of omitted variables that might otherwise bias comparisons of outcomes across treated and a
wide set of non-treated locations. 28 For example, if location choices were made based on unobservable
characteristics that also positively affect TFP growth, then this form of unobserved heterogeneity across

28

The identifying assumption is that, conditional on observables, outcomes in the winning and near-miss areas
would have evolved identically in the absence of the new plant opening. This rules out other unobserved area-time
varying shocks that might differentially affect the paired locations.

26

locations would lead to upward-biased estimates of the effect of a new plant opening on this outcome.
The use of paired counterfactuals can be considered as a form of one-to-one matching, but with the
matches determined directly from information on firms’ decision-making processes. The authors estimate
spillover effects on incumbent plants’ TFP in treated counties by estimating plant-level production
functions that include dummy variables for each winner-loser county pairing to ensure that identification
of spillovers in the period after plant opening is within each matched pair.
A number of papers evaluate the effects of Law 488/1992, a capital investment subsidy program
in Italy, by exploiting a specific feature of the grant allocation process. Applications to the scheme are
given a normalized score on the basis of known criteria and then ranked on their score within each region
and year. Each region has a pre-allocated amount of expenditure under the program each year, and hence
projects are funded in rank order until the funding pot is exhausted. These papers exploit the lowerranked, unfunded projects as a control group to address the endogeneity of participation. In a sense this
approach using “near-miss” applicants is analogous to the near-miss locations used by Greenstone et al.
(2010) to deal with the endogenous selection of locations.
The fact that unsuccessful projects received a lower ranking means that they differ in their
characteristics from the successful applicants. To control for observable characteristics that affect the
probability of receiving a subsidy, Bernini and Pellegrini (2011) exploit detailed data on the actual
variables used to construct the project-ranking scores. They use this as part of a propensity score
matching exercise to control for selection on observables, and to ensure common support in observable
characteristics across the treatment and control groups. In addition, the authors argue that the fact that the
ranking is carried out within regions and years, and that each region has a different budget for the
program in each year, generates exogenous variation for a pooled sample of all applicants in the
likelihood of being above or below the funding cut off across these dimensions. Start-up projects are also
given priority, and hence for an existing firm making an application the probability of being funded will
also depend on the number of start-ups applying for funding in their host region and year. Hence it is
quite possible for firms with very similar characteristics, and very similar scores, to receive the subsidy in
some region-years but not in others.
To control for unobservable time-invariant characteristics the authors employ a difference-indifferences approach using data on firms in their pre-application year compared to the year after the
subsidized project is completed. Clearly for the control group who do not receive the subsidy the date at
which the project would have been completed needs to be approximated. This is imputed using
information on the average completion time, by year, industry, and investment type, from the subsidy
recipients. The authors also argue that spillover effects from subsidized to non-subsidized firms are
unlikely to confound the estimates since subsidized firms make up a very small fraction (around 3

27

percent) of manufacturing firms in the eligible regions.
Bronzini and de Blasio (2006) also look at the effects of Law 488 using a difference-indifferences estimator and using applicants who did not receive a subsidy as controls. Since they find that
those firms that score highly and receive a subsidy are a non-random sample of all applicants, they try to
address this problem by also adopting an approach akin to a regression discontinuity (RD) design (see
Baum-Snow and Ferreira, this Handbook, and Lemieux and Lee, 2010). To do this they use narrower
groups of treated and control firms that are close to the funding cut-off threshold and that have similar
scores in the ranking process. These groups are defined as bands, for example firms within plus or minus
30 or 10 percentiles of the ranking distribution of firms around the cut-off threshold. Pellegrini and
Muccigrosso (2013) also aim to identify the impact of Law 488 on the survival of recipient firms using an
RD approach. They argue that receipt or non-receipt of a subsidy close to the budget cut-off point, as in
Bernini and Pellegrini (2011), can essentially be considered as random.
4.6. Relative versus absolute effects
A final issue is whether empirical research can shed light on aggregate effects of place-based
policies, and in particular whether they result in a zero-sum game, simply relocating activity spatially.
Applications of panel data estimators (or other methods of causal inference) can only identify the relative
effect of the policy on treated versus control areas, where the latter are by definition assumed to be
unaffected by the policy. Hence, such approaches cannot provide information about potential effects of
the policy on the control areas, which would let us determine whether the policy had a net positive effect
or not across both treated and control areas. Studies that look at displacement or spillover effects (as
discussed in Section 4.4) can tell us something about impacts on areas not treated directly, but they
typically estimate effects for a nearby (often small) area, and to do so require some other control area that
is in turn assumed to be unaffected by the policy.
It possible to make more headway on aggregate effects by relying more on theory. For example,
as discussed in Section 2, if there are agglomeration externalities that are nonlinear, then moving
economic activity can increase aggregate output (assuming activity moves to locations where the
externalities are greater). Some evidence on this question comes up in Kline and Moretti’s (2014)
evaluation of the Tennessee Valley Authority – a very large-scale place-based policy. As a second
example, with enough theoretical structure to estimate welfare effects, one can get evidence on the
aggregate effects of a policy (analogous to what we can learn from structural versus non-structural
approaches in other areas of economics). Busso et al.’s (2013) analysis of federal Empowerment Zones
presents such an approach and estimates.
5. EVIDENCE ON IMPACTS OF POLICY INTERVENTIONS
We now come to the evidence from evaluations of place-based policies. We discuss a variety of

28

types of place-based policies, beginning with enterprise zones. One common theme that emerges across
all these types of intervention is that precise policy design matters for the behavioral responses that the
policy ultimately delivers, and that some theoretical characterizations of place-based policies as simply
setting an optimal city size, or delivering a substantial, but temporary policy or “big push” that could
generate longer-run, self-sustaining gains in the presence of agglomeration economies, are far removed
from the multi-faceted set of incentives that place-based policies provide in practice.
5.1. Enterprise zones
The results from earlier studies of enterprise zones varied widely. Many studies failed to find
employment effects of enterprise zones, although some of the work (e.g., O’Keefe, 2004; and research
reviewed in Wilder and Rubin, 1996) concluded that there are positive employment effects, at least in the
short-run. Relatively recent overviews of the literature conclude that it is difficult to find evidence of
positive employment effects of enterprise zones (Lynch and Zax, 2011; Elvery, 2009; Ham et al. 2011).
However, in the past few years there have been numerous studies of enterprise zones making
creative use of both data and econometric methods to overcome some of the empirical problems involved
in evaluating place-based policies in general and enterprise zones in particular. In this section, we discuss
this recent research. We begin by discussing the Neumark and Kolko (2010) study of California enterprise
zones as an example addressing many of these problems. We then turn to concurrent or more recent
evidence, highlighting how other studies address the same research challenges, and also trying to resolve
what the extensive new literature says and identify the important questions for further research.
As the earlier discussion indicated, the multiple challenges that arise in studying place-based
policies imply that the details of the analysis can be quite important. Hence, in some cases we delve into
these details to illustrate the issues that arise and how researchers have addressed these issues and the
potential consequences of some of these choices; these are lessons that apply beyond the specific study of
enterprise zones. In other cases, the discussion is more cursory and one has to refer back to the original
paper for more details.
5.1.1. The California Enterprise Zone Program
California’s enterprise zone program had multiple goals – primarily attracting jobs and
businesses and raising employment, but also reducing poverty and unemployment and raising incomes in
target areas. The program provided a variety of tax incentives to businesses located in designated areas to
try to encourage the hiring of economically disadvantaged workers and to spur the creation of businesses.
The largest incentive accounting for the lion’s share of the cost was a state tax credit equal to 50 percent
of qualified wages (up to 150 percent of the minimum wage) in the first year, falling by 10 percentage
points each year until reaching zero after five years. The main criterion for getting the credit was hiring
workers who resided in a Targeted Employment Area (TEA) – a Census tract with low income. However,

29

TEA residents qualified for the hiring credit regardless of the worker’s characteristics, and many TEA
residents in mixed-income neighborhoods are not disadvantaged. Nevertheless, given that disadvantaged
workers earn lower wages, the tax credit could result in a larger relative reduction in the cost of hiring
low-skill labor.
Localities applied to the Department of Housing and Community Development to have a
geographic area designated as an enterprise zone. Eligibility criteria include job-generating capacity as
well as the level of economic distress measured along a number of dimensions. The area also had to
include an industrial or commercial area “contiguous or adjacent to” the distressed area. In addition, the
application for enterprise zone status required the preparation of an economic development plan
(including marketing, finance and administration of the plan, other local incentives, infrastructure
development plans, and information management). 29 The hiring credit was paid to firms located in the
enterprise zone, but businesses in an enterprise zone could claim hiring credits for employees living in a
TEA, which need not be coincident with the enterprise zone. Hence the program has to be evaluated for
businesses located in the zones (or TEA residents), rather than zone residents.
As noted above, Neumark and Kolko exploit the expansion of original zones to construct control
areas, while alternative control areas come from very narrow geographic rings around the zone. They
define the original zone and each expansion area, as well as the control rings (when used) as unique
“subzones,” constructing an observation on each subzone-year pair. They specify regression models for
log employment, which include a dummy variable for enterprise zone status and dummy variables for
each subzone and year; the year effects account for the possibility that enterprise zones were established
in periods of either particularly high or low employment growth across all of the regions in the sample.
They also include a full set of enterprise zone-year interactions, which allow for an arbitrary pattern of
changes over time across the broad area covered by a zone, its expansions, and the associated control ring
(when included). Given that the effect of enterprise zone designation is identified off of subzone-level
variation, even with these arbitrary changes over time for each enterprise zone, the effect of enterprise
zone designation is identified. They also estimate models including subzone-specific linear time trends,
and models that allow enterprise zone designation to shift the growth rate of employment.
Other geographically-targeted policies are accounted for in two steps. First, subzone-year pairs
are redefined to represent status with regard not only to whether and when they became part of an
enterprise zone but also whether and when they became part of a redevelopment area or federal zone,
resulting in far more subzones. Second, the specifications are modified to include dummy variables
indicating whether each subzone is in a redevelopment area or federal zone in each year.

29

The California enterprise zone program was substantially changed in 2013, including eliminating the hiring credit.

30

Across a variety of specifications, there is no evidence that enterprise zones affect employment.
The estimates (summarized in Table 2, along with the estimates from other studies discussed here) are
small, statistically insignificant, and negative as often as they are positive. The statistical power of the
evidence is modest, as the confidence intervals for the estimated employment effects are rather large. The
baseline model for employment was also estimated with many leads and lags of the enterprise zone
dummy variable, to see whether, for example, enterprise zones tended to be established in areas that had
transitory downturns in employment relative to other areas, in which case the finding of no effect would
be strengthened (because the mean reversion would look like a positive treatment effect). Alternatively, if
zones are established in areas doing particularly well just before designation, perhaps because such areas
have better organized constituents for capturing an enterprise zone, then the estimated effects from the
simple model might fail to detect longer-run positive effects of enterprise zone designation on the rate of
job growth. Similarly, the many lags allow the data to reveal whether effects of enterprise zones emerge
over the longer term. The resulting estimates do not exhibit any evidence of leading or lagged effects, but
instead cement the view that enterprise zones in California did not affect employment.
[Table 2 here]
If the enterprise zone program has positive spillovers, encouraging employment growth not only
within zone boundaries but just outside zone boundaries as well, then there might be no evidence of an
effect of enterprise zones on employment because enterprise zones are compared to immediately
neighboring areas. But the evidence is similar using the larger (2,500-foot) control rings. What about
negative spillovers, with enterprise zones pulling jobs and businesses away from nearby areas? The
similarity of results with and without control rings undermines this possibility. Moreover, such negative
spillovers would tend to produce evidence that enterprise zones do encourage job growth relative to
control areas. Thus, if there were negative spillovers, the conclusion that there are not positive
employment effects would only be reinforced. Finally, in the analysis accounting for the overlap between
state enterprise zones and redevelopment areas or federal zones, there is similarly no evidence that
enterprise zones have positive employment effects, whether or not they are combined with these other
local policies.
Enterprise zone programs vary in the level and nature of tax credits and other incentives, as well
as in other forms of assistance available to zone businesses – some of which are difficult to quantify and
evaluate. This heterogeneity across programs limits how much one can generalize from the study of a
single program, and heterogeneous effects could help explain why the extensive research literature on the
employment effects of enterprise zones is not unanimous in the conclusions it reaches.
Indeed earlier work provided suggestive evidence of substantial heterogeneity in the effects of
enterprise zones, both within and across state enterprise zone programs (Dowall, 1996; Elling and

31

Sheldon, 1991; Erickson and Friedman, 1990), and evidence that enterprise zones were more effective
when tax incentives were “complemented by more traditional supports for economic development (e.g.,
technical assistance, location/site analysis, special staffing)” (Wilder and Rubin, 1996, p. 478). This led
Ladd (1994) to suggest that supply-side tax reductions, which are generally uniform across individual
zones, are ineffective, whereas interventionist components like technical assistance account for whatever
success enterprise zone programs have (p. 202).
In a follow-up study, Kolko and Neumark (2010) explore the associations between the jobcreating effects of California enterprise zones and (1) factors relating to the areas in which enterprise
zones are established and (2) how enterprise zones are administered. The research used a survey of
enterprise zone administrators that asked detailed questions about how active the zone was in: using
marketing; amending zoning or other local regulations; training workers or operating hiring centers;
facilitating earning tax credits; encouraging the building of additional infrastructure; and offering other
tax incentives, credits, or discounts on public services at the local level. The analysis uses these responses,
as well as information on characteristics of enterprise zone locations that could influence the effectiveness
of the program, such as employment density, industry mix, and local demographics.
The estimates point to variation in program effectiveness across individual zones, which has
potential implications for features of enterprise zone programs that policymakers and administrators
might encourage via both legislation and the selection of sites as enterprise zones. Enterprise zones appear
to have a more favorable effect on employment in zones that have a lower share of manufacturing and in
zones where managers report doing more marketing and outreach activities. Somewhat surprisingly, a
strong focus on helping firms pursue hiring credits made available by the enterprise zone program appears
to run counter to job-creation efforts, likely because these activities focused more on claiming the tax
credits retroactively than on creating jobs currently. 30 One implication of these findings is that the overall
evidence from the literature on enterprise zones may be too pessimistic, and that it may be possible to find
ways to make enterprise zones more effective at creating jobs.
Elvery (2009) reaches similar conclusions to Neumark and Kolko (2010) for California. He
focuses on the effects of enterprise zones designated in the mid-1980s on employment of zone residents in
the 1986-1990 period. His method matches tracts that are in zones or substantially overlap with them to
non-zone tracts using propensity score methods. Elvery also estimates a neighborhood component of
employment to capture employment differences across neighborhoods that are not related to the
characteristics of individuals in those neighborhoods, and also estimates the effect of enterprise zone
designation on this neighborhood component, which leads to more precision.
30

Moreover, until reforms in 2007 “cross-vouchering” was allowed, whereby one zone could collect fees for helping
businesses from other zones get credits.

32

Elvery finds no evidence of positive effects of enterprise zones on employment – in this case
viewed in terms of employment of residents (rather than employment at enterprise zone establishments as
in Neumark and Kolko (2010), which is more appropriate given the distinction between the zones and
TEAs). Indeed his point estimates are always negative, ranging from about −0.4 to −2.6 percentage points
(not statistically significant). Elvery does impose some sample restrictions based on age (18-55) and, in
some analyses looks at men only, although it is difficult to imagine that positive effects among the groups
he excluded could possibly offset the negative point estimates he reports.
5.1.2. Other recent evidence for U.S. state-level and federal programs
A number of recent studies of enterprise zones in the United States address the empirical
challenges in different ways, and take up different substantive issues, with conclusions that sometimes
vary. Freedman’s (2013) analysis of the Texas enterprise zone program is a good example of a study that
addresses many of the key challenges in the evaluation of enterprise zones. First, the study exploits an
unusual feature of the Texas program to construct an appropriate counterfactual, because Census block
groups were designated as enterprise zones mechanically, based on whether the poverty rate in the 2000
Census was equal to 20 percent or greater. Freedman therefore uses a regression discontinuity around the
20 percent cutoff to estimate effects on job growth (his main focus), as well as other outcomes.
Freedman also pays careful attention to estimating effects for those who should actually be
affected by the policy – which is obviously important (as also suggested with respect to California) but
not always as simple as it seems. The Texas program has incentives for hiring zone residents, but the
firms that hire them do not have to be located in the zone. Rather, employers are designated as “Enterprise
Projects” that can claim benefits (sales and use tax refunds of up to $1.25 million over five years) in
return for committing to hire a certain share of employees from enterprise zones or who are economically
disadvantaged. Freedman suggests that firms are more likely to target workers based on where they live
because that is much easier to verify. As a result of these program features, he argues, the hiring effects
should be more pronounced for zone residents than for establishments in the zone, and Freedman
examines both by using data from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics
(LEHD) program, which has information on workers’ place of residence and place of work. Freedman
also accounts for overlapping state and federal enterprise zones, and, as discussed below, presents some
analyses meant to avoid the effects of spillovers.
Freedman focuses most of his analysis on block groups in a narrow band around the 20 percent
poverty threshold, showing that there are no clear breaks around this threshold in characteristics of block
groups other than zone status, which helps to bolster the RD design. The estimates for resident
employment indicate a jump in the annual growth rate of employment of 1 to 2 percent, which is fairly
large when cumulated over a number of years. For workplace employment the evidence is less clear,

33

consistent with Freedman’s conjecture that the effects should be less evident for employment based on
workplace location, although the point estimates are sometimes larger, raising the possibility that
something else was occurring in the designated zones. The study also breaks out results by broad
industry, and broad pay categories, with perhaps the most interesting finding that the employment effects
are concentrated in jobs paying less than $40,000, although because there was not a hiring credit that is a
larger share of the pay for low-wage workers, it is not clear why this would necessarily be expected. The
paper does not provide any of the usual RD figures for this analysis, however.
Freedman reports analyses excluding control block groups within narrow rings around zones, to
avoid possibly overstating the effects because of negative spillovers. Almost none of the estimates are
significant for either employment measure when this is done, and in some cases the positive effects on
resident employment become smaller or even negative, consistent with the positive findings being driven
more by relocation between nearby areas.
Freedman concludes that “EZ designation has positive effects on resident employment” (p. 340).
We are a bit less confident in this conclusion, and the qualification that the effects may largely reflect
relocation is important. Nonetheless, this is clearly a very careful study that appropriately addresses the
many challenges that arise in drawing causal inferences about the effects of enterprise zones.
Freedman also present results using the same research design to look at other outcomes, using
American Community Survey (ACS) data. Regression estimates indicate a statistically significant 11
percent increase in median housing values at the 20 percent poverty threshold, as well as a 4 percent
decline in the share of housing units that are vacant. The point estimates also indicate an increase in
population and a decrease in the share black, although these estimates are not close to statistically
significant. At the same time the data indicate no change in median household income. One interpretation
– although the evidence can only be taken with a grain of salt given the lack of significant findings – is
that enterprise zone designation led to some compositional shifts in the population, and that the main
effect seems to have been an increase in land value – a finding that arises in other studies, some of which
suggest that this may be a principal effect of enterprise zones (e.g., Hanson, 2009).31
Ham et al. (2011) study state and federal programs, and conclude that the programs “have
positive, statistically significant, impacts on local labor markets in terms of the unemployment rate, the
poverty rate, the fraction with wage and salary income, and employment” (p. 779). Their state-level
analysis looks separately at California, Florida, Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, and Oregon, as well as
an aggregation of seven other states that have relatively few tracts in zones. As they note, enterprise zone
benefits vary widely across states. For example, the hiring credit – which we would think would be most
31

Evidence of effects of enterprise zones on commercial property might be more compelling. Burnes (2012)
provides evidence of capitalization of enterprise zone benefits in California into commercial real estate prices.

34

relevant to job creation – was worth $35,000 over five years in California, and was also large in Florida.
At the other extreme, Ohio offered $300 per new employee and Oregon offered no hiring credit. In the
federal zones, the main credit was for hiring, with both programs offering a credit of up to $2,400 for 1824 year-olds for the first year of employment, and Empowerment Zones also offering a credit of up to
$3,000 per employed resident working in the zone for up to 10 years, with the credit declining over time
(Busso et al., 2013).
Ham et al.’s econometric approach to the selection problem is to compute a triple-difference
estimate. Because they focus only on zones established in the 1990s (or expansions of zones that took
place in the same period), their baseline first difference is the difference in outcomes between 2000 and
1990 in the tracts where zones were established. They then subtract from the 2000-1990 difference the
1990-1980 difference, to pick up any differences in linear trends. From the double difference for tracts
where zones were established they then subtract off the corresponding double difference for three
different controls (always using the same years): the nearest tract that was not in a zone; the average of
contiguous tracts to the zone that were not in the zone; and the average of all other non-enterprise zone
tracts in the state. This estimator can be interpreted as allowing the treatment and control zones to have
distinct intercepts and linear trends, but common higher-order trends.
To address overlapping programs, Ham et al. restrict attention to tracts affected by only one of the
three programs during the 1990s. And to address spillovers they estimate treatment effects for the nearest
non-enterprise zone tract to each enterprise zone tract, using the second-nearest non-enterprise zone tract
as the comparison. A potential downside of this approach is that the comparison tract (or tracts) for the
actual enterprise zone tract and the tract where there are potentially spillovers is not the same – in contrast
to comparing both to a more-distant tract that clearly was not affected by enterprise zone designation.
The results Ham et al. report for the combined (average) effect of state enterprise zones and for
the two types of federal zones are almost always strong and positive. As summarized in Table 2, across
the three types of zones, the authors generally find positive and significant effects on the outcomes they
consider. Moreover, they conclude that spillover effects are if anything positive, although in general the
evidence is statistically weak and sometimes points in the other direction; certainly there is no strong
indication of negative spillovers. At the same time, some features of their estimates are surprising and
hard to interpret. First, looking at the estimates for the federal zones, and for the state zones averaging
across all the states they consider (which is what Table 2 reports), the estimates are often implausibly
large, such as an increase in employment of around 34 percent from federal Empowerment Zones, and a
reduction in the poverty rate of 20.3 percentage points from federal Enterprise Communities. More
generally, the positive effects they estimate for Enterprise Communities are surprising, given that other
researchers regard Enterprise Community benefits as inconsequential relative to Empowerment Zone

35

benefits (Busso et al., 2013; Hanson and Rohlin, 2013).
Second, the cross-state variation in estimated effects is surprising. The estimated employment
effect for California is small and negative, whereas only for Ohio is there a significant positive effect. Yet
California had a huge hiring credit, whereas Ohio’s was only $300. And Oregon, which has the secondlargest point estimate for the employment effect, had no hiring credit. They do estimate a large
employment effect for Florida (not statistically significant), and Florida has a large hiring credit; yet
Elvery’s (2009) estimates for Florida for the previous decade are consistently negative. 32 To increase
precision, Ham et al. present estimates pooling the data across states. But the large policy differences
across state enterprise zone programs make this questionable. If one accepted the constrained estimate,
one would be equally likely to believe it applied with no hiring credit or a $35,000 hiring credit.
These kinds of findings indicate that it would be useful for future research to try to tie the effects
of enterprise zone policies to features of those policies, and exploit variation in the generosity of the
policy to a greater degree in evaluation. This could include information on the value of hiring credits as
well as other features that would make such policies more likely to lead to employment increases, such as
requiring that the number of employees grow in order for firms to qualify for incentives. One possibility,
although it cannot reconcile all the conflicting findings, is that the effects of enterprise zones arise from
something other than hiring credits; this issue resurfaces in research focusing on federal Empowerment
Zones, to which we turn next.
Busso et al. (2013) study the effect of federal Empowerment Zones. They compare outcomes in
the six urban communities that were awarded Empowerment Zones with the full range of benefits and
credits, to matched tracts of rejected zone applicant areas as well as areas in future zones. The comparison
to future zones has parallels to Neumark and Kolko (2010), but differs from Ham et al. in using tracts
from other cities and states as controls, rather than nearby tracts.33 In addition to substantial hiring credits,
Empowerment Zones received block grants of up to $100 million for purposes such as business
assistance, infrastructure investment, and training programs. For nearly all of the cities in which zones
were rejected, Enterprise Community status was awarded instead; these areas did not receive major block
grants and had much more restricted hiring credits.34 Busso et al. use 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census data

32

Billings (2009) reports positive employment effects for new establishments in Colorado’s enterprise zones, based
on a border discontinuity design, looking at 1990-2000 data, even though Colorado’s hiring credit is minor (only
$500, increasing to $1,000 under some circumstances, plus a job training credit).
33
Busso et al. do not address overlap between federal and state enterprise zone programs. They also argue that
spillovers are unlikely to affect their estimates because most rejected and future zones are in different cities. But that
does not rule out their estimated effects reflecting relocation of businesses into a zone from nearby.
34
Note that these cities are included as controls (or potential controls, subject to trimming based on propensity score
matching) by Busso et al., whereas Ham et al. study these as a separate group of treated cities, and sometimes find
larger effects than for Empowerment Zones. Given the potentially large benefits suggested by the Busso et al.

36

including confidential information on where people live and where they work, by tract, and
establishment-level data from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) from 1987, 1992, and 2000. In
both cases they focus on the estimated impact of Empowerment Zones designated in 1993 on changes
over the 1990s.
Busso et al. find, in both the Census and LBD data, that Empowerment Zone designation appears
to generate substantial job growth – around 21.3 percent in the LBD, and 12.2 percent (not significant) in
the Census data. Moreover, the Census data suggest that there were increases in jobs in the zone held by
residents (17.6 percent), but less evidence of such effects for non-residents (6.4 percent, not significant).
The Census data also point to large increases in non-zone employment of zone residents (12.3 percent, not
significant), which suggests that there may have been effects due to factors other than zone incentives.
They also find evidence of positive wage effects on zone residents working in the zone (12
percent), but no effect on wages of non-residents working in the zone. The positive point estimate for
employment of non-residents in the zone is consistent with zone designation increasing productivity of
labor in the zone, but we should not necessarily expect a positive wage effect because the hiring credit
should not affect wages of non-zone residents relative to what they earn elsewhere (in equilibrium).
The fairly large estimated employment effects for zone residents working outside the zone
suggest that the effects on zone employment that Busso et al. estimate are not fully attributable to the
hiring credit. And some of the other estimates they report (in their Table 5) of employment effects on
non-zone residents – although not their preferred estimates – are quite large. The block grants are large,
and there is some evidence – although Busso et al. appropriately note that it is far from rigorous – that the
block grants (or something else about the zones) may have attracted large amounts of outside private
capital. This could have boosted employment in the zone of non-residents, and perhaps through spillovers
employment of zone residents outside the zone. If in fact the block grants played a major role, this may
help square the results of Busso et al. with those of Neumark and Kolko (2010), who find no effect of the
California enterprise zone program that very much concentrated its incentives on hiring credits.
The authors also develop a stylized general equilibrium model that captures the welfare
implications discussed in Section 2 – that the welfare gains from place-based policies depend on whether
many agents are inframarginal in their preferences over places to live and work, which is more likely
when their preferences are more heterogeneous. In their modeling framework, one can express the effects
on welfare in terms of elasticities of the various marginal responses one can estimate from the data (some
more precisely or convincingly than others). Adding estimated effects on housing prices, rents, and
population, their welfare calculations point to potentially large gains – in large part because an absence of
results, this may further reduce the plausibility of the results for Enterprise Communities found by Ham et al.

37

positive effects of zone designation on population or rents suggests that large migration responses do not
dissipate the gains of the program. Despite finding no effects on rents, Busso et al. find large effects on
house prices. They suspect these are inflated, in part because they do not find an effect on vacancies or on
out-migration, but other estimates still point to positive effects. And they suggest that rents may be sticky
in the short-run because of rent control. However, other evaluations of the Empowerment Zones discussed
below also report evidence of house price increases, as well as some evidence of compositional shifts
towards the more-skilled and a decline in vacancies, suggesting smaller welfare gains.
The authors estimate relatively little deadweight loss from the program, based on calculations and
auxiliary information used to estimate jobs created in the targeted areas, although they note that it is
difficult to pin down estimates of the number of jobs created in the zones, for zone workers, in the
covered sector. They estimate substantial welfare gains. The bulk of the estimated welfare gains come
from positive effects on house prices in the zones, raising the question of whether the program is
achieving its distributional goals. A key question is whether the block grants raised productivity of
workers in the zone. Under fairly small gains (0.5 percent) the benefits would outweigh the costs, but we
do not know the actual impact of these block grants. Another question is whether the evidence of positive
employment effects is attributable to effects of these block grants. It would therefore be useful to know
how these block grants are used and whether there is corroborating evidence that they had effects that
boosted employment – perhaps in conjunction with zone benefits – in light of other evidence that even
generous enterprise zone hiring credits do not increase employment. This discussion again emphasizes
that it would be useful, in future research, to try to parse out the effects of different dimensions of
enterprise zone policies.
Reynolds and Rohlin (2014) approach the problem of evaluating the welfare consequences of
these zones in a different way, by embedding the analysis in the quality of life framework standard to
urban economics, estimating the effects of Empowerment Zone designation on wages and rents in
hedonic equations. They find notable increases in what is termed the “quality of the business
environment,” which is captured in the summed effects on rents and wages. And they find modest
increases in the quality of life for individuals, captured in the difference between rents and wages (what
individuals are willing to pay to live in an area). Moreover, Reynolds and Rohlin present evidence
suggesting that the role of the wage credit is negligible. This is potentially important because the value of
the wage credit only lasts as long as the wage credit is available, whereas other sources of gains may be
more permanent, such as agglomeration effects from firms moving into the area.
The impact of federal Empowerment Zones has been considered in a number of other studies,
most of which are less favorable than the Busso et al. evaluation on many dimensions. Hanson (2009)
extends the analysis of Empowerment Zones by considering the endogenous selection from among the

38

applicants, which can induce selection on unobservables that is not addressed by matching methods. If
selection is based on unobserved improvements in economic conditions, there is a bias towards finding
positive effects. The results cannot be directly compared to those of Busso et al. because there are other
differences in both data and research design. It would likely be highly informative to explore the issues
discussed in the various papers assessing the federal program in a single study that held the data constant
and focused solely on the substantive issues addressed by different research designs.
Hanson instruments for zone designation using representation of the areas encompassing the
proposed zones on the powerful U.S. House Ways and Means Committee. Hanson considers possible
reasons the instrument may be invalid, such as if Ways and Means representation yields other economic
benefits (or costs) to the same districts. He presents some evidence suggesting this is not the case,
although that begs the question of why members exert power over zone designation but not other public
resources; and if members do exert other influences on economic outcomes, the IV would be invalid. The
estimates without instrumenting indicate that Empowerment Zone designation increased employment
significantly, by 2 percentage points, and reduced poverty significantly, also by 2 percentage points.
However, the IV estimates indicate no effect on employment and a positive but insignificant effect on
poverty. 35 Hanson concludes that “OLS specifications over-estimate the effect of the EZ program on
increasing resident employment and decreasing poverty” (p. 728).
Hanson and Rohlin (2013) attempt to directly estimate the spillover effects of federal
Empowerment Zones on nearby or similar areas – effects that could be negative or positive. They identify
tracts that are close to the Empowerment Zones, based on either geography or economic similarity, and
compare changes from before and after zone designation for the close tracts to what happened in tracts
that were close – on the same measure – to the rejected applicants in other cities (which became
Enterprise Communities). The evidence points to negative spillover effects. For establishment counts, the
estimated effect ranges from −15.2 to −36.5, with almost all of the estimates statistically significant. The
employment effects are more variable, and statistically significant about half the time; but many are in the
range of −300 to −600. 36 Moreover, when they estimate program effects based on comparisons of the
actual zone tracts to those that are close (using the same definitions), the positive effects are of about the
same magnitude in absolute as the negative spillover effects, suggesting that Empowerment Zones are, to
a first-order approximation, simply creating relocation of economic activity.
A recent study by Reynolds and Rohlin (2013) instead emphasizes that evidence of positive mean
35

Hanson also finds that OLS estimates of the effects on median residential property values indicate insignificant
increases of around $6,600, which is smaller than reported by Busso et al., or by Reynolds and Rohlin (2013),
discussed below. And his IV estimates are huge, indicating implausible increases of over $100,000.
36
The authors do not report the means needed to calculate percentage effects, but these are large numbers relative to
tract population, which average about 4,000

39

effects of Empowerment Zones mask distributional effects that are much less favorable to the
disadvantaged. Using similar but not identical methods and data, their results indicate that the zones were
advantageous to high-skilled, high-income people who to some extent likely moved into Empowerment
Zones because the program made these areas more attractive, and were neutral or even harmful to the
impoverished residents of these zones. They largely replicate the Busso et al. findings that Empowerment
Zone designation boosted mean wages and employment – although in their case this is documented in
terms of mean annual household income, which they estimate rose by around 11 percent. However, the
effect on median household income was only $250, and not statistically significant, and Empowerment
Zone designation had no detectable impact on the poverty rate, with an insignificant 1 percent decline.37
Moreover, they find increases in the proportion of households below one-half the poverty line,
commonly termed “extreme poverty,” with an estimated increase of 1.1 percentage points. When they
look at effects across bins of the household income distribution, the only sizable (and significant) increase
occurs for households earning at least $100,000 in income, which is unlikely to be directly attributable to
Empowerment Zone incentives (since the hiring credit represents a much larger percentage of pay for
low-wage workers), as well as an increase in the share of households with income less than $10,000.38
They also present evidence of increases in the share of people with higher education (some college or
more), most likely consistent with inflows of higher-skilled people into the areas designated as
Empowerment Zones – like the increased share with high incomes. Finally, when they break up the zones
into tracts with initially above- versus below-median poverty rates, they find that the positive income
effects (at $100,000 or above) occur solely in the lower-poverty tracts, whereas there is evidence (not
quite statistically significant) that the increase in the share of households with less than $10,000 in income
occurs in the high-poverty tracts. 39
It is hard to be definitive about what reflects an impact on residents versus a composition effect.
But it is unlikely that lower-income households would have replaced higher-income households in
response to Empowerment Zone designation. In contrast, the increase in education levels (and higher
incomes) seems likely to be a composition effect. Thus, these results present a more negative portrait of

37

Their data are closer to Hanson (2009), although their approach is closer to Busso et al. The poverty estimate is
not that different from Hanson, who found an insignificant 2 percentage point decline.
38
They have to use income categories that are fixed in nominal terms across the years. Clearly then there will be
some upward drift into higher-income bins from inflation. However, the authors argue that since this occurs in both
the Empowerment Zone and non-Empowerment Zone cities, it does not affect the triple-difference estimates.
39
The authors’ conclusions differ from those of Freedman (2013), who suggests that “Texas’ EZ Program had a
positive effect on communities, but one that was largely confined to households in the lower end of the income
distribution” (p. 340). However, this is not based on as comprehensive a distributional analysis as Reynolds and
Rohlin’s, but rather seems to derive from evidence of the positive effects discussed earlier, coupled with no effect on
median income in the ACS data.

40

federal Empowerment Zones as failing to deliver on the goal of helping low-income families in these
areas, and make an important addition to the growing literature on the importance of trying to assess the
distributional effects of public policies – especially those intended to influence the distribution of income
(e.g., Neumark et al., 2005b; Bitler et al., 2006). The apparently adverse distributional effects do not
necessarily contradict Busso et al.’s estimates of the value created by the Empowerment Zone program.
But they certainly raise questions about how to evaluate the gains from a social welfare perspective.
Moreover, if the zones generated housing price gains from gentrification, it is entirely possible that there
were offsetting housing price effects in areas that were unlikely to be weighted heavily as controls for the
tracts designated as Empowerment Zones, as there is no reason to think that the higher-skilled in-migrants
came from other disadvantaged areas.
An obvious question is why Empowerment Zone designation would have mainly benefitted
higher-income households, including perhaps enticing some to move into the zones. One possibility is
that the block grants were spent on things that had this gentrification effect, rather than on activities or
programs that increased job opportunities for low-income zone residents. There does not seem to be a lot
of information on how these funds were used, although a 2006 GAO study (U.S. General Accounting
Office, 2006) gives brief summaries of what each of the zones did, noting that some Empowerment Zones
and Enterprise Communities focused more on community development than economic opportunity. It
also cites some specific examples that could be viewed as having these types of effects, such as:
contributing financial assistance to a 275,000 square foot retail complex in Harlem; housing development
in Detroit; and cleaning up vacant lots in Philadelphia.
Whether one shares the positive assessment of Empowerment Zones of Busso et al. (2013), or the
more negative assessment of Reynolds and Rohlin (2013), it would be useful to learn more about how the
large amount of block grant funds were spent, since much other evidence on enterprise zones suggests
that the other components of the policy, like hiring credits, had little impact. Of course the Busso et al.
and Reynolds and Rohlin studies focused on only six Empowerment Zones, so it is difficult to imagine
making much headway based on differences among these zones – and suggesting also that we should be
wary of generalizing either set of results. However, the program was expanded to an additional 38 cities
beyond the original six that these two papers study, so there may be more that can be done with the
additional zones, although much smaller discretionary sums, rather than large block grants, were made
available to these additional cities (Mulock, 2002; U.S. General Accounting Office, 2006).
Another question is whether enterprise zone hiring credits could be made more effective
depending on how they are structured. For example, the hiring credits under California’s enterprise zone
rules did not do anything to require or verify job growth. In contrast, Ohio’s program requires
employment growth, and that employment was not reduced or a facility closed outside the enterprise zone

41

program to facilitate growth in the zone (although one might wonder how this is determined). It is
conceivable that these design features matter. For example, in related work on hiring credits generally,
which do specifically require job or payroll growth, Neumark and Grijalva (2013) find that allowing
states to claw back credits if the job creation goals are not met appears to make these credits more
effective. This kind of claw-back feature, with payment linked to specified job or investment targets, is
used in some of the discretionary subsidy policies discussed later.
5.1.3. Evidence from other countries
The French Zones Franches Urbaines (ZFU’s) are enterprise zones modeled similarly to U.S.
programs. Firms with fewer than 50 employees located within the zones’ boundaries are exempt, for five
years, from local business, corporate, and property taxes, as well as social security contributions on the
fraction of salaries lower than 1.4 times the minimum wage; the exemptions are then phased out slowly
after the initial five years. This program therefore appears remarkably generous, and is simple in that it is
based solely on location. One might expect that, given that the incentives are tied so strongly to location,
the program would have the most impact on births of businesses in the zones, or relocations of businesses
into the zones.
In studying the ZFU’s, Givord et al. (2013) address the key challenges that arise in evaluating
place-based policies. First, the paper uses rich administrative panel data on establishments with
information on precise location, the creation date of the business at that location (and whether it was a
birth or a relocation), and the date of bankruptcy if that occurred; the precise location information is
important because enterprise zone boundaries do not coincide with existing jurisdictional boundaries.40
The authors have administrative data on employment and salaries, fiscal records of taxes paid, and data on
other business outcomes.
Second, the paper uses compelling control groups. The implementation of the ZFU program
occurred in three phases. In the first, in 1977, the government defined 44 areas that were granted ZFU
status. An additional 416 areas were identified as slightly less distressed economically. Then, in 2004, 41
new ZFUs were created, all chosen from that second group of 416. The authors’ identification strategy
compares changes in these 41 new ZFUs with changes in some of the remaining group, known as ZRUs,
which that were initially identified as distressed, but not designated as ZFUs in the second round.41 The
zones designated in the second round might be expected to be relatively more distressed. But the

40

Givord et al. focus on single-establishment firms because the tax information is at the firm level, and other data
supposed to be at the establishment level is sometimes aggregated across establishments. Since ZFU incentives
apply to firms with fewer than 50 employees, focusing on single-establishment firms should capture most affected
businesses. The discussion below refers to “businesses,” but the meaning is single-establishment firms.
41
These latter areas, called Zones de Redynamisation Urbaine (ZRUs), also have some tax incentives, but these
were negligible during the study period.

42

committee selecting these zones had to follow precise guidelines based on an index calculated from
population, unemployment rates, tax revenues, the proportion of youths, and the proportion of dropouts.
Given that the authors can construct the same index, they are able to compare the ZFUs designated in the
second round with zones having the same index value that were not designated, and show that the main
selection criterion was that new ZFUs be far from those established in the first round (presumably to
achieve a more even geographic distribution) and near to other ZRUs (allowing mergers to achieve the
minimum population size). They use propensity score matching to candidates among the ZRUs to
estimate treatment effects, matching on the variables used in the index, these distance measures, and other
variables including outcomes prior to ZFU designation. 42
Third, the paper pays close attention to negative spillovers, which we might expect to be
particularly important in the case of a program that simply pays incentives based on location. Indeed this
study grapples more directly with relocation than the other recent studies. Relocations are of interest as a
direct manifestation of the kinds of negative spillovers discussed earlier.
Givord et al. first show evidence not usually available – that the ZFU program resulted in
substantially lower business taxes and social security contributions paid relative to the control areas. (One
potential explanation for an absence of employment effects in many U.S. studies is that most companies
do not take advantage of the tax credits.) Turning to outcomes, the ZFU program positively affected the
number of businesses located in the treated areas, via both births and relocations. The program boosted
the number of establishments by about 5-7 percent. This is due roughly equally to births and relocations,
but compared to average relocation versus birth rates, the relative impact on relocations is much higher –
about 100 percent compared to 25 percent.
When the authors split the sample into existing businesses, there is no evidence of an employment
effect; the point estimates range from -6 to 9 percent, and are never significant. Thus, it seems likely that
if there was employment growth it came from the new businesses that moved into the ZFUs, although
with the imprecise estimates we cannot be sure. Mayer et al. (2012), in their analysis of the same
program, report results indicating that only establishments with 50 or fewer workers (and with sales
below the maximum to be eligible) were affected by the policy, in terms of the decision to locate in a
ZFU. (They do not study employment responses among businesses already in the ZFU.)
Finally, given the evidence suggesting that the response is strongest on the relocation margin,
Givord et al. explore negative spillovers on nearby areas. These spillovers could also be manifested in
42

In a closely-related paper on the same program, using the same data source, Mayer et al. (2012) compare ZFU and
non-ZFU areas in the same city. As they argue, this lets them control for city-specific differences in policy,
transportation infrastructure, etc. The findings in Mayer et al. are quite similar on many dimensions, both in terms of
responsiveness to zone incentives, and the finding in Givord et al. that the positive effects in zones are largely offset
by diversion from areas near the zone (in the case of Mayer et al., the rest of the city).

43

business births, because the incentives can influence the decision about where to open a new business.
Using a procedure very similar to Neumark and Kolko (2010), the authors construct 300-meter rings
around their ZFUs, and estimate the impact of the ZFU incentives on these areas. Their comparisons are
based on similar rings around their control areas (the ZRUs). Interestingly, the results mirror quite closely
– albeit with opposite sign – the effects on activity inside the ZFUs. Fewer businesses are created
(through both the birth and relocation channel, although only the estimates for the latter are statistically
significant). And the employment estimates are generally negative and of similar magnitude (in absolute
value) to the positive estimates inside the ZFUs, although again insignificant.43 Although there could be
gains from relocation, it seems hard to make the case that there are gains from reallocation of activity
over such small geographic areas, or that such gains could offset the substantial foregone tax revenue that
the study documents.
A recent paper by Briant et al. (2012) extends the analysis of ZFUs to consider heterogeneity in
effects of the program based on geographic features, including access to transportation, and barriers and
distance between targeted areas and main employment centers. Briant et al. use a simple difference-indifferences strategy based on geographic subunits of municipalities. The effects of ZFU designation vary
in ways we might expect with geographic features of the treated areas. In particular, better access to
transportation by roads or trains is associated with a larger positive effect in attracting firms. Moreover,
some of these geographic features appear to do more to boost the creation of new firms rather than just
relocations of existing firms, in contrast to the results for homogeneous treatment effects in Givord et al.
suggesting that relocation was the primary response. The paper clearly presents some intriguing findings
that bear further study in the context of enterprise zones in France as well as other countries, and
emphasizes the point made with respect to the U.S. literature as well – that we need to learn more about
when enterprise zones are more effective or less effective.
5.1.4. Summary of evidence on enterprise zones
The research literature on enterprise zones is noteworthy for two reasons. First, it provides a
fairly comprehensive examination of the effects of this particular place-based policy. Second, it is
illustrative of the kinds of analyses that need to be undertaken to evaluate place-based policies generally,
exhibiting careful and creative efforts to address to the numerous challenges that arise in evaluating the
effects of these programs, and – especially in the most recent studies – attention to issues beyond mean
effects, which are needed to evaluate the distributional and perhaps even the welfare effects of these
policies. In this summary section we do not reiterate the general research contributions of this literature,

43

Mayer et al. (2012) also conclude that the ZFU program mainly led to diversion, with even stronger evidence that
the response is centered on the relocation margin. In their analysis, this is based on evidence that the overall flow of
establishments into municipalities was not affected by designation of a ZFU within the municipality.

44

which have been highlighted in the earlier discussion. But we do attempt to summarize the findings for
enterprise zones specifically.
Research on three specific state programs (California, Florida, and Texas) concludes that two
generate no employment effects, and the third (on Texas) finds positive effects concentrated on lower-pay
jobs. One study looking at numerous states also finds some positive employment effects, but they do not
appear to be tied in any way to hiring credits. Thus, evidence on whether these state programs created
jobs is mixed, while a stronger case can be made that if they did create jobs, it was not because of the
hiring credits highlighted in many state enterprise zone programs.
Evidence from analyses of the U.S. federal Empowerment Zones program is also mixed. One
study finds strong effects on job growth and wages, whereas another suggests that if we account for
endogenous selection of zones there is no evidence of beneficial effects. Moreover, if there are benefits
they appear to accrue to higher-income households. If one concludes that the federal program was
beneficial, it seems plausible that the large block grants associated with Empowerment Zones played an
important role, although verifying that will be challenging given the small number of affected zones, and
these grants may have done more to increase the attractiveness of zones to higher-income people. The
later-round Empowerment Zones did not receive these large block grants. Thus, comparison of the effects
of the later Empowerment Zones with the first-round zones could be informative about these questions.
The evidence on spillovers is also mixed for the United States, with some studies suggesting
negative spillovers that offset program benefits. There is evidence of strong spillovers in France, where
zones offering significant tax breaks resulted mainly in the relocation of economic activity from nearby
areas to inside the zones. There may be reasons policymakers want to relocate economic activity to some
areas even if this is solely at the expense of other areas. But clearly the case for place-based policies is
harder to make if this is what happens, especially for relocation over small areas. At a minimum, we
would presumably want to see evidence of other beneficial effects of this relocation of economic activity.
Indeed reflecting the preference for boosting firm births, for example, rather than relocations, some states
have inserted provisions that bar relocating businesses from obtaining enterprise zone benefits (Wilder
and Rubin, 1996; and the current Ohio program). 44
Finally, theoretical modeling of the effects of place-based policies indicates that the welfare
implications depend also on the effects on housing prices and migration responses. On these issues, too,
the conclusions are mixed, with Busso et al. (2013) staking out a position that rents do not increase and
that there are not compositional shifts, leading to a rather strong positive evaluation, while other research
emphasizes housing price increases (which may reflect welfare gains but also have distributional

44

See http://development.ohio.gov/bs/bs_oezp.htm (viewed September 6, 2013).

45

consequences), compositional shifts, and gains for higher-income households to a much greater extent.
What do we make of all this? We draw two main conclusions. First, it is very hard to make the
case that the research establishes the effectiveness of enterprise zones in terms of job creation or welfare
gains, although there clearly are some studies pointing to positive effects. Further progress requires effort
to figure out what features of these programs can make them more effective, following on some early
efforts in this direction in the existing research. Second, although there has been a slew of new studies in
the past few years – and even many studies focusing on the same program – there has not been enough of
an attempt to reconcile the disparate evidence. This kind of careful, often painstaking work may well help
sharpen the findings from a research literature in which the findings remain rather disparate.
5.2. Place-based policies that account for network effects 45
Earlier, we discussed how place-based policies might be more effective if they took advantage of
labor market networks involving the residents of targeted locations. Ladd (1994) echoes this point,
suggesting that place-based policies should recognize “the social isolation of many residents in distressed
areas” that “results in incomplete knowledge of the labor market and limited exposure to people in the
labor market who may serve as the informal contacts needed for successful job searches” (p. 196). This is
largely an unexplored area of research, although a recent study of Jobs-Plus provides some of the first
evidence of which we are aware (Riccio, 1999). Job-Plus aimed to increase labor supply incentives for
public housing residents by reducing the rent increases that accompany increases in earnings. In addition
to including employment-related activities and services, Jobs-Plus endeavored to encourage the formation
of labor market networks, or to provide functions similar to those supplied by networks. Most sites had
“job developers” on staff whose responsibilities included providing outreach to local employers,
cultivating relationships with them in an effort to place Jobs-Plus participants in employment (Kato et al.,
2003). The program also employed residents as “court captains” or “building captains” who maintained
contact with other participants, including sharing information about employment opportunities.
Job-Plus had a clear place-based flavor, attempting to transform the community through a
saturation strategy that targeted all non-disabled working-age residents of these projects, rather than just
trying to change individual behavior. This was based on the network-related (and peer-effect-related)
theory that saturation can lead to tipping points, creating a critical mass of employed residents who
succeed in the workforce. These employed residents would “signal to others the feasibility and benefits of
working, elevate and strengthen social norms that encourage work, foster the growth of work-supporting
social networks, and … contribute to still more residents getting and keeping jobs” (Riccio, 1999, p. 13).
There is evidence that the program delivered economic benefits in terms of both earnings and

45

The discussion in this subsection draws heavily on Hellerstein and Neumark (2012).

46

employment (Bloom et al., 2005). It is difficult, however, to draw firm conclusions about the value-added
of specific efforts to build labor market network connections due to two problems: first, implementation
of the network component of Jobs-Plus was spotty and encountered unanticipated difficulties; and second,
it is hard to tell which components of the Jobs-Plus program delivered economic gains to its participants.
The reports on Jobs-Plus are replete with discussions of the problems encountered regarding
building and strengthening networks. For example, Kato et al. (2003) note that community support for
work was the slowest component to develop (p. iii), and one site never developed it (p. 3). Bloom et al.
(2005) note, with regard to community support for work, that “[a]lthough many of these kinds of
activities were tried at some points during the demonstration … most did not take root. What did take root
– and grow – was the idea of using a small group of residents as extension agents of Jobs-Plus” (p. 48).
Issues also arose regarding difficulties in doing outreach owing to high levels of illicit activity in some
developments. Residents interested in working sometimes reported that a desire to stay out of trouble,
combined with criminal activity among residents, “discouraged them from interacting with other
residents, for fear that their neighbors might be complicit” (Kato et al., 2004, p. 30). More to the point
with regard to networks, there was a concern that someone you might refer could reflect badly on you. 46
Despite these difficulties, however, the description of implementation reveals numerous cases of job
developers and sometimes captains developing means of linking residents to employment opportunities,
likely providing labor market contacts that many of the participants were lacking.
It is, however, difficult to attribute the gains from the Jobs-Plus program specifically to the
network efforts, because the evaluations focused on the overall success of the program, rather than
parsing out the effects of the separate components. Thus, at the end of the day, it is difficult to point to the
evidence from Jobs-Plus as establishing the productivity of place-based policy efforts focusing on
strengthening labor market network ties. It is possible that most of the effect of Jobs-Plus came from the
increased financial incentives to work generated by restructuring the effects of earnings increases on rent,
or other components of the program.
The discussion in this section thus far has focused on how network effects might be leveraged to
help blacks (and others) in low-income, urban labor markets. There is, however, an alternative
perspective, whereby networks can diminish the effectiveness of other policies. For example, as noted
earlier with respect to enterprise zones, such policies may be ineffective at improving local labor markets
because businesses may not hire locals in these neighborhoods. Dickens (1999) echoes this concern (p.
46

This parallels findings from more systematic research by Smith (2005), who, based on in-depth interviews of lowincome blacks, concludes: “Over 80 percent of respondents … expressed concern that job seekers in their networks
were too unmotivated to accept assistance, required great expenditures of time and emotional energy, or acted too
irresponsibly on the job, thereby jeopardizing contacts’ own reputations in the eyes of employers and negatively
affecting their already-tenuous labor market prospects.” (p. 3).

47

394), citing some case-study evidence from Kasinitz and Rosenberg (1996) suggesting that employers
may even prefer to hire those who live farther away, because employers were worried that locals would
have trouble avoiding family problems at work, and could be pressured by locals to help burglarize them.
Thus, networks can be a two-edged sword, reducing labor market search frictions by increasing the
flow of information about jobs, but also potentially introducing rigidities by making continued hiring
within a particular network lower cost than going outside the network, when the latter may be necessary
to deliver benefits to residents of target areas. We believe that the design and evaluation of place-based
policies that try to leverage labor market networks to improve job market outcomes for local residents is a
high priority for research and policy alike.
5.3. Discretionary grant-based policies
The specific aims of discretionary grant-based policies often include attracting new firms and
investment to an area, and either job creation or the prevention of job losses. Research has addressed
whether these policies achieve these aims by evaluating effects on the targeted outcomes for subsidized
firms. In some cases a somewhat broader analysis of the welfare effects of these programs has been
attempted, for example looking at effects on productivity of participant firms and of other firms whose
performance might be affected by agglomeration externalities, as well as looking at employment
displacement across areas. Much of this research faces a similar problem confronted by the literature on
enterprise zones – in this case, that the eligible areas, in particular for countries in the European Union,
are simultaneously eligible for other sources of regional development assistance. It is therefore crucial to
control for these other sources of support to isolate the effects of discretionary grant policies.
A number of papers have examined whether these subsidies are effective in attracting new
entrants. Two, for France and the United Kingdom, estimate location choice models using firm microdata and find some evidence of statistically significant but very small effects of discretionary grants on
firm location decisions. Crozet et al. (2004) estimate conditional logit and nested logit models to examine
the effect of the Prime d’Aménagement du Territoire (PAT) on foreign multinational location decisions
across NUTS3 areas (départements) in France. 47 PAT grants aim to create or safeguard employment in
lagging regions, and the authors report that around half of annual expenditure under this scheme went to
foreign-owned firms. The authors measure the generosity of the program at each potential location using
data on the allocation of grant funding at the broader NUTS2 region-year level. While they find some
evidence of positive effects of these grants on location choice, this is not highly robust, and even where

47

The European Commission defines three levels of regional units, under the Nomenclature des Unités Territoriales
Statistiques or NUTS classification. NUTS1 regions are the largest with populations of 3-7 million, for example
England, Scotland, and Wales within Great Britain. NUTS2 regions are groups of administrative regions within
countries containing 0.8-3 million inhabitants, with NUTS3 regions containing 150-800 thousand inhabitants.

48

there is a positive effect, its magnitude is dwarfed by that of other factors such as market access and
agglomeration externalities. They also examine the effect of EU regional policy funds, which we cover in
Section 5.5, and which may affect the attractiveness of locations for investment, but find no evidence that
this EU expenditure acted to boost the appeal of the qualifying locations for foreign investors.
Devereux et al. (2007) analyze the effect of the similar U.K. RSA scheme on firm location
decisions. The policy provides subsidies to firms for new investment in physical capital, with an ultimate
aim of creating and safeguarding jobs and attracting FDI. The scheme aims to subsidize only additional
investment that is attributable to the funding. Firms apply for a subsidy under the scheme and the
application is assessed before a subsidy offer – conditional on job targets being met – is made. The
funding is only available in designated Assisted Areas, and the rate of the subsidy is governed by EU
rules and varies with area characteristics. While Crozet et al. use area-level data on grant expenditure,
Devereux et al. use micro data on the value of subsidies offered to individual firms to form a prediction of
the subsidy that each new entrant might expect to receive in each location according to their
characteristics. 48 They then use these predicted subsidy offers in a conditional logit location choice model
across counties within Great Britain. The study finds that the grants had a positive and statistically
significant effect on the location choice of new entrants (both multinationals and new plants established
by existing U.K. manufacturing firms). However, the magnitude of the effect was extremely small. Grants
were found to be more effective in locations that had greater pre-existing employment in the relevant
industry – i.e., their impact on location choices was magnified in areas that might also benefit from
localization economies – but the overall effect remained very small.
Overall, the evidence from both studies suggests that such incentives have little leverage in terms
of influencing where firms choose to locate, a conclusion that has implications for the use and costeffectiveness of this type of policy as a tool to try and create or enhance industrial clusters. In addition, it
also suggests that unlike the evidence for enterprise zones, this type of discretionary, plant-specific and
potentially heavily monitored grant policy is unlikely to result in significant relocation of activity into
eligible areas. Indeed, in the United Kingdom the policy rules have explicitly included as a requirement
that the grant is only awarded if it does not involve the displacement of employment, for example across
plants in different locations within a firm.
Criscuolo et al. (2012) evaluate the same policy as Devereux et al. (2007), but analyze its effect
on employment, investment, and productivity, including displacement effects across areas. Their IV
evaluation strategy was outlined in Section 4.5. Their findings suggest that RSA grants are effective in

48

They also estimate a first-stage selection equation to address the fact that in practice only certain firms apply and
that the expected grant for each new entrant in each location can only be estimated from data on a set of firms that
applied to the scheme and were successful in receiving an offer.

49

generating both additional employment and investment, but that they do not increase productivity. Using
plant-level panel data, they find a positive effect of receipt of a grant on employment. The magnitude of
the estimated effect increases when they instrument participation in the RSA program with their
exogenous policy instrument – the maximum subsidy rate mandated by the EU, which varies over time
and by area and is zero in non-eligible areas. The downward bias in the OLS estimates is consistent with
the idea that there is selection into both applying to the scheme, and in the successful award of a grant, by
firms facing negative shocks to performance. Their estimates suggest that participation in the RSA
scheme increases plant-level employment substantially, by 43 percent, where the mean and median plant
sizes in their sample are 79 and 6 employees respectively. They also investigate heterogeneity in the
effects of the policy across plants owned by firms of different sizes. Their results imply that positive
effects are confined to plants that are part of smaller firms with fewer than 150 employees. While this is
potentially in line with the idea that smaller firms are more likely to face financial constraints, which a
subsidy to capital investment can alleviate, it might also be that larger firms are better able to capture
rents under the scheme.
They then estimate the impact of the policy on investment and productivity at the firm level. They
find positive effects on investment, which are again restricted to smaller firms. Moreover, the estimated
impacts on investment are greater than the impacts on employment, in line with the design of the policy,
which provides a direct subsidy to capital. There is no evidence that the policy led to increased TFP or
average wages at the firm level. Therefore, since their descriptive statistics of prior characteristics show
that it is less productive firms that typically receive the subsidies, and since the scheme acts to increase
employment in these firms this implies a negative effect on aggregate productivity. Given the design of
the policy – a subsidy to capital combined with employment targets to either create or safeguard jobs –
the authors rightly argue that while the subsidy may lead to an increase in capital per worker, there is no
ex ante reason for it to lead to increased TFP.
Criscuolo et al. then analyze impacts at the area level and find that the policy acted to increase
employment both within existing firms and via new firm entry, and reduced unemployment in these
lagging areas. They also found little evidence of displacement effects on non-participant firms or for noneligible but neighboring areas. The only evidence they find that is suggestive of displacement is for plants
that are part of larger firms, which is in line with larger, multi-plant firms having more flexibility to move
plants or employment from outside to inside an eligible area. Since some of the areas in which these
grants are available also qualify for EU Structural Funds, the authors included an indicator variable for
areas receiving these transfers, but found no evidence that this alternative funding acted to increase
employment. Moreover, controlling for the presence of this other sources of regional support did not
affect the estimates of the impact of the RSA scheme.

50

Although they do not conduct a full cost-benefit analysis of the policy, the authors perform some
additional calculations on the magnitudes of their estimated effects. Their results suggest that a 10 percent
subsidy rate increases area employment by nearly 2.9 percent. At the average subsidy rate of 24 percent,
this translates to an increase of around 111,000 jobs over the period 1986-2004 (from a basis of 1.6
million employees in manufacturing), at an estimated cost per job of nearly £4,900 in 2010 prices. They
report that this is lower than previous estimates of the cost-per-job under the policy, and argue that this is
because their IV strategy overcomes the downward bias affecting OLS results. Further calculations for the
estimated number of individuals drawn out of unemployment are close to those for the number of
additional jobs created, again suggesting that the policy is primarily acting to reduce unemployment
rather than displacing employment from other firms or areas.
A similar subsidy program known as Law 488 exists in Italy. The policy aims to create new jobs
via a subsidy to investment projects, for example start-up physical capital investment, or modernization or
relocation projects. Applicant firms must specify the number of new jobs to be created alongside details
of the investment project. The creation of these new jobs is binding on recipient firms in that if fewer
individuals are employed the entire value of the subsidy must be repaid. In addition, the number of jobs to
be created per unit of investment is one of the criteria used to score and subsequently rank each
application in terms of priority for funding. The other two main criteria are the share of project costs
borne by the firm, and how high the rate of subsidy requested is relative to the maximum rate allowable in
the area under EU regulations (Bernini and Pellegrini, 2011, p. 254).
Bernini and Pellegrini (2011) evaluate the impact of this policy on the performance of subsidized
firms using a difference-in-differences estimator with unsuccessful applicants as controls. They consider a
wide set of outcome variables, including growth in output, value added, employment, capital investment,
and measures of profitability and productivity. Using data from the year before the application for the
subsidy and for the project completion year, they find strong evidence that while the subsidies acted to
increase output, employment, and investment growth, growth in output increased to a lesser extent than
employment, and both labor productivity and TFP growth declined. Their estimates suggest that, over on
average a 3.6 year period, total output growth was around 8-10 percent higher in subsidized firms, while
employment growth was around 16-17 percent higher. Growth in physical capital was even higher at
around 40 percent. Growth in labor productivity as measured by output per worker was found to be 7
percent lower, and TFP growth 8 percent lower, as a result of the subsidies. Similar to Criscuolo et al.,
they also find evidence that the effects on output and employment growth were greater for small firms,
some evidence of lower labor productivity growth, but no evidence of lower TFP growth for this group.
While the evidence implies that the program generated positive effects on the targeted outcomes
of capital investment and employment, the negative effects on productivity may be due to distortions

51

brought about by the policy design. The subsidy may have induced firms to undertake investment projects
that would not have been funded by external capital markets. If firms were not subject to external
financing constraints in the absence of the policy, and were optimally not choosing to undertake
investment with an insufficiently high return, then any genuinely additional investment brought about by
the subsidy may be relatively unproductive. The combination of a subsidy to capital investment coupled
with an explicit target for job creation (and a potential incentive to overstate the number of new jobs plus
a subsequent requirement to meet this target), may create distortions to firms’ optimal capital-labor ratios.
In addition, the design of the scheme may even have created incentives to recruit relatively lowproductivity, low-wage workers to meet the binding employment targets, potentially implying a tradeoff
between the stated employment goals of the program and any productivity objectives (although perhaps
with positive distributional effects). It may also be the case that non-recipient firms had stronger
incentives to increase their own efficiency, potentially due to increased competition from the subsidized
firms.
Bronzini and de Blasio (2006) investigate whether Law 488 generates additional investment,
focusing on the time profile of investment in subsidized firms relative to unsuccessful applicants. They
find evidence of an increase in investment in subsidized firms two years after the subsidy was awarded.
This is exactly the point at which firms undertaking a two-year investment project under the scheme
would receive the second half of their funds, and at which firms undertaking a longer project would
receive the second third of the subsidy. The payment of these installments is conditional on firms having
undertaken their specified investment projects, and hence this is the exact point at which a positive impact
would be expected. However, looking over a longer time horizon, they find that recipient firms show a
decrease in investment relative to the control group at five years, i.e., two to three years after the final
subsidy payment is made.
The authors interpret this as evidence that the policy may not in fact have generated additional
investment, but merely brought forward investment that would have happened eventually. Potentially in
line with this argument, they find that at the five-year point subsidized firms exhibit lower debt, which is
suggestive of firms bringing forward investment and substituting public funds for private borrowing
which would otherwise finance investment at a later date. One issue is how to square the findings with
those of Bernini and Pellegrini (2011), who find a larger effect on capital investment. One explanation is
that the latter use information on the exact completion date of the project and do not look at investment
beyond that point; by conducting the analysis over a slightly shorter time period they miss a fall in
investment relative to the control group after the subsidy has been paid.
Some policies aim explicitly at attracting very substantial new investment and influencing where
large, new entrants locate. The PAT and RSA schemes discussed above have an element of this, for

52

example in using multi-million dollar investment grants to attract internationally mobile FDI. Greenstone
et al. (2010) evaluate the effects of subsidies to attract large plants to specific U.S. counties. Rather than
focusing on the effects on the recipient plant, they look for evidence that the new plant generates positive
agglomeration externalities or productivity spillovers, the existence of which would potentially provide a
rationale for the use of such subsidies. As discussed in Section 4.5, the study uses information on counties
that narrowly missed out on winning the plant as counterfactual locations. The authors find convincing
evidence that the arrival of these large new plants led to higher TFP among incumbent plants, higher net
entry of new plants, and an increase in county-level labor costs, with the latter implying that part of the
productivity spillover accrues to workers in the form of higher wages, rather than simply leading to
increased profits for incumbent firms. Spillover effects on incumbent TFP are identified by estimating
difference-in-difference specifications of plant-level production functions, which compare TFP growth in
incumbent plants before and after the plant opening across paired winning and losing counties. Effects on
wages are estimated using similar difference-in-differences specifications on individual-level wage data,
controlling for worker characteristics.
While the main aim of the paper is to credibly identify agglomeration externalities in the context
of a large-scale plant opening, the paper also provides evidence on the benefits of the subsidies. However,
since the authors do not use information on the value of the subsidies given to these plants the findings
are not used in a full cost-benefit analysis. The authors find that five years after the opening of a new
manufacturing plant, compared to plants in losing counties, incumbent plants in the winning location had
on average around 12 percent higher TFP (equivalent to moving from the 10th to the 27th percentile of the
observed TFP distribution across counties), evidence that strongly supports the existence of externalities
and of substantial efficiency benefits stemming from the use of such subsidies. The authors translate this
average effect into an increase of around $430 million in incumbent plant output after five years. The
average effect on wages is estimated to be an increase of around 2.7 percent. Using an equivalent
econometric specification for productivity spillovers that implies an effect on incumbent plant TFP of 4.8
percent, a 23 percent share of labor in total costs implies that the estimated overall cost effect via higher
wages is around 13 percent of the TFP increase. These estimated effects reflect the direct result of the
opening of the new plant, as well as indirect effects through subsequent plant entry and any changes in the
industrial mix of the area, together with changes in competition for inputs that will also influence the
extent of spillovers to incumbent plants and input prices.
The average productivity spillover effect is perhaps not the most useful parameter for a
policymaker. The authors do not find that all winning locations benefit; indeed for some counties the
estimated spillover effects are negative. The paper investigates how the magnitude of externalities varies
depending on a set of measures of economic proximity between the subsidized plant and incumbents.

53

These measures are intended to capture the classic channels through which theory and other evidence
suggest that spillovers might be stronger, namely labor-market pooling or thick labor markets at the
industry-level, knowledge spillovers, and input-output linkages (the presence of thick markets for
intermediate inputs than can benefit firms in vertically related industries). The results support the
existence of heterogeneous effects across incumbents with different characteristics relative to the new
plant, but not via all three mechanisms. Spillover benefits appear to be stronger for incumbents in
industries that share labor with the industry of the new plant, and also for those that have technological
connections, but not for incumbent plants in industries that have upstream or downstream linkages.
A further point the authors make is that if increases in labor costs occur across all industries
within a winning county, but the size of productivity spillovers are industry specific, then the effects on
incumbent plants’ profits can be highly asymmetric. The existence of such asymmetric effects could then
explain the attractiveness of certain locations for specific sectors and the observed longevity of industrial
clusters. An additional issue with regard to the scope of benefits that is not covered in the analysis, but is
relevant to policymakers concerned with place, is whether heterogeneous effects occur not just according
to economic proximity, but also geographic proximity to the subsidized plant, in terms of the spatial scale
on which spillover benefits accrue.
If, as the results suggest, the externalities generated by new plant openings are heterogeneous
across locations, a policy where local areas compete to attract such plants could be welfare enhancing at
an aggregate as well as at a local level. In these circumstances the payment of subsidies to firms, which
mean that they internalize the externalities they generate in their location decisions, can increase
efficiency. However, from a cost-benefit perspective this argument also relies on local policy authorities
being able to accurately assess the scale of future benefits arising from the establishment of new plants,
and being able to judge how much to bid. As the results in Greenstone et al. indicate, the estimated
productivity spillovers arising from these new plant openings have not always been positive.
5.3.1. Summary of evidence on discretionary grants
The literature looking at the effects of discretionary programs has been creative in dealing with
the additional identification problem posed by selection of businesses into the schemes, as well as dealing
with issues of location-based selection common to place-based policies that almost by definition target a
highly non-random set of areas (see Section 4.5). Overall, the available evidence on the effects of
discretionary subsidies on their targeted outcomes of investment and employment in recipient firms is
positive; Table 3 provides an overview of the findings. The fact that plants that receive subsidy offers
have their applications pass through an initial scrutiny process, and that the targeted outcomes are often
heavily monitored and that payment of the subsidy is contingent on the job and/or investment targets
being met, may explain why these policies appear more successful in achieving their stated goals than, for

54

example, enterprise zone programs. But close monitoring of these discretionary schemes will come at an
administrative cost, and it would be instructive to have further evidence on how long the additional jobs
created actually survived once the monitoring period expired, to form a better assessment of their longerrun impact on employment.
[Table 3 here]
The evidence also suggests that the design of some schemes might itself create distortions to
firms’ optimal capital-labor ratios and to productivity, with associated welfare effects. Indeed, to the
extent that the schemes are designed to finance marginal investment projects that, absent any capitalmarket failures, would not be backed by private-sector finance, the subsidized investment may be
relatively unproductive. Overall, the evidence does not provide any hint that these grants acted to improve
productivity at recipient plants, and if, as in the case of the U.K. evidence, recipient firms had relatively
low productivity to start with and then subsequently expanded, this implies a negative effect on
productivity in the aggregate.
Evidence from the United States does, however, imply that the use of subsidies to influence the
location of very large new plants can result in productivity spillovers to incumbent firms. It is likely that
the areas offering subsidies in the U.S. are quite different to those typically targeted in a European
context. Greenstone et al. report that U.S. counties that win a new plant have superior economic
characteristics, for example in terms of incomes, population growth and labor force participation rates,
compared to the rest of the country, which could reflect Glaeser and Gottleib’s (2008) suggestion,
discussed in Section 2.7, that efficient place-based policies may increase disparities between areas. In
contrast, within the EU the opposite is true, with subsidies applying to more economically-distressed
areas. In fact, even the Greenstone et al. results illustrate significant heterogeneity in the magnitude of the
estimated spillover effects both across locations and across industries within those locations, implying
that any benefits of the policy that are external to the recipient firm, and which might provide a theoretical
justification for the use of such subsidies, may be highly contingent on local economic characteristics.
5.4. Clusters and universities
Some countries have tried to use the placement or promotion of universities as a tool to enhance
local economic development. It is easy to point out that world-leading universities are typically located in
economically-thriving regions and cities, and many of the most famous examples of high-tech clusters are
explicitly linked to, or at least located in the vicinity of, prestigious research universities, such as Silicon
Valley, and Silicon Fen around Cambridge University; see also Carlino et al. (2012). But causal estimates
of the effects of university presence on local economic performance are relatively scarce, and what
evidence there is – which is primarily based on established universities in relatively affluent regions –
does not necessarily translate to a lagging-region context.

55

More generally, the observation that within a number of countries, employment in a wide range
of industries is geographically localized, together with evidence that such clusters appear to generate
productivity spillovers, has led to debate about whether there is a role for policy in promoting cluster
development. Some countries, such as France have explicitly adopted clusters policies, whereas others
have emphasized industrial clustering as part of an enterprise zone program, for example the 2011
program in England.
5.4.1. Clusters policies
This section discusses the scant evidence base on the effectiveness of cluster policy initiatives
that aim to improve cluster performance, and on policies that, as a side effect, may have influenced cluster
development. Martin et al. (2011) evaluate the effects of a policy aimed at boosting the productivity of
existing clusters in France. The program, Local Productive Systems (LPS), provided funds to aid
collaboration and cooperation between groups of firms in the same industry in the same local area.
Projects typically operated at the geographic level of a département (administrative areas) or a smaller
employment area (local labor market areas). An application to the program was normally made by a local
public authority, and if successful, firms then signed up to participate. Projects involved the establishment
of local initiatives, for example to boost the profile of the cluster or to promote exports. The level of
subsidy provided under the program was relatively small, at an average of around 40,000 Euros per
project. The policy ran from 1999 to the mid-2000s, when it was replaced in 2005 by a larger-scale policy
known as “competitiveness clusters.”
The authors use an administrative dataset to identify a set of firms that participated in the LPS
scheme. They use difference-in-differences and matching approaches to estimate whether the policy had
any discernible effects on firm performance, such as TFP and employment. They also provide evidence
on the types of firms that chose to participate. The scheme was not explicitly aimed at supporting
underperforming regions and industries, but in practice, this is what occurred. Although the LPS
participant firms were relatively large, they were less productive, with the latter driven by industry and
location characteristics. For example, the authors found that LPS firms tended to be located in areas
eligible for the PAT grant program outlined in Section 5.3 above.
The estimates provide little evidence of a positive effect of the policy on TFP in LPS firms, and if
anything point towards TFP falling post-participation relative to the controls. In a separate examination of
pre-program trends, the authors find that TFP in participating firms appeared to be declining relative to
non-participants even before receipt of the funding, which suggests that this might have driven their
decision to engage with the scheme. At best, the results suggest that participation might have brought
about a temporary halt to this decline in TFP. The authors look at other adjustment margins, but find no
effect on employment growth or on firm-level exports.

56

The authors acknowledge that there may be spillover effects from participant to non-participant
firms at least within region, which may affect the firm-level estimates. They therefore carry out a second
estimation exercise at the industry-département level. An area-industry is defined as participating in LPS
if it contains at least one LPS firm. The results primarily confirm the picture from the firm-level
estimates, the only difference being some evidence of an increase in exports, although this is not robust
across specifications. The paper also finds no evidence that firm survival rates were higher in industryareas receiving funding. Overall, the results paint a rather negative picture of the impact of the scheme.
Potential explanations include that the program was too focused on lagging industry-regions, the
development of which was an objective of the government agency that administered the policy, possible
rent-seeking activity by firms, and insufficient funding per project to generate discernible effects.
Falck et al. (2010) analyze the effects of a cluster policy in the state of Bavaria in Germany,
which was more directly focused on innovation in high-tech sectors. From 1999 to 2004, the Bavarian
High-Tech Offensive targeted businesses operating in five technological sectors including life science,
information and communication technology, and environmental technologies. Over this period, 1.35
billion Euros were spent on initiatives aimed at improving firm performance and improving public-sector
research in these fields, with around 50 percent of the budget spent on the latter. For example, funds were
spent on public-sector research infrastructure with an explicit aim of enabling private-sector firms to
access the facilities. In addition, expenditure was targeted at improving networks and cooperation
between firms operating within the same technological field within the state, and state-backed venture
capital funding was also made available. Other initiatives included science parks where innovative firms
could locate rent-free.
The evaluation uses a difference-in-difference-in-differences design comparing changes in firmlevel innovation outcomes from before to after the program in affected industries in Bavaria to the beforeafter change in the same industries outside Bavaria, relative to the corresponding comparison of changes
in non-affected industries. The authors estimate effects on three outcomes: an indicator of whether or not
a firm has introduced a product or process innovation; an indicator of whether an associated patent
application was filed; and log R&D expenditures. The results imply a positive effect of the cluster
initiative on the first two outcomes, but a negative effect on the third. The likelihood of innovating in the
targeted sectors increased by around 4.6 percentage points from a baseline of roughly 50 percent, with the
probability of filing for a patent increasing by 5.7 percentage points. However, the results imply that
R&D expenditures fell substantially, by around 19 percent. Although at a first glance this appears a
contradictory set of findings, Falck et al. suggest that because R&D expenditures are a measure of
innovation inputs, the result could be interpreted as a reduction in the costs of innovation.
The paper also tries to address how the policy might have led to what appear to be improvements

57

in firms’ innovation productivity. Using answers to survey questions on the innovation process, they find
that affected firms were less likely to report that their innovation activity was hampered by a lack of
opportunities for cooperation with public research institutions, a lack of access to external expertise, or
difficulties in finding R&D personnel. This suggests the program was successful in enabling privatesector access to public-sector scientific research and that it may have increased network connections
between firms.
Some policies may indirectly affect cluster formation and development. Fallick et al. (2006)
provide evidence that for the computer industry, aspects of California state law may have aided labor
mobility, which in turn may have led to increased human capital externalities and knowledge spillovers as
sources of agglomeration economies. Greater flexibility to move between employers should result in a
more efficient allocation of human capital and talent across firms, and potentially as a by-product increase
inter-firm diffusion of knowledge. This latter effect could reduce individual firms’ returns to investment
in innovation and in employee human capital, and provide an incentive for them to use non-compete
contracts to try to reduce labor mobility and reduce knowledge spillovers to competitor firms. However,
unique historical features of California state law make such contracts unenforceable.
In support of the influence of state law, the paper finds that month-to-month transition rates to a
new job for college-educated men are higher in the Silicon Valley cluster, and other computer clusters
within the state, than they are in computer industry clusters outside the state of California. However, the
same pattern is not found for other industries, for which there is no evidence of significantly higher job
transition rates in California. The authors develop a model under which, if the nature of the innovation
process is one in which success is highly uncertain but high return, it may be optimal to have many
companies working independently on the same problem, such as within a cluster, and then have an ex
post reallocation of labor to the successful innovator. They argue that the characteristics of innovation in
the computer industry fit with this model. While only offering circumstantial evidence, the results are in
line with California state labor law acting to aid labor mobility and increase knowledge spillovers.
5.4.2. Universities
While Carlino and Kerr in this Handbook cover agglomeration and innovation more generally,
here we focus on evidence on the effects of universities on private-sector activity, including industrial
clusters and wider effects on local employment and wages. The main empirical challenges in assessing
the impact of universities on local economic conditions come from the fact that the location,
characteristics, and scale of universities are non-random across geographic space, that factors such as
business innovation and productivity and the industrial and skill composition of an area will very likely
themselves influence university performance, and that unobservable local productivity shocks will likely
affect both private-sector and university-sector activity.

58

Kantor and Whalley (2014) attempt to overcome these identification issues using an IV strategy
to analyze the effect of knowledge spillovers from universities on non-education-sector labor income in
U.S. urban counties. Their empirical analysis examines the relationship between non-education-sector
wages and university expenditure. As an instrument for the latter, they exploit exogenous variation
brought about by national stock market shocks, which affect the market value of universities’
endowments, and through this, university expenditure.
The authors use a county-industry panel from 1981 to 1996, with a basic regression specification
relating the long difference, t-x to t, in log non-education labor income at the county-industry level, to the
long difference in per-capita university expenditure at the county level, and a set of year fixed effects. The
instrument for changes in per-capita university expenditure is constructed as an interaction between the
lagged market value of universities’ endowments within a county (dated t-x-1) and the change in the S&P
500 Index over the period t-x to t. Since universities follow fixed expenditure rules, spending a set
fraction of around 4 to 5 percent of the market value of their endowments per annum, shocks to the stock
market will directly, and differentially, affect expenditure for each university, dependent on the initial
value of their endowment. The national stock market shocks, and lagged university endowment levels,
must also be exogenous with respect to growth in local non-education labor income. 49
The IV estimates imply that an increase in university expenditure of 10 percent increases wages
for workers in the non-education sector by 0.8 percent. However, this relatively small average effect
masks some heterogeneity. The authors distinguish responses across different types of industries,
focusing on those with closer links to the university sector, and across counties with more or less
research-intensive universities. They find that industries that are technologically closer to university
research (measured as the propensity for industry patents to cite university patents), and hence more likely
to benefit from knowledge spillovers from higher education, receive higher spillovers, as do industries
that employ a higher fraction of graduates, and industries with higher worker transitions into and out of
the higher-education sector. In addition, locations with more research-intensive universities (measured by
the fraction of university students who are graduate level) generate higher spillovers. Their results suggest
that the skill and industry mix of an area, and the type of university it hosts, are important determinants of
the degree to which locations can both benefit from, and generate, externalities from higher education.
This plausible pattern of heterogeneity in effects suggests that the results are more likely to be causal.
More descriptive evidence consistent with effects of universities on industrial clusters includes
Abramovsky et al. (2007) and Abramovsky and Simpson (2011), who analyze whether the presence of

49

The authors carry out robustness checks to address the issue of unobservables that might be correlated with past
endowment values and affect future income growth: e.g., the possibility that firms are differentially affected by
stock market shocks and that the location of particular types of firms is correlated with initial endowment values.

59

universities, and in particular highly rated university research departments within universities, are
associated with the location of firms’ R&D facilities. They exploit data from the U.K. Research
Assessment Exercise, which is used to allocate the main publicly funded grant for research and provides
ratings of individual university research departments, with the highest-rated departments deemed to be
carrying out internationally leading, frontier research. The authors link this information at the area level to
data on private-sector R&D labs. They find that for some industries, but by no means all, the geographic
distribution of R&D labs is skewed towards locations with highly rated, industrially relevant university
research departments. For example, Abramovsky and Simpson (2011) find that pharmaceutical firms tend
to locate their R&D labs disproportionately within 10 kilometers of world-class chemistry research
departments. Similar evidence is found for R&D services firms – many of which serve the
pharmaceuticals industry. However, their results cannot be interpreted as causal. They find that many of
these positive relationships can be explained by the presence of science parks. While it is quite likely that
the science parks result from universities’ research standing, and also from private-sector demand for
premises in proximity to these universities, it remains difficult to untangle the direction of causality. 50
One study that assesses the effects of a deliberate policy of using the geographic location of
higher education as a lever for regional development is Andersson et al. (2004). From 1987, Sweden
engaged in a substantial expansion of higher education that involved an increase in student enrollment,
the establishment of new colleges, and four existing colleges gaining university status. Part of the aim
was to make higher education less centralized and more available to students across all locations in
Sweden including more remote regions, with a view to increasing participation. However, the policy
could also have had effects on the demand for skilled labor in these regions through increased
employment in the higher-education sector, and depending on migration patterns, the supply of graduates
in these locations. It may also have generated effects through innovation or human capital externalities
from higher education to the private sector.
Andersson et al. estimate the effects of higher-education presence on local labor productivity
(output per worker) using a municipality-level panel. Identification comes from within-municipality
variation over time in two measures of the scale of higher education in the area – the number of
researchers employed at higher-education institutions and the number of students enrolled. The authors
differentiate between newer and older established institutions (the original six universities in operation),
and consider whether effects vary with geographic distance. Overall, they find evidence in line with
50

Other evidence in a similar vein includes Woodward et al. (2006), who find a positive but fairly weak relationship
between proximity to university research, measured by total university R&D expenditure in science and engineering,
and numbers of high-tech start-ups. Unlike Abramovsky et al. (2007) and Abramovsky and Simpson (2011), who
find considerable heterogeneity across industries, the Woodward et al. findings are consistent with knowledge
spillovers from university research across a number of high-tech sectors.

60

positive effects on local labor productivity from the expansion of higher education, that the effects
associated with university researchers are greater than those associated with expansion of student
numbers, that effects are greater with respect to newer institutions for both measures of university
presence, and finally that effects are strongly spatially concentrated. The latter results imply that over half
of the estimated productivity gains accrue within 20 kilometers of the border of the institution’s host
municipality. However, the study is unable to disentangle the underlying causes of effects on labor
productivity. In principle one would want, for example, to be able to distinguish between effects driven
by changes in the composition of the workforce (for example through increased skill-levels), or through
externalities from spillovers from university research leading to higher non-education-sector TFP.
The same authors go some way to addressing this in Andersson et al. (2009), and revisit the
effects of the policy. They extend the analysis to look at innovation as measured by patents granted, and
look at aggregate effects on labor productivity and output. Given that the locations chosen for university
expansion may have been related to underlying economic variables such as their scope for future
productivity growth, the paper also presents IV estimates, instrumenting for university presence and scale
with measures of pre-existing facilities in the area including nursing schools and military facilities (since
the buildings were used as sites for the new institutions), the fraction of the local population turning 18,
and the fraction of voters voting for different political parties (some of which were strong supporters of
university decentralization).
Their findings for labor productivity are in line with the previous paper, with gains if anything
estimated to be even more localized. In addition, they estimate panel data count models relating numbers
of patents granted in an area, which might better capture knowledge spillovers from university research,
to numbers of research staff employed at old and new institutions. The results suggest a positive
relationship between the measures of investment in higher education and innovative outcomes. Effects for
both labor productivity and innovation are found to be increasing in the fraction of individuals in the area
who hold doctorates (measured contemporaneously). This suggests that the benefits of the
decentralization policy were asymmetric across areas according to their human capital endowments,
although the latter may also have evolved endogenously because of the policy.
As a final exercise, the paper estimates the net innovation and productivity gains at the national
level by constructing a no-decentralization counterfactual whereby researchers based at new institutions
created post-1987 are allocated proportionately to pre-existing institutions, and re-calculating levels of
innovation and productivity in each region. The results of this exercise imply on aggregate zero effect on
patents generated, suggesting that the spatial redistribution of university research staff did not lead to any
aggregate gain in innovative activity. However, using the labor productivity estimates, the authors back
out an estimate of GDP gains from the policy of between 0.01 percent and 0.10 percent. While the authors

61

do not attempt to reconcile these findings, the findings would seem to imply that the aggregate GDP gains
are driven by human capital improvements and agglomeration externalities working through channels
other than purely innovation. However, the non-citation-weighted patent measure will likely be an
imperfect measure of innovative activity, since different industries will exhibit highly different
propensities to patent, and not all patents are of equal value; hence it remains possible that the policy did
result in additional innovation in the aggregate.
5.4.3. Summary of evidence on clusters and universities
The evidence on higher-education institutions suggests that areas do benefit from productivity
spillovers, but that these may be highly localized and also industry specific, and in particular arise in
industries with closer technological links to university research and in those that employ a higher
proportion of university graduates. Knowledge spillovers might benefit incumbent firms, but the evidence
is also at least suggestive of university research facilities acting to attract high-tech, innovative firms to
these areas, and hence acting as a basis for cluster formation with potential long term benefits accruing –
at least to certain industries – through these agglomerative forces. Many of these studies are based,
however, on long-established universities, very likely in relatively affluent regions. But from the point of
view of using universities as a policy tool for economic development, the evidence from Sweden points
towards beneficial effects on local labor productivity – effects that do not appear to net out on aggregate
across regions, and which are potentially driven by increases in local human capital endowments. Hence,
the evidence implies that investment in higher education and research, which have public-good elements
to them, could generate long-term, local effects. But questions remain about the optimal location of
higher-education investment, and to inform this more evidence is needed, in particular on the precise
channels through which higher education institutions affect local economic activity, and how effects vary
with local characteristics.
To some degree, high-tech firms do appear to internalize externalities from public-sector research
in their location decisions, although science parks and other incentives may also be influential. The results
on the impact of the Bavarian cluster initiative also suggest that, aside from seeking to influence firm
location decisions, government intervention can also potentially overcome coordination failures and
increase the returns to innovative activity, by seeking to bolster interaction between private-sector firms
and improve private-sector access to public research facilities. However, this appears to have been both a
highly targeted program, with funds flowing to both private firms and public-sector research, and an
expensive program, certainly in comparison to the LPS policy adopted in France, which did not result in
any evidence of beneficial effects on firm performance.
5.5. Infrastructure investment and other regional policies
The European Union has long embraced policies aimed at reducing disparities between regions

62

across all member states, with funds being distributed to lagging regions even within nations with on
average relatively high income per capita. The primary policy instrument is EU Structural Funds,
comprising the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and European Social Fund (ESF), which
aim to increase economic growth and create jobs in eligible areas. ERDF expenditure is typically on
infrastructure, for example investment in energy, telecommunications, or linked to R&D, but can also
include subsidies for investment by firms. Expenditure under the ESF is on initiatives to boost
employment, such as training programs or projects to increase labor market attachment. A third pot of
funding, the Cohesion Fund, is available to whole countries with Gross National Income per capita less
than 90 percent of the EU average. This program funds investment in cross-national transport
infrastructure (see Redding and Turner in this Handbook, for a discussion of the evidence on transport
infrastructure and growth), and investment with environmental benefits. During the period 2007-2013,
expenditure under the three programs accounted for around 35 percent of the total European Community
budget (Becker et al., 2012), with ERDF expenditure of 201 billion Euros accounting for over half of
this. 51 The largest amount of funding goes to Objective 1 regions with per capita GDP below 75 percent
of the EU average. Within these lagging areas, European national governments are also permitted under
EU regulations to offer discretionary subsidies of the type discussed in Section 5.3.
The United States also provides an example of a very large-scale regional development program,
the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), the long-run impact of which is analyzed by Kline and Moretti
(2014). The authors not only evaluate effects on the targeted region, but also estimate aggregate effects
for the United States as a whole, and examine outcomes after the funding is withdrawn. We first discuss
this and related U.S. policy, and then turn to EU policy.
The TVA development and modernization policy involved substantial investment in public
infrastructure including energy (electricity generating dams), transport (road networks and canals), and
new schools. The investment in electricity-generating capacity was part of a deliberate strategy to attract
manufacturing activity to the TVA area. In geographic scope, it spanned four U.S. states, covering nearly
all of Tennessee plus areas of Kentucky, Alabama, and Mississippi. The program began in 1933, with the
highest expenditure occurring during the 1940s and 1950s. Kline and Moretti report that federal
expenditure totalled around $20 billion (in 2000$) from 1934 to 2000, with transfers per household during
the early 1950s peaking at around 10 percent of average household income in the region.
Using pre-program data from 1930, the authors demonstrate that the set of counties covered by
the program performed worse on a set of economic indicators compared to U.S. counties in general and
compared to other Southern counties. The fraction of employment in agriculture was higher and that in

51

See http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/thefunds/funding/index_en.cfm (viewed January 7, 2014).

63

manufacturing lower, manufacturing wages were lower, and literacy rates were also lower, indicating
lower productivity and human capital. Given these systematic differences in the characteristics of the
TVA counties, Kline and Moretti exploit the fact that regional authorities were proposed but due to
political reasons never established in other parts of the country, to construct an additional set of control
areas. To do this they approximate the geographic boundaries of six potential regional authorities, and
verify that many of their pre-TVA economic characteristics, including prior trends in the share of
employment in manufacturing, are much closer to those in the TVA counties.
The authors first look at impacts on the TVA counties for a range of outcomes over different
periods: 1940-2000, and two sub-periods 1940-1960 and 1960-2000. The sub-period split is chosen
because after 1960 federal transfers to the program were negligible. For the full time period their most
consistent findings are that the growth rate of manufacturing employment was higher (at around 5-6
percent per decade) and the growth rate of agricultural employment lower (around 5-7 percent lower per
decade) relative to control areas. In addition, median family income growth increased around 2.5 percent
per decade because of the policy. The results by sub-period indicate that the faster growth in
manufacturing employment occurred during both periods, although the effect was around three times
higher during the initial two decades (around 10-12 percent per decade during 1940-1960, as opposed to
3-3.5 percent from 1960-2000). In stark contrast, agricultural employment is found to have experienced
substantially faster growth up to 1960 (around 11-12 percent per decade), but dramatically slower growth
thereafter (around 13-17 percent lower per decade).
The results over the full period 1940-2000 paint a picture of public infrastructure investment in
the TVA counties increasing the pace of industrialization, shifting employment out of agriculture towards
manufacturing. That the authors found little evidence of wage increases in the manufacturing sector
implies that labor supply was elastic, with new workers either moving to the area or switching from
agricultural to manufacturing employment. The increase in family income growth therefore is driven by
changes in the composition of employment, since wages in manufacturing exceeded those in agriculture.
The authors attribute the differential response of manufacturing and agricultural employment growth post1960 to the presence of agglomeration externalities in manufacturing, discussed next. These externalities
continued to make the TVA counties an attractive location for new manufacturing activity even in the
face of depreciation of the initial infrastructure investments following the withdrawal of federal funding,
whereas the authors argue that faster growth in agricultural employment did not persist because
agriculture may not exhibit the same external economies (Hornbeck and Naidu, 2013).
The paper then analyzes the aggregate effects of the TVA program – whether it generated
benefits at the national level, or whether the gains in the TVA counties came at the expense of other areas.
The authors’ theoretical framework for analyzing national effects allows for two channels through which

64

the policy can affect aggregate labor productivity: a direct effect whereby investment in public
infrastructure acts to raise private-sector productivity; and an indirect effect arising from the presence of
agglomeration economies in manufacturing. As outlined in Section 2, this latter effect cannot have a
positive impact on the aggregate unless different areas exhibit heterogeneity in how responsive local
productivity is to a change in agglomeration, i.e., the local agglomeration elasticity. If this elasticity is
constant across regions then a spatial redistribution of workers will generate no aggregate benefits. Their
empirical evidence is supportive of the latter case.
Rather than estimate effects on labor productivity, the authors assume perfect labor mobility and
estimate effects on manufacturing employment, 52 which will increase in the face of labor-productivityenhancing investment. The paper estimates both the direct effect of the TVA investment on
manufacturing employment, and the indirect effect on manufacturing employment of agglomeration, as
measured by the lagged density of local manufacturing employment. One issue is how to separately
identify the direct and indirect effects, given that a direct effect that increases manufacturing productivity
will increase manufacturing employment, which in turn will affect the density of manufacturing
employment. The model is estimated using a county-level panel in first differences, with the dependent
variable the change in log county-level manufacturing employment over a decade. The direct effect is
identified from the inclusion of a dummy variable for TVA counties (not differenced). The indirect effect
is identified from lagged changes in the density of manufacturing employment, which are instrumented
using longer (two-decade) lags.
A second aim is to allow the agglomeration elasticity to vary flexibly across the distribution of
the density of manufacturing employment. This is done using piecewise splines in manufacturing
employment density, estimating spline functions for low, medium, and high sections of the distribution.
The estimates using a spline in the log of manufacturing employment density measure the agglomeration
elasticity with respect to manufacturing employment, and there appear to be no significant differences in
the estimated elasticities across the three sections of the density distribution, with a 1 percent increase in
density resulting in a 0.3-0.35 percent increase in manufacturing employment. 53
The estimated direct effect over the entire sample period 1960-2000 is positive but statistically
insignificantly different from zero in the IV specifications, suggesting no evidence of differential
52

Their data are decadal; hence, the assumption needs to hold at this frequency. In their model, the TVA investment
increases firm productivity, which increases the wage, leading to an inflow of workers until in the longer-run the
wage returns to its equilibrium level, but at a higher level of manufacturing employment. This higher level of
employment will only be permanent if either the productivity increase from the investment is permanent, or the
elasticity of productivity with respect to employment density is non-linear.
53
Their central estimate of the agglomeration elasticity with respect to productivity is around 0.14, which is
somewhat higher than the majority of elasticity estimates reported in Melo et al. (2009) across a range of studies, but
not outside the overall range of estimates.

65

manufacturing employment growth in TVA counties over this period. However, this conceals
considerable variation in the estimated direct effect over three sub-periods 1940-1960, 1960-1980, and
1980-2000. When the sample is extended further back in time, the results indicate that for the early years
– 1940-1960 – the TVA policy resulted in a significant direct boost to manufacturing employment, but for
the final two periods the direct effect is estimated to be negative but insignificant. Hence, while the direct
effect of the policy is felt in the period when substantial federal transfers were being made, the indirect
effects on manufacturing employment and productivity within the TVA counties, generated by
agglomeration externalities, continued after the funding had been withdrawn, as evidenced by the
continuing faster growth in manufacturing employment in the affected counties noted earlier.
As a final exercise, they use their estimates in a cost-benefit analysis from the point of view of the
aggregate effect on the United States. Since the constant agglomeration elasticity implies that
agglomeration benefits of the policy cancel out across U.S. counties, the only benefit is the direct benefit
to the TVA counties, by raising the productivity of the manufacturing labor force in that location during
1940-1960. They estimate the net present value of the benefits delivered by the program to be $22-$32.4
billion, which exceed the net present value of the federal transfers of $17.3 billion.
In summary, for the TVA counties, once the federal subsidy program ended, the gains to
agricultural employment that arose during the earlier period were eventually eroded. But increases in
manufacturing employment brought about by investment in public infrastructure spending continued well
beyond the policy end date, due to agglomeration externalities. The estimated direct effects of this
infrastructure investment on aggregate manufacturing productivity are positive, with estimated benefits
exceeding the program cost. However, based on the near-constant estimated elasticities of manufacturing
employment with respect to manufacturing density, the estimates of indirect effects on manufacturing
arising from agglomeration externalities are around zero in aggregate, with the positive agglomeration
benefits which accrued to the TVA region offset by negative effects elsewhere.
Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) discuss the effects of the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC)
which, beginning in 1963, disbursed considerable federal funding, primarily for transportation
infrastructure but also for expenditure on health and education, to counties spanning a large geographic
area from Mississippi to New York. They estimate effects on ARC counties using other non-treated
counties within the same states as controls (excluding those within 56 miles of the coast). They find some
evidence of a positive effect of the infrastructure expenditure on population growth over 1970 to 1980,
but no statistically significant evidence of an effect over a longer period 1970 to 2000, and importantly,
no statistically significant evidence of an effect on growth in income per capita. Their results are quite
different to the findings of a previous study by Isserman and Rephann (1995), who primarily used
comparisons of mean growth rates across matched treatment-control pairs (this time excluding as

66

potential controls counties within 60 miles of ARC counties), and found large effects of the program on
income per capita. While the stark differences in findings may be due to the alternative ways in which the
authors address the problem of constructing a proxy for unobservable counterfactual outcomes, Glaeser
and Gottlieb do acknowledge that the standard errors around some of their estimates are large enough that
they cannot rule out substantial positive effects. In fact, their conclusion is that evaluation of this type of
wide-ranging expenditure policy can prove very difficult, due to the funding being spread thinly across a
very large geographic area and over a long time period, and the difficulty of controlling for many other
confounding factors that might affect economic growth over the longer term across such a wide region.
Becker et al. (2010, 2012) provide recent evaluations of the impact of major infrastructure
investments under EU regional policy. They focus on the impact of Structural Funds on growth in
employment and per capita GDP in Objective 1 regions. Becker et al. (2010) exploit data on NUTS2 and
NUTS3 regions for three rounds of the Structural Funds program between 1989 and 2006. The authors
use the fact that the NUTS2 area eligibility threshold is in principle a strict cut-off at GDP per capita
below 75 percent of the EU average in an RD evaluation strategy, arguing that those regions with GDP
per capita close to the threshold will have ex ante similar characteristics, but only those below the
threshold will qualify for funding as Objective 1 regions. Since in practice there are a few exceptions to
defining eligibility at the NUTS2 level – a small number of NUTS3 regions received funding, and a small
fraction of NUTS2 regions have a treatment status that does not adhere to the strict eligibility rule – the
paper implements a fuzzy RD approach and instruments regions’ treatment status using the eligibility
rule, and also conducts a robustness check whereby treatment status is defined at the NUTS3 level.
Their results imply a robust positive effect of Structural Funds expenditure on growth in per
capita GDP, with a preferred estimate of around 1.6 percentage points per annum within a funding
period. 54 However, in the vast majority of specifications they find no effect on employment growth. The
authors conduct a back-of-the-envelope cost-benefit analysis, which suggests that the program of transfers
is cost-effective, generating a return of 20 percent, or a multiplier of 1.2. However, the confidence
intervals around their estimates mean that they cannot reject a multiplier of only 1. They speculate that the
findings of effects on GDP per capita, combined with no effects on employment, are driven by
productivity gains from infrastructure investment, but that new job creation only occurs with a longer
time lag. Overall, though, their results imply that the policy is cost-effective in increasing income in
targeted regions.

54

Their evidence of a positive effect on per capita GDP growth in Objective 1 regions is also supported by Mohl
and Hagen (2010). Table 1 in that paper provides an excellent summary of the findings from evaluations of the
effects of EU Structural Funds, together with information on the data and econometric approaches. The majority of
studies suggest positive effects on regional growth or on regional convergence, with a few exceptions.

67

Becker et al. (2012) extend this analysis to look at the relationship between the generosity of
financial assistance under the program, i.e., the treatment intensity, and growth in income per capita.
Their approach allows them to analyze whether the Structural Funds budget could have been redistributed
across eligible EU regions to achieve higher growth in the aggregate, and faster convergence. The
underlying idea is that if the investment funded by the transfer payments exhibits decreasing returns, it is
possible that funding beyond a certain level becomes inefficient. It is also possible that very low levels of
transfers are simply ineffective in stimulating growth, with a minimum funding generosity required to
generate a big push.
The authors use data on the intensity of transfers under the Structural Funds and Cohesion
budgets over two EU funding rounds (1994-1999 and 2000-2006) at the NUTS3 level. They identify
substantial variation in the intensity of transfers across regions, as measured by annual transfers as a
fraction of a region’s GDP in the year before the funding began. This ranged from 0.00009 percent of
GDP for a region within Sweden to 29 percent of GDP for a region in Greece, with an average intensity
of 0.756 percent. The paper estimates the effects of different degrees of treatment intensity using
generalized propensity score estimation. This non-parametric method is an extension to continuous
treatments of the propensity score matching approach to analyzing the impact of a binary treatment. The
method allows the authors to estimate whether the treatment effect varies at different funding intensities,
conditional on observable determinants of the treatment intensity itself (Hirano and Imbens, 2004).
The results confirm the findings of Becker et al. (2010) that on average the program generated
positive effects on regional growth, but also imply a non-linear relationship between treatment intensity
and growth in income per-capita. From this, the authors can back out various thresholds. First, the
“maximum desirable treatment intensity,” defined as the intensity beyond which they cannot reject a null
hypothesis of zero effects on growth, and second the “optimal transfer intensity,” the level at which one
additional Euro of funding generates exactly one Euro of additional GDP in the average region.
They find that around 18 percent of NUTS3 regions received funding beyond the estimated
maximum desirable treatment intensity threshold of approximately 1.3 percent. For these regions, growth
would not have been substantially lessened by a reduction in the generosity of funding to this level. In
addition, they estimate that a redistribution of funds away from these regions and towards regions with
lower funding intensities would be more efficient and could have increased average regional growth in
income per-capita by around 1.12 and 0.76 percentage points in the first and second funding rounds,
respectively. They also find that around 36 percent of regions received transfers beyond the optimal
transfer intensity of 0.4 percent of regional GDP. Redistribution across regions based on this lower
threshold could have raised aggregate GDP growth, but would have come at the cost of working against
the regional convergence objective, since the re-distribution would have been towards relatively

68

prosperous areas. This suggests a trade-off between maximizing the aggregate efficiency of the program
and potentially taking advantage of greater agglomeration externalities in relatively well-off regions, and
the specified redistributive aim of the scheme. The authors also find no evidence to suggest that a
minimum level of transfers is necessary to generate increases in per capita income growth, estimating
positive effects of even small transfers.
In summary, the evidence from both the analysis of the TVA investment program and the EU
Structural Funds implies that infrastructure investment can be cost-effective in delivering productivity
growth in targeted regions, and can act as a redistributive tool across locations. Questions remain about
how long lasting these effects are, with the direct benefits of the TVA program appearing to erode over
time, and also about the precise mechanisms underlying the effects on growth. For example, this type of
funding typically covers a wide range of public infrastructure investments, and it would be instructive to
know the relative benefits of each in terms of their effects, and whether these investments are
complementary to each other in terms of increasing local growth. There is also evidence that
infrastructure investment can result in agglomeration benefits for the targeted areas, although this
evidence also seems to suggest that these may come at the expense of efficiency gains in other regions.
5.6. Community development and locally-led initiatives
Finally, we turn to a small number of place-based policies that do not fit so neatly into the
previous categories. First, in the United States there are a number of programs that focus on real-estate
development, but sometimes also have other components. Moreover, these often have some discretionary
flavor. The discussion of enterprise zones above already referred to redevelopment areas. A common tool
in these areas is to allow Tax-Increment Financing (TIF) whereby increases in property taxes owed as a
result of appreciation (presumably stemming from redevelopment) are used to finance the debt incurred to
engage in the redevelopment. TIFs and redevelopment are somewhat controversial, and we do not discuss
them in any detail in this chapter as the research on them focuses nearly exclusively on implications for
real-estate prices (e.g., Weber et al., 2007). Low-income housing programs similarly have a place-based,
discretionary flavor. Among studies examining their effects – again, mainly on housing markets – are
Sinai and Waldfogel (2005) and Eriksen and Rosenthal (2010).
A recent study (Freedman, 2012) examines the federal New Markets Tax Credit (NMTC)
program, which concentrates on real-estate development, but also devotes resources to economic
development mainly through subsidizing capital for businesses through loans or preferential interest rates.
The study examines the same kinds of labor market outcomes examined in the literature on enterprise
zones. For the period of this study (2002-2009), the NMTC provided $26 billion in tax credits to investors
making capital investments mainly in businesses located in moderately low-income neighborhoods.
Freedman reports that around 70 percent of the funds go to commercial real-estate development, and most

69

of the rest goes to business development – mainly loans to firms. NMTC funds are channeled through
Community Development Entities (CDEs), often banks or financial institutions, which have to meet
several criteria including serving or providing capital to low-income communities and people. The
channeling through the CDEs are what gives the NMTC a discretionary flavor, especially given that only
a very small fraction received the right to allocate tax credits in the years Freedman studies, via a
competitive process. The tax credits flow to investors that make equity investments in the CDEs.
The study has many parallels to Freedman’s study of Texas enterprise zones (2013) discussed
earlier, although the focus is national. He uses the same data and a similar research design, exploiting a
discontinuity in eligibility for NMTC funds based on the main criterion that makes tracts eligible – having
median family income in the 2000 Census below 80 percent of the state’s median for non-metro areas,
and below the greater of the MSA or state median for metro areas. This is not the only rule determining
eligibility, so Freedman uses a fuzzy design that instruments for actual NMTC credits with whether or not
a Census tract is eligible based on this rule. He carries out many of the same kinds of analyses to validate
the RD design as in the enterprise zone paper. He does not, however, consider overlap with enterprise
zones, which could be important.
The evidence suggests that there is a discontinuous increase in NMTC investment at the threshold
for eligibility based on median family income in the tract – about $1 million more in NMTC investment
than similar tracts that do not qualify, and about 0.05 additional businesses receiving investment. Given
that these amounts seem fairly small, it may be more plausible to believe that the effects Freedman finds –
discussed next – flow more from the real-estate development side of the NMTC. Using Census data, the
main statistically significant effect Freedman finds is for reducing the poverty rate, with estimates
centered on a reduction of about 0.8 percentage point. He characterizes this as a limited and costly effect,
so that despite the small investment effects, the evidence implies that it costs about $23,500 to lift one
person out of poverty. At the same time, Freedman also finds some evidence consistent with
compositional changes, with a few of the estimates indicating increases in household turnover of about
0.75 percentage point. Such displacement effects could imply even higher costs to reduce poverty.
However, unlike some of the work on enterprise zones, Freedman does not find evidence of an effect on
median housing values, with the estimates very close to zero, which is less consistent with a
compositional change towards higher-income, higher-skilled people. Inferring a direct impact on poverty
of residents is also challenging because there is no statistical evidence of employment effects from the
LEHD data. While the point estimates hover around 1.5 percent, the standard errors are three times as
large. Freedman generously concludes that there is a “modest positive effect on private-sector
employment” (p. 1012), and while a positive but insignificant effect does not imply no effect, this still
seems too strong a conclusion. And compositional shifts, in and of themselves, could also lead to higher

70

employment. Between the potential compositional shifts, the difficulty of understanding how such small
amounts could have much impact, and the small impacts that occurred even if we rule out compositional
changes, it is hard to attribute much success to the NMTC program.
Some place-based community-development policies involve considerable local autonomy in
terms of designing interventions and spending public money. Two examples within Europe are the Patti
Territoriali program in Italy, which aimed to stimulate growth and employment, and the New Deal for
Communities in England, which focuses on community development with a very broad remit. Accetturo
and de Blasio (2012) evaluate the effects of the Patti Territoriali program, established in 1997. These
territorial pacts aim to boost economic growth and employment in lagging areas eligible for support under
EU criteria. During the period analyzed, in principle the program covered the whole of Southern Italy as
an Objective 1 region and some areas of Central and Northern Italy. Within these areas, local
governments, local business groups, and trade unions from proximate municipalities could come to
together to form an agreement, which set out a development plan for the area. Therefore, not all eligible
municipalities participated in the program in practice, although the authors report that those that did
tended to form large groups covering on average 27 municipalities and an average population of 235,000.
Public funding was allocated to both public infrastructure investment and financial incentives for privatesector investment in the participating areas. A maximum of 50 million Euros was allocated to each area,
with public infrastructure investment expenditure limited to 15 million Euros.
The paper evaluates effects on employment and on plant numbers. Clearly both the eligible
municipalities and within those the subset that actually choose to participate are non-random samples of
the full population. Within the North and Center of Italy, not all areas are eligible to form Patti
Territoriali. The authors use propensity score matching to identify similar eligible and non-eligible
municipalities prior to the implementation of the program, and use difference-in-differences to estimate
an intention-to-treat effect, which can be a valuable parameter for policy makers wanting to know the
effect of the program on the target areas. They also estimate the effect of treatment on the treated by
comparing a set of participating areas with a set of comparable areas that were ineligible to participate.
These evaluation approaches are not available in assessing the impact of the program in the South
of Italy since the entire geographic area is eligible as an Objective 1 area. Instead, difference-indifferences estimates compare changes in outcomes in participating municipalities to changes in nonparticipating municipalities in the South. Equivalent difference-in-difference estimates, using eligible but
non-participating municipalities as controls, are calculated for the North and Center to try to assess the
degree to which selection into participation on unobservables might affect the estimated program effects
for the South. The authors also address the fact that the Law 488 program discussed above was running

71

concurrently. 55
Using Italian Census data from 1996 to 2001, the intention-to-treat estimates for the Center and
North of Italy on employment and the number of plants are negative and not statistically significant.
While it is possible that this reflects a combination of positive effects on participating areas and negative
spillover or displacement effects on eligible but non-participating areas, the estimated effect of the
program on participating municipalities is also negative and statistically insignificant. Estimates for the
South, which compare outcomes for participating versus non-participating but eligible municipalities,
imply a positive and significant effect of the program on employment. However, replicating this approach
for the Northern and Central regions suggests that the estimates for the South are very likely upward
biased, and if the sample for the South is reduced to only those municipalities that received no funding
under the Law 488 program, the estimated effect on employment decreases in size and becomes
statistically insignificant.
These results point towards there being no positive effects of the policy on employment or on the
creation of new plants. This begs the question of why it was not successful. One possibility the authors
discuss is that the available funding of 50 million Euros per area was spread too thinly to generate
sufficient additional activity in these lagging regions. However, since this level of funding was found to
be equally ineffective in the most deprived Southern regions and in the relatively more prosperous regions
of the North and Center of Italy, where perhaps a lower level of expenditure might have been required,
the expenditure cap was likely not the only explanation. The second suggestion is that the program fell
victim to rent-seeking activities, which could even have been heightened by the bottom-up, locally-led
approach, and that subsidies were diverted to inferior private-sector projects.
A second example of a policy with local autonomy is the New Deal for Communities, which was
operational in England from 2002. The ultimate aim of the policy was to improve living standards in the
most deprived neighborhoods in the country. In practice, the program involved local committees devising
and implementing a range of policies that aimed to improve employment and educational attainment,
reduce crime, improve health, and address local housing and environmental issues. Examples of projects
aimed at increasing employment included advice and credit schemes for those wanting to start their own
business, become self-employed, or develop an existing business, and support for vocational training.
Thirty-nine neighborhoods participated in the scheme and a total budget of £2 billion was allocated to be
spent supporting these local initiatives over a ten-year period.

55

For the North and Center only areas eligible for Patti Territoriali are eligible for Law 488 financial incentives,
potentially biasing estimates of the effects upwards. For the South the non-participant areas used as controls are also
eligible for Law 488, which could bias estimates of the effects upwards or downwards depending on how Law 488
affected the different areas.

72

Gutiérrez Romero (2009) uses a difference-in-differences approach to analyse the effects of the
program on employment outcomes in participating areas. Control group neighborhoods were selected
based on being within the same – in principle eligible – local authority as treated neighborhoods, but not
directly bordering the treated neighborhoods where the program was in operation. Using a household
survey carried out in treatment and control neighborhoods, she finds that the program increased the
likelihood of entering employment for specific types of individuals, such as those who were in full-time
education or undertaking training in the pre-program period, and those who were claiming incapacity
benefits, but not for those who were claiming unemployment benefits. Partly in line with these results, in
a companion paper using administrative data on benefit claimants, Gutiérrez Romero and Noble (2008)
found that the same program led to a reduction in individuals in treated neighborhoods claiming
unemployment and incapacity benefit.
Like in the analysis of enterprise zones, one point to come out of studies of local initiatives that
include a very wide range of policy elements is the need to understand which components of these
programs makes a difference, in those instances where beneficial effects are detected. In addition, for
policies that do not appear to generate effects, it would help to have further corroborative evidence on
why they did not work – whether it is simply that the financial scale of the intervention is too low with
funds being spread too thinly, or whether the policy design was ineffective. In addition, the analyses of
the NMTC and New Deal for Communities highlight the value of trying to isolate which sets of
individuals are affected by the policy, and whether it is reaching the target groups.
6. UNANSWERED QUESTIONS AND RESEARCH CHALLENGES
In summary, what have we learned from the available evidence? The answer is probably – “not
enough.” To guide policy we need know more about what works, why it works, and crucially for placebased policy, where it works, and for whom it works. We conclude by suggesting five areas where the
evidence base could be usefully extended: investigating long-run effects; isolating specific features of
policies that make them effective or that create unwelcome distortions; identifying more precisely what
the effects are and who it is that gains benefits or incurs costs; learning more about potential strategic
interactions between jurisdictions offering place-based policies; and examining whether broader policy
levers such as tax policy might be more effective than place-based initiatives.
In our view, a major shortcoming of the research on place-based policies is that even the most
positive evidence on their effectiveness does not establish that they create self-sustaining economic gains.
That is, at best the evidence (sometimes) says that when place-based incentives are in effect, there are
increases in economic activity and perhaps welfare. There may be some gains from benefits even if
governments have to continue paying the costs. However, a much stronger case would exist if some kinds
of place-based policies helped to jump-start economic development in an area in a way that becomes self-

73

sustaining – in the language of economics, by moving the area to a new equilibrium. Moretti (2012)
concurs, arguing: “The real test is not whether [place-based policies] … create jobs during the push …
Instead we need to look at whether the publicly financed seed can eventually generate a privately
supported cluster that is large enough to become self-sustaining” (pp. 200-1).
Some of the most positive evidence summarized above seems to point towards the benefits of
infrastructure expenditure, perhaps within enterprise zone type programs, and more clearly as part of EU
Structural Funds, as well as benefits from expenditure on higher education and university research. This is
perhaps not surprising given the public-good nature of this type of investment. However, more evidence
is needed on longer-term outcomes. The findings from Kline and Moretti (2014) on the effects of the
investment under the TVA program suggest that this very substantial push did generate long-lasting
increases in manufacturing employment and income in the targeted region, through both a direct effect
during the peak period of infrastructure spending, and through subsequent agglomeration externalities.
But even this study finds that the direct effect of the public investment on local productivity diminished
over time, and also that when measured at the national level, the indirect agglomeration benefits to
manufacturing appear to net out across regions at around zero. This analysis further highlights the value
of assessing the aggregate welfare effects of these investment programs, not just those on the directlyaffected areas, in order to fully determine the magnitude of any trade-off between aggregate efficiency
and redistribution across regions – although that is very hard to do.
As summarized above, for enterprise zone policies much of the evidence to date is at odds and
presents mixed messages as to the effects of such programs. More could be done to try to reconcile the
existing findings, and to unpack whether differences are due to data, to econometric methods, or to
genuine differences in the effectiveness of different programs operating in areas with different economic
characteristics. Moreover, different features of programs may alter their effectiveness, as exemplified by
the discussion of the potential role of block grants in the federal Empowerment Zones. This highlights our
second point, that even if the current evidence did all point in the same direction – for example, in terms
of positive employment effects – what it does not tell us is exactly which features of these programs
matter – for example the use of hiring credits versus infrastructure investment. Knowing more precisely
what works in terms of specific elements of the policy, and importantly why these elements work, would
be of considerable value to policymakers.
In addition, we need to know about how generalizable the policy conclusions are across areas. By
their very nature place-based policies are implemented in locations with different characteristics, and it is
not just the policy details that vary but the economic environments in which they are set. A few studies
have looked for and found evidence of heterogeneous effects of the same policy across different locations
– perhaps most notably and systematically the Briant et al. (2012) study of variation in the effectiveness

74

of the French ZFUs based on transportation accessibility and barriers between targeted areas and main
employment centers. Clearly much more could be done to understand the source of this variation in policy
effectiveness.
We have argued that studies that provide evidence on the outcomes specifically targeted by
policies are valuable in their own right and are the obvious first step in policy evaluation. However,
research could look at a wider range of outcomes relevant to assessing overall welfare effects. For
example, are there distortionary effects of enterprise zone policies beyond the displacement of
employment from neighboring areas? If firms receive targeted incentives to increase employment, does
this create any unwelcome distortions to firm productivity, for example through the type of workers
recruited or through the displacement of firms from otherwise more productive locations? While some of
the empirical literature on discretionary grants assesses potential distortions of this type stemming from
the policy design, the literature on enterprise zones does not typically look at plant labor productivity or
TFP, although it has looked at related outcomes for individuals such as wages.
Research could also aim to shed more light on exactly who gains any benefits from place-based
policies. If programs are effective in increasing local productivity, are the ultimate beneficiaries actually
landowners if the supply of housing or buildings is inelastic? If policies are found to be effective in
raising employment rates or average incomes in targeted areas, is it resident individuals in low-income
groups, whom the policies often aim to benefit, who actually realize these gains, or is there significant inmigration? More evidence on the redistributive effects of these policies across individuals within eligible
areas would be valuable, in particular linked to features of the programs, such as setting hiring incentives
for specific groups.
Some of the empirical literature pays attention to overlapping place-based policies, but that may
be just the tip of the iceberg. Given the evidence that place-based policies often encourage simple
relocation of economic activity, it seems natural to think that – at least for place-based policies at a local
level – jurisdictions may respond to the policies offered nearby. This is a common theme in concerns
about a “race to the bottom” in welfare programs, environmental regulation, and tax policy (e.g.,
Brueckner, 1998). This can have potentially important implications for empirical work: for example, the
estimated impact of a place-based policy implemented in a particular jurisdiction may capture the partial
equilibrium effect, rather than the general equilibrium effect once other jurisdictions have responded.
While this issue has been taken up with respect to other state or local policies, it seems it could be
fruitfully considered in the context of the kinds of place-based policies this chapter considers, and is also
relevant to the issue of whether such policies are in reality a zero-sum game.
Finally, we noted earlier that there are policies intended to boost local labor-market activity –
such as lowering business taxes – that are outside the definition of place-based policies, because they do

75

not favorably treat one area within a government’s jurisdiction. In light of some of the theoretical
arguments against place-based policies discussed in this chapter, it may well be that policies that
encourage economic activity without distinguishing between regions within a jurisdiction are more
efficient. Bartik’s (2012) review suggests that the evidence clearly indicates that lower local average
business taxes are associated with higher local labor demand, although the range of elasticities is so large
(−0.1 to −0.6) as to make cost-benefit calculations meaningless. He also argues that evidence on
Michigan’s MEGA programs, which provided marginal subsidies to businesses that export from the local
economy, shows that it is much more effective (six times more impact per dollar of foregone revenue)
than cutting the overall business tax rate (Bartik and Erickcek, 2010). Bartik also notes that we know a lot
about policies to increase the quality of labor supply, and how this can have positive externalities on
others (Moretti, 2004), but not nearly as much about how a regional development policy to increase
human capital results in more jobs and higher-quality jobs in the local economy.
We think an important research question is whether place-based policies, per se, are more
efficient, or less distortionary, than broader local economic development efforts. We are not aware of
work that tries to weigh the alternative approaches, but given the fairly weak or highly uncertain evidence
regarding the effectiveness of at least some place-based policies, it is likely that broader policies are more
efficient. At the same time, it is plausible that the broader policies fail to achieve some of the
distributional goals of place-based policies, although as we have noted the evidence that place-based
policies achieve their distributional goals is itself far from clear.

76

References
Abramovsky, L., Simpson, H. (2011). “Geographic proximity and firm-university innovation linkages:
evidence from Great Britain”. Journal of Economic Geography 11(6), 949-977.
Abramovsky L., Harrison, R., Simpson, H. (2007). “University research and the location of business
R&D”. Economic Journal 117 (519), C114-C141.
Alder, S., Shao, L., Zilibotti, F. (2013.) “Economic reforms and industrial policy in a panel of Chinese
cities”. UBS Center working paper no.5, University of Zurich.
Baum-Snow, N., Ferreira, F. (XXXX). “Causal inference in urban economics”. In: Duranton, G.,
Henderson J.V., Strange, W. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Accetturo, A., de Blasio, G. (2012). “Policies for local development: an evaluation of Italy’s “Patti
Territoriali””. Regional Science and Urban Economics 42, 15-26.
Ananat, E., Fu, S., Ross, S. L. (2013). “Race-specific agglomeration economies: social distance and the
black-white wage gap.” NBER Working Paper No. 18933.
Andersson, F., Haltiwanger, J.C., Kutzbach, M.J., Pollakowski, H.O., Weinberg, D.H. (2014). “Job
displacement and the duration of joblessness: the role of spatial mismatch.” NBER Working Paper No.
20066.
Andersson, R., Quigley, J., Wilhelmsson, M. (2004). “University decentralization as regional policy: the
Swedish experiment”. Journal of Economic Geography 4, 371-388.
Andersson, R., Quigley, J., Wilhelmsson, M. (2009). “Urbanization, productivity and innovation:
evidence from investment in higher education”. Journal of Urban Economics 66, 2-15.
Åslund, O., Östh, J., Zenou, Y. (2006). “How important is access to jobs? Old question – improved
answer”. Journal of Economic Geography 10, 389-422.
Bartik, T. (2003). “Local economic development policies”. Upjohn Institute Working Paper No. 09-91.
Bartik, T. (2009). “What should Michigan be doing to promote long-run economic development?”
Upjohn Institute Working Paper No. 09-160.
Bartik, T. (2012). “The future of state and local economic development policy: what research is needed”.
Growth and Change 43, 545-562.
Bartik, T., Erickcek, G. (2010). “The employment and fiscal effects of Michigan’s MEGA tax credit
program”. Upjohn Institute Working Paper No. 10-164.
Bayer, P., Ross, S., Topa, G. (2008.) “Place of work and place of residence: informal hiring networks and
labor market outcomes”. Journal of Political Economy 116, 1150-1196.
Becker, G. (1993). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to
Education, Third Edition. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Becker, S., Egger P., von Ehrlich M. (2010) “Going NUTS: the effect of EU structural funds on regional
performance”. Journal of Public Economics 94, 578-590.
Becker, S., Egger P., von Ehrlich, M. (2012) “Too much of a good thing? On the growth effects of the
EU’s regional policy”. European Economic Review 56, 648-668.
Bernini, C., Pellegrini, G. (2011). “How are growth and productivity in private firms affected by public
subsidy? Evidence from a regional policy”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 41, 253-265.
Billings, S. (2009). “Do enterprise zones work? An analysis at the borders”. Public Finance Review 37,
68-93.
Bitler, M., Gelbach, J., Hoynes, H. (2006). “What mean impacts miss: distributional effects of welfare

reform experiments”. American Economic Review 86, 988-1012.
Bloom, H., Riccio, J., Verma, N. (2005). “Promoting work in public housing: the effectiveness of JobsPlus, final report.” MDRC.
Bondonio, D., Greenbaum, R. (2007). “Do local tax incentives affect economic growth? What mean
impacts miss in the analysis of enterprise zone policies”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 37,
121-136.
Bound, J., Groen, J., Kédzi, G., Turner, S. (2004). “Trade in university training: cross-state variation in
the production and stock of college-educated labor”. Journal of Econometrics 121, 143-173.
Briant, A, Lafourcade, M., Schmutz, B. (2012). “Can tax breaks beat geography? Lessons from the
French enterprise zone program”. Paris School of Economics Working Paper No. 2012-22.
Bronzini, R., de Blasio, G. (2006). “Evaluating the impact of investment incentives: the case of Italy’s
Law 488/1992”. Journal of Urban Economics 60, 327-349.
Brueckner, J. (1998). “Testing for strategic interaction among local governments: the case of growth
controls”. Journal of Urban Economics 44, 438-467.
Burnes, D. (2012). “An empirical analysis of the capitalization of enterprise zone tax incentives into
commercial property values”. Unpublished manuscript.
Busso, M., Kline, P. (2006). “Do local economic development programs work? Evidence from the federal
Empowerment Zone program”. Unpublished manuscript.
Busso, M., Gregory, J., Kline, P. (2013). “Assessing the incidence and efficiency of a prominent place
based policy”. American Economic Review 103, 897-947.
Brülhart, M., Bucovetsky, S., Schmidheiny, K. (XXXX). “Taxation and cities”. In: Duranton, G.,
Henderson J.V., Strange, W. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Carlino, G., Kerr, W. (XXXX). “Agglomeration and Innovation”. In: Duranton, G., Henderson J.V.,
Strange, W. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Carlino, G., Carr, J., Hunt, R., Smith, T. (2012) “The agglomeration of R&D labs”. Unpublished
manuscript.
Chang, A. (2013). “Tax policy endogeneity: evidence from R&D tax credits.” Unpublished manuscript.
Combes, P-P., Duranton, G., Gobillon, L., Roux, S. (2010). “Estimating agglomeration economies with
history, geology and worker effects”. In: Glaeser, E. (Ed.), Agglomeration Economics. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Combes, P-P., Duranton, G., Gobillon, L., Puga, D., Roux, S. (2012). “The productivity advantages of
large cities: distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection”. Econometrica 80(6), 2543-2594.
Crane, R., Manville, M. (2008). “People or place? Revisiting the who versus the where of urban
development”. Land Lines, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, July,
http://www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/1403_People-or-Place- (viewed January 7, 2014).
Criscuolo, C., Overman, H., Martin, R., Van Reenen J. (2012). “The causal effects of an industrial
policy”. NBER Working Paper 17842.
Crozet, M., Mayer, T., Mucchielli J-M. (2004). “How do firms agglomerate? A study of FDI in France”.
Regional Science and Urban Economics 34, 27-54.
Damm, A. (2014). “Neighborhood quality and labor market outcomes: evidence from quasi-random
neighborhood assignment of immigrants”. Journal of Urban Economics 79, 139-166.
Devereux, M., Griffith, R., Simpson, H. (2007). “Firm location decisions, regional grants and
agglomeration externalities”. Journal of Public Economics 91, 413-435.

Dickens, W. (1999). “Rebuilding urban labor markets: what community development can accomplish”.
In: Fergusson, R., Dickens, W. (Eds.), Urban Problems and Community Development. Brookings
Institution Press. Washington, DC.
Dowall, D. (1996). “An evaluation of California’s enterprise zone programs”. Economic Development
Quarterly 10, 352-368.
Dujardin, C., Selod, H., Thomas, I. (2008). “Residential segregation and unemployment: the case of
Brussels”. Urban Studies 45, 89-113.
Duncan, G., Zuberi, A. (2006). “Mobility lessons from Gautreaux and Moving to Opportunity”.
Northwestern Journal of Law and Social Policy 1, 110-126.
Duranton, G. (2011). “California Dreamin’: the feeble case for cluster policies”. Review of Economic
Analysis 3, 3-45.
Duranton, G., Puga, D. (2004). “Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies”. In: Henderson,
J.V., Thisse, J-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Elling, R.C., Sheldon, A.W. (1991). Comparative analyses of state enterprise zone programs. In R.E.
Green (Ed.), Enterprise Zones: New Directions in Economic Development. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Ellwood, D. (1986). “The spatial mismatch hypothesis: are there jobs missing in the ghetto?” In:
Freeman, R., Holzer, H. (Eds.), The Black Youth Employment Crisis. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Elvery, J. (2009). “The impact of enterprise zones on residential employment: an evaluation of the
enterprise zone programs of California and Florida”. Economic Development Quarterly 23, 44-59.
Erickson, R., Friedman, W. (1990). “Enterprise zones: 2. A comparative analysis of zone performance
and state government policies”. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 8, 363-378.
Eriksen, M., Rosenthal, S. (2010). “Crowd out effects of place-based subsidized rental housing: new
evidence from the LIHTC program”. Journal of Public Economics 94, 953-966.
Falck, O., Heblich, S., Kipar, S. (2010). “Industrial innovation: direct evidence from a cluster-orientated
policy”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 40, 574-582.
Fallick B., Fleischman, C., Rebitzer, J. (2006) “Job-hopping in Silicon Valley: some evidence concerning
the microfoundations of a high-technology cluster”. Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 472-481.
Fieldhouse, E. (1999). “Ethnic minority unemployment and spatial mismatch: the case of London”. Urban
Studies 36, 1569-1596.
Freedman, M. (2012). “Teaching new markets old tricks: the effects of subsidized investment on lowincome neighborhoods”. Journal of Public Economics 96, 1000-1014.
Freedman, M. (2013). “Targeted business incentives and local labor markets”. Journal of Human
Resources 48, 311-344.
Fu, S., Ross, S. L. (2013). “Wage premia in employment clusters: how important is worker
heterogeneity?” Journal of Labor Economics 31, 271-304.
Givord, P., Rathelot, R., Sillard, P. (2013). “Place-based tax exemptions and displacement effects: an
evaluation of the Zones Franches Urbaines program”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 43, 151163.
Glaeser, E. (2007). “The economics approach to cities”. NBER Working Paper No. 13696.
Glaeser, E., Gottlieb, J. (2008). “The economics of place-making policies”. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring, 155-239.
Gobillon, L., Selod, H. (2007). “The effect of segregation and spatial mismatch on unemployment:
evidence from France.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6198.

Gobillon, L., Magnac, T., Selod, H. (2012). “Do unemployed workers benefit from enterprise zones: the
French experience”. Journal of Public Economics 96, 881-892.
Gobillon, L., Rupert, P., Wasmer, E. (2013). “Ethnic unemployment rates and frictional markets.”
Unpublished manuscript.
Gobillon, L., Selod, H., Zenou, Y. (2007). “The mechanisms of spatial mismatch”. Urban Studies 44,
2401-2427.
Greenbaum, R., Engberg, J. (2004). “The impact of state enterprise zones on urban manufacturing
establishments”. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23, 315-339.
Greenstone, M., Hornbeck, R., Moretti, E. (2010). “Identifying agglomeration spillovers: evidence from
winners and losers of large plant openings”. Journal of Political Economy 118, 536-598.
Gutiérrez Romero, R. (2009). “Estimating the impact of England’s area-based intervention ‘New Deal for
Communities’ on employment”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 39, 323-331.
Gutierrez Romero, R., Noble. M. (2008). “Evaluating England’s ‘New Deal for Communities’
programme using the difference-in-difference method”. Journal of Economic Geography 8, 759-778.
Ham, J., Imrohoroglu, A., Swenson, C. (2011). “Government programs can improve local labor markets:
evidence from state enterprise zones, federal Empowerment Zones and federal Enterprise Communities”.
Journal of Public Economics 95, 779-797.
Hanson, A. (2009). “Local employment, poverty, and property value effects of geographically-targeted
tax incentives: an instrumental variables approach”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 39, 721-731.
Hanson, A., Rohlin, S. (2011). “Do location-based tax incentives attract new business establishments?”
Journal of Regional Science 51, 427-449.
Hanson, A., Rohlin, S. (2013). “Do spatially targeted redevelopment programs spillover?” Regional
Science and Urban Economics 43, 86-100.
Hellerstein, J., Neumark, D. (2003). “Ethnicity, language, and workplace segregation: evidence from a
new matched employer-employee data set”. Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 71-72, 19-78.
Hellerstein, J., Neumark, D. (2012). “Employment problems in black urban labor markets: problems and
solutions”. In: Jefferson, P. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Hellerstein, J., Kutzbach, M., Neumark, D. (2014). “Do labor market networks have an important spatial
dimension?” Journal of Urban Economics 79, 39-58.
Hellerstein, J., McInerney, M., Neumark, D. (2010). “Spatial mismatch, immigrant networks, and
Hispanic employment in the United States”. Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 99/100, 141-167.
Hellerstein, J., McInerney, M., Neumark, D. (2011). “Neighbors and co-workers: the importance of
residential labor market networks”. Journal of Labor Economics 29, 659-695.
Hellerstein, J., Neumark, D., McInerney, M. (2008). “Spatial mismatch vs. racial mismatch?” Journal of
Urban Economics 64, 467-479.
Hirano K., Imbens, G.W. (2004). “The propensity score with continuous treatments”. In: Gelman, A.,
Meng, X-L. (Eds.), Applied Bayesian Modelling and Causal Inference from Incomplete-Data
Perspectives. Wiley, Chichester, U.K.
Holzer, H. (1991). “The spatial mismatch hypothesis: what has the evidence shown?” Urban Studies 28,
105-122.
Hornbeck, R., Naidu, S. (2013). “When the levee breaks: black migration and economic development in
the American South”. American Economic Review forthcoming.
Ihlanfeldt, K., Sjoquist, D. (1990). “Job accessibility and racial differences in youth employment rates”.

American Economic Review 80, 267-276.
Ihlanfeldt, K., Sjoquist, D. (1998). “The spatial mismatch hypothesis: a review of recent studies and their
implications for welfare reform”. Housing Policy Debate 8, 849-892.
Isserman, A., Rephann, T. (1995). “The economic effects of the Appalachian Regional Commission: an
empirical assessment of 26 years of regional development planning”. Journal of the American Planning
Association 61, 345-364.
Jacobs, Jane, 1961. The Economics of Cities. Vintage, New York.
Jencks, C., Mayer, S. (1990). “Residential segregation, job proximity, and black job opportunities”. In:
Lynn, L., McGeary, M. (Eds.), Inner-city Poverty in the United States, National Academy Press,
Washington, DC.
Kantor, S., Whalley, A. (2014). “Knowledge spillovers from research universities: evidence from
endowment value shocks”. Review of Economics and Statistics 96, 171-188.
Kasinitz, P., Rosenberg, J. (1996). “Missing the connection: social isolation and employment on the
Brooklyn waterfront”. Social Forces 43, 180-196.
Kato, L., et al. (2003). “Jobs-Plus site-by-site: key features of mature employment programs in seven
public housing communities”. MDRC.
Kato, L. (2004). “Mobilizing resident networks in public housing”. MDRC.
Kline, P. (2010). “Place-based policies, heterogeneity and agglomeration”. American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings 100, 383-387.
Kline, P., Moretti, E. “People, places, and public policy: some simple welfare economics of local
economic development programs.” Annual Review of Economics forthcoming.
Kline, P., Moretti, E. (2014). “Local economic development, agglomeration economies, and the big push:
100 years of evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 275331.
Kolko, J., Neumark, D. (2010). “Do some enterprise zones create jobs?” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 29, 5-38.
Kolko, J., Neumark, D., Cuellar Mejia, M. (2013). “What do business climate indexes teach us about state
policy and economic growth?” Journal of Regional Science 53, 220-255.
Ladd, H. (1994). “Spatially targeted economic development strategies: do they work?” Cityscape: A
Journal of Policy Development and Research 1, 193-218.
Lee, D., Lemieux, T. (2010). “Regression discontinuity designs in economics”. Journal of Economic
Literature 48, 281-355.
Ludwig, J., et al. (2013). “What can we learn about neighbourhood effects from the Moving to
Opportunity Experiment?” American Journal of Sociology 114, 144-188.
Lynch, D., Zax, J. (2011). “Incidence and substitution in enterprise zone programs”. Public Finance
Review 39, 226-255.
Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of Economics. MacMillan, London.
Martin, P., Mayer, T., Mayneris, F. (2011). “Public support to clusters. A firm level study of French
“Local Productive Systems””. Regional Science and Urban Economics 41, 108-123.
Matouschek, N., Robert-Nicoud, F. (2005). “The role of human capital investments in the location
decision of firms”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 35, 570-583.
Mayer, T., Mayneris, F., Py, L. (2012). “The impact of urban enterprise zones on establishments’ location
decisions: evidence from French ZFUs.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP9074.

Melo, P., Graham, D., Noland R. (2009). “A meta-analysis of estimates of urban agglomeration
economies”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 39, 332-342.
Mohl, P., Hagen, T. (2010). “Do EU structural funds promote economic growth? New evidence from
various panel data approaches”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 40, 353-365.
Montgomery, J.D. (1991). “Social networks and labor-market outcomes: toward an economic analysis.”
American Economic Review 81, 1408-1418.
Moretti, E. (2004). “Workers’ education, spillovers and productivity: evidence from plant-level
production functions”. American Economic Review 94, 656-690.
Moretti, E. (2010). “Local Labor Markets”. In: Card, D., Ashenfelter, O. (Eds.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 4B. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Moretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Boston.
Mulock, B. (2002). “Empowerment Zone/Enterprise Communities program: overview of rounds I, II, and
III”. Congressional Research Service, Washington D.C.
Neumark, D., Grijalva, D. (2013). “The employment effects of state hiring credits during and after the
Great Recession”. NBER Working Paper No. 18928.
Neumark, D., Kolko, J. (2010). “Do enterprise zones create jobs? Evidence from California’s enterprise
zone program”. Journal of Urban Economics 68, 1-19.
Neumark, D., Schweitzer, M., Wascher, W. (2005b). “The effects of minimum wages on the distribution
of family incomes”. Journal of Human Resources 40, 867-917.
Neumark, D., Zhang, J., Wall, B. (2005a). “Are businesses fleeing the state? Interstate business relocation
and employment change in California”. California Economic Policy 1,
http://www.ppic.org/content/pubs/cep/EP_1005DNEP.pdf (viewed January 8, 2014).
O’Keefe, S. (2004). “Job creation in California’s enterprise zones: a comparison using a propensity score
matching model”. Journal of Urban Economics 55, 131-150.
Papke, L. (1993). “What do we know about enterprise zones?” Tax Policy and the Economy 7, 37-72.
Papke, L. (1994). “Tax policy and urban development: evidence from the Indiana enterprise zone
program”. Journal of Public Economics 54, 37-49.
Patacchini, E., Zenou, Y. (2012). “Ethnic networks and employment outcomes”. Regional Science and
Urban Economics 42, 938-49.
Pelligrini, G., Muccigrosso, T. (2013). “Do subsidised new firms survive longer? Evidence from a
counterfactual approach”. Unpublished manuscript.
Peters, A., Fisher, P. (2002). State Enterprise Zone Programs: Have They Worked? W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Raphael, S. (1998). “The spatial mismatch hypothesis and black youth joblessness: evidence from the San
Francisco Bay Area”. Journal of Urban Economics 43, 79-111.
Redding, S., Turner, M. (XXXX) “Transportation”. In: Duranton, G., Henderson J.V., Strange, W. (Eds.),
Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Reynolds, C., Rohlin, S. (2013). “The effects of location-based tax policies on the distribution of
household income: evidence from the federal Empowerment Zone program”. Unpublished manuscript.
Reynolds, C., Rohlin, S. (2014). “Do location-based tax incentives improve quality of life and quality of
business environment?” Journal of Regional Science 54, 1-32.
Riccio, J. (1999). “Mobilizing public housing communities for work: origins and early accomplishments
of the Jobs-Plus demonstration”. MDRC.

Rosenbaum, J., Zuberi, A. (2010). “Comparing residential mobility programs: design elements,
neighborhood placements, and outcomes in MTO and Gautreaux”. Housing Policy Debate 1, 27-41.
Rosenthal, S., Strange, W. (2003).”Geography, industrial organization, and agglomeration”. Review of
Economics and Statistics 85, 377-393.
Rosenthal, S., Strange, W. (2004). “Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration economies”. In:
Henderson, J.V., Thisse, J-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Sinai, T., Waldfogel, J. (2005). “Do low-income housing subsidies increase the occupied housing stock?”
Journal of Public Economics 89, 2137-2164.
Topa, G., Zenou, Y. (XXXX). “Neighbourhood versus networks”. In: Duranton, G., Henderson J.V.,
Strange, W. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006). “Empowerment Zone and Enterprise Community
Program”.
Wang, J. (2013). “The economic impact of Special Economic Zones: evidence from Chinese
municipalities”. Journal of Development Economics 101, 133-147.
Weinberg, B. (2000). “Black residential centralization and the spatial mismatch hypothesis”. Journal of
Urban Economics. 48, 110-134.
Wilder, M., Rubin, B. (1996). “Rhetoric versus reality: a review of studies on state enterprise zone
programs”. Journal of the American Planning Association 62, 472-492.
Wilson, D. (2009). “Beggar thy neighbour? The in-state, out-of-state and aggregate effects of R&D tax
credits”. Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 431-436.
Wilson, W. (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Woodward, D., Figueiredo, O., Guimaraes, P. (2006). “Beyond the Silicon Valley: university R&D and
high-technology location”. Journal of Urban Economics, 60, 15-32.
Zhang, J. (2007). “Access to venture capital and the performance of venture-backed start-ups in Silicon
Valley”. Economic Development Quarterly, 21, 124-47.

Table 1: Place-Based Policies
Type of
policy
Specific
examples

Policy goals

Enterprise zone
California enterprise
zone program; U.S.
Federal Empowerment
Zones; U.S. Federal
Enterprise
Communities; French
enterprise zones
Job creation

Business
development,
attraction, and
retention
U.K. Enterprise
zones (2011)

New business
creation; job
creation; industry
clustering

Targeting

Areas with higher
concentrations of
poverty, unemployment

New businesses
within government
designated areas

Incentives

Hiring tax credits;
corporate and personal
income tax credits;
sales and use tax
credits; tax-exempt
financing; community
block grants; property,
corporate and wage tax
relief

Reduced business
rates; relaxed
planning regulation;
enhanced capital
allowances in some
cases

Recipients
of support

Mainly businesses;
sometimes workers;
communities

Businesses

Community
development and
locally-led
initiatives
Low-income
housing Tax Credit;
redevelopment
areas; New Markets
Tax Credit

Cluster promotion
French Local
Productive
Systems; Bavarian
High-Tech
Offensive

Infrastructure investment
Tennessee Valley EU Structural
Authority;
Funds; European
Appalachian
Regional
Regional
Development Fund
Commission
(ERDF); European
Social Fund (ESF)

Discretionary grants
UK Regional
Selective Assistance;
Italian Law 488

Increase
collaboration and
co-operation
between firms, and
between firms and
public sector
research institutions
France: no
restriction on local
areas that could
participate;
Bavaria: whole
state
France: subsidy for
a project, e.g., to
boost exports in
which firms
participate;
Bavaria: access to
public research
facilities, venture
capital funding, and
science parks
France: businesses
in a common
industry; Bavaria:
targeted five hightech sectors

Economic
modernization

ERDF: Economic
development; ESF:
increased labor
market participation

Job creation and
safeguarding; inward
investment

Affordable housing;
urban
redevelopment;
economic
development

Poor areas of
region

Areas with relatively
low GDP per
capita/high
unemployment
relative to the EU
average
ERDF: Transport,
telecommunications
infrastructure, and
investment linked to
innovation or
energy; ESF:
training programs

Areas with relatively
low GDP per capita /
high unemployment
relative to the EU
average

Low-income
neighborhoods or
low-income housing
units

Subsidy on new
investment in
physical capital by
firms linked to jobs
targets

Tax credits to
investors or real
estate developers,
tax-increment
financing

Broad

Primarily
manufacturing
businesses

Real-estate
developers or other
businesses

Reduced
electricity rates;
other
infrastructure
improvements

Broad

Table 2: Summary of Evidence on Enterprise Zones
Study
Country
Program
Neumark and United
California enterprise
Kolko (2010) States
zones
Kolko and
Neumark
(2010)
Elvery
(2009)
Freedman
(2013)

United
States

California enterprise
zones

United
States
United
States

California and Florida
enterprise zones
Texas enterprise zones

Results
No significant evidence of employment effects measured at establishments in zones:
estimates range from −1.7 to +1.8 percent (levels), with large confidence intervals (≈
−8 to +6 percent); no evidence of spillovers
Zones more involved with marketing and outreach exhibited positive employment
effects; zones focused on tax credits exhibited negative effects
No evidence of positive employment effects on zone residents: estimates for
California range from −0.4 to −2.6 percent; for Florida from −1 to −4 percent
Positive effect on employment growth among zone residents (1-2 percent per year,
sometimes significant); employment effects concentrated in jobs paying less than
$40,000 annually, and in construction, manufacturing, retail, and wholesale; positive
effects on job growth among zone employers (3-8 percent per year, rarely
significant)
Negative and insignificant effects on share black and with income below the poverty
line
Significant negative effect on vacancy rate (−4 percent)

Ham et al.
(2011)

United
States

State enterprise zones,
federal Empowerment
Zones, federal
Enterprise Communities

Significant positive effect on median home value (10.7 percent)
State programs, significant positive impacts on: unemployment rate (−1.6 percentage
points; poverty rate (−6.1 percentage points); average wage and salary income (≈1.6
percent); employment (≈3.7 percent)a
Empowerment Zones, significant positive impacts on: unemployment rate (−8.7
percentage points); poverty rate (−8.8 percentage points); average wage and salary
income (≈20.6 percent); employment (≈34.2 percent)
Enterprise Communities, significant positive impacts on: unemployment rate (−2.6
percentage points); poverty rate (−20.3 percentage points); fraction of households
with wage and salary income (4.9 percentage points); average wage and salary
income (≈12.7 percent); employment (≈10.7 percent)
Positive but insignificant spillovers on neighboring Census tracts

Study
Busso et al.
(2013)

Country
United
States

Program
Federal Empowerment
Zones

Results
Positive and significant effects on job growth in LBD (12-21), likely concentrated
among births, and existing establishments with > 5 employees
Positive and significant effects on employment in Census data (12-19 percent);
magnitudes generally larger for employment in zone of zone residents (15-17
percent) than non-zone residents (6-16 percent)
Positive generally significant weekly wage effects on zone residents employed in
zone (8-13 percent); magnitudes smaller for zone residents generally (3-5 percent
and usually insignificant) and non-residents working in zone (≈0 percent)

Reynolds and
Rohlin
(2014)

Hanson
(2009)

Hanson and
Rohlin
(2013)

Reynolds and
Rohlin

United
States

United
States

United
States

United
States

Federal Empowerment
Zones

No effects on rents, population, or vacancy rates, large significant positive effects on
house values (28-37 percent)
Positive effect (1.1 percent, insignificant) on difference between rent and wage
premia (“quality of life”)

Federal Empowerment
Zones

Positive effect (6.4 percent, significant) on sum of rent and wage premia (“quality of
business environment”)
OLS estimates: positive significant effect on employment rate (2 percentage points);
negative significant effect on poverty rate (−2 percentage points)

Federal Empowerment
Zones

Federal Empowerment
Zones

IV estimates: No effect on employment rate (0 percentage points); insignificant
positive effect on poverty rate (2 percentage points)
Negative spillovers on Census tracts that are geographically or “economically” close
to zone tracts: generally significant effects on number of establishments (−15.2 to
−36.5); negative, sometimes significant effects on employment (−52 to −1,223, but
many estimates in the range −300 to −600); negative spillovers roughly offset the
positive effects in directly treated areas
Estimates of program effects based on comparison of the actual zone tracts to those
that are close (using the same definitions) yield positive effects of about the same
magnitude as the negative spillover effects
Positive significant effects on mean household income (11 percent), but not on
median household income (one-tenth as large)

Study
(2013)

Country

Program

Results
No significant effect on poverty rate (−1 percentage point); significant increase in
proportion of households below one-half of poverty line (1.1 percentage points) and
in households more than twice the poverty line (1.9 percentage points), coupled with
significant reductions in households in between
Significant increase in share of households with income < $10,000 and above
$100,000
Other results point to higher-skilled, higher-income people moving in: increases in
proportion of households more than twice the poverty line in areas of zone with
above-median poverty rate initially, and increases in proportion below one-half of
poverty line in areas of zone with below-median poverty initially; increases in
housing values for houses valued at $100,000 or higher, extending above $300,000
Positive effects on business creation in and relocation into zone (≈ 5-6 percent);
similar estimates for employment, but imprecise; positive effects fully offset by
negative effects in 300-meter ring around zone

Givord et al.
France
Zone Franches Urbaines
(2013);
similar
results in
Mayer et al.
Briant et al. (2012) report more positive effects in zones with better access to
(2012)
transportation
a
Approximate percent changes are calculated by dividing their estimates of effects on levels by values in zones reported for 1990.

Table 3: Summary of Evidence on Discretionary Grants
Study
Country
Program
Crozet et al.
France
Prime d’Aménagement
(2004)
du Territoire
Devereux et
United
Regional Selective
al. (2007)
Kingdom
Assistance

Criscuolo et
al. (2012)

United
Kingdom

Regional Selective
Assistance

Results
Small, non-robust effects of PAT subsidies on foreign multinational firm location
decisions
Small effects on location decisions of foreign-multinational plant firms and domestic
multi-plant firms
Heterogeneity in the effectiveness of grants in influencing location choice; grants
having a greater effect in areas with higher existing employment in the firm’s
industry
Positive effects on plant employment (43 percent increase in employment for
participant plants) and firm investment, but restricted to plants that are part of
smaller firms (<150 firm employees); no evidence of effects on firm TFP or wages
Positive effects on employment and number of plants at the area level (a 10 percent
subsidy rate increases area employment by 2.9 percent), and negative effects on
unemployment (a 10 percent subsidy rate reduces unemployment by 6.9 percent)

Bernini and
Pellegrini
(2011)

Italy

Law 488

Bronzini and
de Blasio
(2006)

Italy

Law 488

Greenstone et
al. (2010)

United
States

Location subsidies for
large plant entry

No evidence on average of employment or plant displacement from non-eligible to
eligible areas, but some evidence of displacement for plants that are part of larger
firms
Output growth in subsidized firms around 8-10 percent higher over on average 3.6
years, employment growth 16-17 percent higher, and growth in physical capital
around 40 percent higher; labor productivity growth and TFP growth 7 and 8 percent
lower respectively
Effects on output and employment appear to be greater for small firms
Increase in investment over the initial two years following receipt of the subsidy, but
at five years recipient firms show a decrease in investment relative to controls;
program may act to bring forward investment that might otherwise have occurred at
a later date, rather than subsidizing additional investment
Substantial effects on incumbent plant productivity in successful locations;
incumbent plant TFP 12 percent higher after five years
Heterogeneity in magnitude of TFP effects across industries and across locations
Positive effect on county-level wages (2.7 percent)

Figure 1: Santa Ana Enterprise Zone, Initial 1993 Designation (thick black lines), 1994 Expansion (light
grey lines), and Control Ring (dark grey outer envelope)

