                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    RATIONAL INFLATIONARY BUBBLES




                           Behzad 1. Diba

                        Herschel i. Grossman




                       Working Paper No. 2004




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             August 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and Economic programs
Fluctuations. Any Opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of
                                    Economic Research.
                                               Working Paper #2004
                                               August 1986




                       Rational Inflationary Bubbles




                                 ABSTRACT




      This paper analyzes
                           the possible inception of rational
 inflationary bubbles under the assumption that the
 relevant environment                                 empirically
                      precludes the existence of rational
 deflationary bubbles. The analysis shows that if a rational
 inflationary bubble exists, then it must have started on the
of initial issuance of                                           date
of a rational           the fiat money. Moreover, the existence
               inflationary bubble would imply that, prior to the
initial issuance of the
                         fiat money, agents who anticipated its
introduction expected a rational inflationary bubble to
The analysis also shows that once a rational               occur.
bursts it cannot restart.                      inflationary   bubble
preclude the existence of   The analysis, however,  does  not
                           a rational inflationary bubble
shrinks Periodically, but never bursts. The limitations that
inception and existence of                                  on the
apply to rational exchange_rrational inflationary  bubbles  also
                                   bubbles.


Behzad T. Djba
Department of Economics                     Herschel I. Grossman
Brown University                            Department of Economics
Providence, RI 02912                        Brown University
                                            Providence, RI 02912
                                —1—

       Flood and Garher (i9SO)——henceforth
                                           F&G——utjljze the
  rational expectations version of Cagants inflation model
                                                            to
 analyze the theoretical and empirical implications of rational
  inflationary bubbles. This model implies that the logarithm of
 the market—clearing price level satisfies a first—order linear
 expectational difference equation with a stochastic forcing term
 that consists of the variables
                                 shifting the demand and supply of
 money. F&G define the market—fundamentals
                                             component of the price
 level to be the particular solution to this expectatjonal
 difference equation that is obtained by setting the solution
                                                               to
 the associated homogeneous equation equal to zero. They define
 other solutions to the homogeneous equation to be the rational.-
 bubbles component of the price level.
      Defined in this way, the
                               market—fundamentals component
 relates the current price level
                                 uniquely to the parameters of the
money demand and supply functions and, except in extreme cases of
the forcing processes, to the current and expected future values
of the stochastic forcing
                           variables. The existence of a
rational—bubbles component would reflect a self—confirming belief
that the price level depends on a variable (or a combination of
variables) that is intrinsically
                                  irrelevant——that is, not part of
market fundamentals__or on truly relevant variables in a
                                                          way that
involves parameters that are not part of market fundamentals.
     In the F&G model, the assumption that demand for real
                                                            money
balances depends negatively on the expected rate of inflation
implies that the eigenvalue of the expectatjonal difference
equation governing price fluctuations is greater than unity.
This property of the difference equation has two important
consequences. First, it guarantees the existence of an
economically meaningful (i.e., forward looking) market—
fundamentals solution except in extreme cases of the forcing
processes. Second, it implies that rational bubbles have
explosive conditional expectations.
                                     Specifically, the expected
                             —2—

value of a rational—bubbles component of the price level either
would increase or would decrease geometrically into the infinite
future.

     This property of explosive conditional expectations
notwithstanding, Obstteld and Rogoff (1983) show that a rational
inflationary bubble can exist in an economy with an inconvertible
fiat money unless money is essential to the economy in the sense
that no finite amount of extra consumption could compensate
agents for reducing their money balances to zero. Kingston
(1982) shows that the Cagan money demand schedule used by F&G
implies that money is not essential to the economy in this sense.

     In contrast, the property of explosive conditional
expectations provides the basis for various arguments in the
literature for ruling out the existence of rational deflationary
bubbles and, more generally, of positive rational bubbles in the
value of any asset. One such argument is that the existence of a
rational deflationary bubble would violate a transversality
condition that must hold if agents have infinite planning
horizons——see Brock (1974), Gray (1984), and Obstfeld and Rogoff
(1986). specifically, the existence of a rational deflationary
bubble would imply that agents expect to gain utility from
reducing their money holdings permanently.
     Another argument, developed by Tirole (1982), assumes that,
even if asset holders have infinite planning horizons, they would
not plan to hold forever an overvalued asset, such as a fiat
money whose value reflects a deflationary rational bubbles
component. Instead, each asset holder would want to realize the
capital gain associated with the deflationary rational bubble at
some date in the finite future. Consequently, if the number of
potential asset holders is finite, a finite future date would
exist beyond which no one would plan to hold the overvalued
asset. Under these conditions, a backward unraveling argument
precludes the existence of a positive rational bubbles component
                                   —3—

  in the value of
                    any asset and, in particular, in the value of a
  fiat money.

        Tirole (1985) and Weil (1986) develop overlapping
  generations models in which money is a pure Store of value and
  would be worti-iless
                       according to their definition of market
  fundamentals     They show that these economies
  in which money is valuable and refer to such possess equi1jbrj
                                                  equilibria as
  bubbles in the value of money. Because the concepts of
                                                              market
  fundamentals and bubbles in the analyses of Tirole
                                                         and Weil do
  not coincide with the concepts of the present paper,
                                                           our results
 are not directly comparable to theirs. Their
                                                   results, however,
 suggest that the impossibility of
                                      rational deflationary bubbles
 under all Conceivable conditions
                                     cannot be taken for granted.
 Also, Quah (1985) points out that even if agents have
                                                            infinite
 planning horizons, if they ignore low Probability
                                                       events, their
 optimizing decisions are not
                                necessarily inconsistent with the
 existence of Positive rational
                                  bubbles in asset values if these
 rational bubbles will almost surely burst at a date in the
 future.                                                         finite

      Having noted these Possibilities,
                                         the analysis that follows
assumes that in the empirically
                                 relevant environment the property
of explosive conditional
                          expectations rules out the existence of
rational deflationary bubbles. Given this assumption,
                                                         we can
focus on the implications
                           of the impossibility of rational
deflationary bubbles for the
                              possible inception of a rational
inflationary bubble.

      In what follows, Section 1 reviews the basic
                                                   properties of
rational bubbles in the F&G model. Section 2 derives
                                                       the result
that, given the impossibility of rational
                                           deflationary bubbles, a
rational inflationary bubble can start only on the date of
initial issuance of the fiat money. Section 3
                                                derives the
further result that rational bubbles cannot burst
                                                   and
simultaneously restart and discusses the possible forms that
interesting rational inflationary bubbles could take.
                                                        Section 4
                                    —4—

discusses the relevance of the arguments developed in this paper
for the inception of rational bubbles in foreign exchange
rates. Section 5 generalizes the analysis for a nonlinear model
of the demand for money. Section 6 provides a summary.

1.      Properties of Rational Bubbles
        F&G analyze the familiar Cagan model of inflation with
rational expectations of future inflation replacing Cagan's
adaptive expectations. In this model, the current price level
satisfies a condition of equality between the real money stock,
given by the lhs of equation (1), and the demand for real money
balances, given by the rhs of (1):

                                          —
(1)          Mt —    = at   —
                                (EtPt+i       Pt),          > 0,


where
             is the logarithm of the nominal money stock at date t,
        Mt
             is the logarithm of the price level at date t,
             represents all of the variables that influence demand
             other than expected inflation, and
             is the semi—elasticity of real money demand with
             respect to expected inflation.

The conditional expectations operator      is based on an
information set that contains the current and lagged values of
Mt, P, and a. Equation (1) applies for any date t such
that t   0, where the fiat money was initially issued at date
zero.

        Rearranging terms in equation (1) leads to the following
linear first—order expectational difference equation:


(2)          EtPt+i —   (l+ —l     =   —1       —
                                                     Mt).
                                        —5—

 Because the eiqenvalue, i+', is greater than unity, the
 forward—looking Solution for           Pt involves a convergent sum, as
 long as the sequence       {E(Mi — at+1)1=i         does not grow at a
 geometric rate equal to or greater than        The forward—
 looking solution, denoted by Ft and referred to as the market—
 fundamentals component of the price level, is

 (3)      Ft =
                 (1+)[(Mt_    )     +
                                            (l+')'Et(Mt._ at+j)].
 Equation (3) says that  Ft is proportionate to a weighted sum of
 current and expected future realizations of the money supply and
 the variables that shift money demand.

     The general solution to equation (2) for     is the sum of
the market—fundamentals component, Ft, and the rational—bubbles
component, Bt——that is,

(4)         Pt =   Bt +

where  Bt is the solution to the homogeneous expectatjonal
difference equation,

(5)         EtBt+1 —      (l+1)B   =


A nonzero value of Bt would reflect the existence
                                                    of a rational
bubble at date t—--that is, a self—confirming belief that the
price level does not conform to the market—fundamentals
component, Ft. A positive value of    Bt would represent a
rational inflationary bubble and would imply that the fiat money
is undervalued (relative to market—fundamentals) at date t. A
negative value of Bt would represent a rational deflationary
bubble and would imply that the fiat money is overvalued at
date t.
                                       —6—

      Solutions to equation (5) satisfy the stochastic difference
equation

(6)         Bt+i —      (l+')Bt   =


where z1 is a random variable (or combination of random
variables) generated by a stochastic process that satisfies


(7)          Et.zt+i = 0     for all      j   0.



The key to the relevance of equation (6) for the general solution
for Pt is that equation (5) relates Bt to EtBt+iI rather
than to Bt+i itself as would he the case in a perfect—foresight
model.
     The random variable z1 is an innovation, comprising new
information available at date t+l. This information can be
intrinsically irrelevant——that is, unrelated to F+1__or it can
be related to truly relevant variables, like t+l and
through parameters that are not present in Ft÷l. The critical
property of         given by equation (7), is that its expected
future values are always zero.
       The general solution to equation (6) for any date t,
t     0,   is


(8)             Bt =   (l+)tB0    +
                                      tl (l+_l)tTzT.
Equation (8) expresses the rational—bubbles component at date t
as composed of two terms. The first term is the product of the
eigenvalue raised to the power t and the value of the rational—
bubbles component at date zero. The second term is a weighted
sum of realizations of Z    from -r = 1 to -r = t. The weights
are powers of the eigenvalue such that the contribution of    z

to Bt increases exponentially with the difference between t
                                         —7

      and    T.
               For example, a past realization Z, 1
                                                           < t,
     Contributed only the amount z     to B , but Contributes
      (1÷l)t—T to Bt.       Blanchard and Watson
                                                 (1982) sugqest, as an
     empirically interesting specification for a
                                                  rational_bubbles
     component, a process in which the analog to z
                                                       is not
     covarjance stationary and implies that rational bubbles
     and restart repeatedly.                                  can burst

            The assumption of rational
                                      expectations implies that in
     forming EtBt+., for all    j > 0, agents behave as if they know
     that any rational—bubbles
                               component of the price level would
     conform to equation (5) in all future periods.
                                                      Accordingly, any
     Solution to equation (5) would have the Property

     (9)          EtBt. =   (1+8)B      for all j > 0.

 Equation (9) says that the existence of a nonzero
                                                     rational—
 bubbles component at date t would imply that the
 of the rational—bubbles                              expected value
                         component at date t+j either increases
 or decreases with j at the geometric rate 1÷81.
                                                        Therefore,
 the existence of a rational
                              bubble would imply that the expected
 value of the logarithm of the price level,
 increases or decreases Without bound at       {EtPt+.}, either
                                          approximately the
geometric rate li- In particular, the existence of
                                                           a
rational deflationary bubble at date t would imply
                                                        that the
expected future value of a unit
                                  of fiat money (in units of the
consumption good) grows without bound at this increasing
proportionate rate. Accordingly,
                                    if, as discussed above, in the
empirically relevant environment agents cannot rationally
                                                             expect
the value of a unit of fiat
                             money to grow at such a rapid pace,
then rational
              deflationary bubbles cannot exist.

2.
           The Inception of Rational
                                       Inflationary Bubbles
     Given that rational
                         deflationary bubbles are not possible,
the rational_bubbles component of the price level
                                                  as given by
                                 —8—

equation (6) also satisfies Bt+i         0. consequently, the
realization of z1 must satisfy

(10)        z1 — (l+ —1 )Bt     for all t       0.



Equation (10) says that the realization z1 must be large
enough to ensure that equation (6) implies a nonnegative value
for Bt+i.
     Suppose that Bt equals zero. In that case, equation (10)
implies that z41 must be nonnegative. But, equation (7) says
that the expected value of z1 is zero. Thus, if Bt equals
zero, then z1 equals zero with probability one.
    This result says that if a rational bubble does not exist at
date t, t    0, a rational bubble cannot get started at date
t+1, nor, by extension, at any subsequent date. Therefore, if a
rational bubble exists, it must have started at date zero, the
date of initial issuance the fiat money, and hence, this fiat
money must have always been undervalued relative to market
fundamentals. The essential idea underlying this line of
argument is that, because the inception of a rational bubble at
any date after the introduction of the fiat money would involve
an innovation in the price level, the expected initial values of
a rational inflationary bubble and a rational deflationary bubble
would have to be equal. Accordingly, if a deflationary rational—
bubbles component cannot exist, then an inflationary rational—
bubbles component also cannot start after the date of initial
issuance of a fiat money.
       Suppose that, prior to the issuance of a new fiat money,
agents anticipate its introduction and form an expectation about
the initial price level. Suppose further that this expectation
coincides with market fundamentals——that is,

                          —          =   0.
(11)        E1B0 = E1P0       E1F0
                                         —9—

  Equation (11) would imply that
                                 B0 is a random variable with
  mean zero. Accordingly, given the nonnegativity
                                                  condition
  B0     0, B0 would equal zero with Probability one. This
 observation implies that if a rational inflationary bubble
 exists, agents who anticipated the introduction of the
                                                        new fiat
 money expected it to he undervalued relative to market
 fundamentals.

 3.      Can Rational
                         Inflationary Bubbles Burst and Restart?
         Consider the following model of the innovations
                                                             zt+1:
 (12)         z÷1 =      [e÷1 — (l+')]B        +


 where        and              are mutually and serially independent
 random variables.        If the processes
                                           generating        and
 satisfy

 (13)        Etioti =      l+      for all j        0 and

 (14)        Et—j. t+l   =0    for all   j     0,
then
               as given by equation (12) satisfies equation (7).
        Substituting for z1 in equation (6) from equation (12)
gives


(15)         Bt÷i =            +
                      Ot+iBt
Quah (1985) suggests the model of the rational—bubbles
                                                        component
given by equation (15) as a genera1izaj00 of the
                                                   specification
assumed by Blanchard and Watson
                                 (1982). Equation (15) says that,
with
       z1 given by equation (12), an existing rational—bubbles
component, B, will burst next period if the event           = 0
occurs.   If this event has Positive
                                     Probability, then any
rational_bubbles component would burst at a random, but
                                                         almost
                             — 10 —



surely finite, future date. Specifically, if the probability
associated with 01 = 0 is II, 0 < n < 1, then the expected
duration of a rational—bubbles component is      periods and the
probability that Bt will not burst by date T (T > t) is
(1_fl)Tt, which tends to zero as T approaches infinity.
     Given that realizations of          and        are mutually
and serially independent and also independent of Bo, then
      is independent of Bt for all t      0.  In this case, if
Ct÷l
the event 0t+l = 0 were by chance to coincide with a positive
realization of         then, according to equation (15), as an
existing rational—bubbles component bursts, a new rational
bubbles component, which is independent of all existing and past
rational—bubbles components, would simultaneously start.

     In this model, the impossibility of rational deflationary
bubbles would imply that, in addition to satisfying equation
                                                      0.
(15), the rational—bubbles component satisfies Bt+i
Therefore, the event       = 0 cannot coincide with a negative

realization of c1. Accordingly, given that the event
     = 0   has positive probability and that the random variables
                  are independent,        must be nonnegative.
6t+l and
But, equation (14) says that the expected value of        is

zero. Therefore,         equals zero with probability one and the
chance coincidence of        = 0   and         > 0 has zero
probability.
     This result says that the impossibility of rational
deflationary bubbles, in addition to implying that an
inflationary rational—bubbles component that burst could not
restart at a later date, also precludes the possibility that a
 new independent inflationary rational bubble could simultaneously
 start when an existing inflationary rational bubble bursts. In
 sum, the analysis of Sections 2 and 3 has shown that, given the
 impossibility of rational deflationary bubbles, an inflationary
                                       — 11 —



     rational_bubbles component can start only on the date of initial
     issuance of the fiat money and must either continue
                                                          to exist
     forever or, as in BiancIiard's (1979)
                                           specification, burst at a
     date in the finite future and never restart.

       Nevertheless, a rational inflationary bubble that began
                                                               on
  the first date of circulation and will never
                                               burst can
  Periodically shrink. An example of such C
                                             rational_bubbles
  component, which is consistent with
  be                                  the preceding analysis, would


                           +
  (16)
                               Et+l                      with Probability
             Bt+i
                     (l—) (l+—1—       611)B    +        with   Probability i—a,

 where 6       is a small Positive constant and where
                                                            Etcti =    0   and
 B0 > 0. This Specification
                                   corresponds to setting             in
 equation (15) equal to   6 with Probability       and equal to
                                                    II

 (1_n)_1(l+_1_ 61) with Probability i—il
                                              and allowing       to
depend on Bt and            in such a way that         remains
nonnegative with Probability
                               one. In particular, given
      = 6,
            realizations of         must satisfy        ) — 6Bt.
Equation (16) Specifies
                         an inflationary rational_hubbies
component that starts on the first date of trading, that
collapses with Probability
                                 in any period, but that, given 6
                                  II


greater than zero and the
                           appropriate restriction on the
realizations of          always remains Positive.

4.       Rational Bubbles in Exchange Rates?

      Although the analysis in this paper focuses on the
determination of the value of
                               a fiat money in units of goods and
services, it also has implications
                                     for the determination of this
value in units of
                   foreign currency. Utilizing a model that is
formally identical to the model discussed in Section
                                                       1, Meese
(1986) suggests that rational bubbles that burst and
                                                       restart
occurred in foreign exchange
                              rates during the l97O's and
                             — 12 —



1980's.  Woo (1985) also suggests that in this period episodes
during which exchange rates conformed to market fundamentals
alternated with episodes during which rational bubbles were
present.
     As Singleton (1987) points out, any rational bubble in an
exchange rate would have to be reflected either in a rational
bubble in the price level at home or abroad or in a rational
bubble in the deviation from purchasing power parity. But a
rational bubble in the deviation from purchasing power parity
cannot exist, because agents cannot expect unexploited potential
profits from commodity arbitrage to grow geometrically without
bound. Accordingly, given the impossibility of rational
deflationary bubbles, any rational bubble in exchange rates would
have to coincide with a rational inflationary bubble in the
depreciating currency.
     The analysis in the preceding sections thus implies that the
inception of a rational exchange rate bubble can only occur at
the first date of circulation of a fiat money.  In particular,
the rational—bubbles component of the value of a currency could
not burst and restart repeatedly——as in Meese's specification——or
only exist during certain periods——as in Woo's specification. As
Hamilton and Whiteman (1985) demonstrate, the existence of
rational bubbles is empirically indistinguishable from
misspecification of market fundamentals. Accordingly, the
correct interpretation of the econometric findings of Meese and
Woo would seem to be that the models they study misspecify the
market—fundamentals component of the exchange rate.


5.    A Nonlinear Model of the Demand for Money

     The expectational difference equation governing price
fluctuations in the F&G model——equation (2) above——is linear.
The linearity of this equation makes explicit characterization of
the market—fundamentals and rational—bubbles components of the
                                     — 13 —


  price level possible without assuming that the money Supply and
  other forcing variables are constant over time or
                                                     grow at a
  constant rate. The linearity of the difference equation
                                                            (2) was
 also convenient for
                      developing the analysis of the inception of a
 rational inflationary bubble.   Specifically, equation (2) implied
 that a rational_bubbles
                          component in the F&G model would have to
 satisfy the linear stochastic
                                difference equation (6). Setting
 Bt equal to zero, then, shows that the inception of a rational
 bubbles component at any date after the introduction of a
                                                             new
 fiat money must involve an innovation in the price level.
      In a nonlinear model, equation (6) has no counterpart.
                                                                The
 following analysis demonstrates, however, that the inception of
                                                                    a
 rational—bubbles component in the more general (nonlinear) model
 of Brock (1974, 1975) would also involve an innovation in
                                                            the
 price level. Accordingly,
                             an argument analogous to that of the
 preceding section would also limit the inception of a rational
 inflationary bubble in Brock's model.
     Assume that a representative household maximizes
                                                      expected
utility over an infinite horizon,

 (17)                            ÷
             Et tt T_t{u(c )         v(x)}, 0 <   < 1,

where C       and x
                    represent, respectively, consumption of a
single perishable good and holdings of real money balances at
date -r, and      is a discount factor. The functions u(.)
and v(e) are monotone
                        increasing, strictly concave and
continuously differentiable on (O,oo). In addition, the function
v(.) satisfies the Inada conditions: lim v'(x) =
                                                             and
urn v'(x) = 0.                       x+0
x+
        The household receives
                                 an initial endowment, m, of
(nominal) money balances before date zero and a constant
endowment, y, of the consumption good each period beginning at
date zero. The household takes the price level,
                                                         p, as given
                                      — 14 —



                                              balances, rn,
and chooses consumption, C, and nominal money
subject to the budget constraint


(18)         pc +     T
                          —
                              Tl
        The first—order conditions for the household's utility
maximization problem is


                 ru'(c + u'(c  )
                         =_____t            —
                                                v'(x   t
(19)
                 L t+i
                 I

                                      Pt          Pt


                                                 = m and
Incorporating the market—clearing conditions, mt
c = y for all t 0, in equation (19) and multiplying both
sides of this equation by m yields
                                  v' (xe)
                              —
(20)         Etxt+i = [1

                                                       difference
Equation (20) is a nonlinear first—order expectational
equation in real money balances.
     Define the market—fundamentals component, f, of real
money balances to be the positive nonstochaStic steady—state
solution to equation (20)——that is,


 (21)           =    x,
where x is the unique solution to

 (22)        VI(X*) =     (l—)u'(y).
 Define the rational—bubbles component of real money balances,
 bt, as any divergence from ft__that is,

 (23)         bt = Xt —
                                 — 15 —


         In equatj (23), a positive
                                    rational bubbles component,
  which would represent a rational deflationary
                                                bubble, could not
  exist for any plausible specification of the function
                                                         v(.).
  Specifically, as Gray (1984) argues, a plausible model of how
  money enhances utility, would imply that, for a given level
                                                                of
  consumption, the utility derived from holding real money balances
  is bounded from above. Boundedness of the
                                              function v(.), in
 turn, would imply that
                         a transversality condition, necessary for
 the optimality of the
                        household's decisions, rules out the
 existence of a rational
                          deflationary bubble.  In fact, weaker
 Conditions than boundedness of the function v(.)
                                                     are sufficient
 for ruling out rational
                          deflationary bubbles——see Brock (1974)
 and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1986).

        Consider now the implications
                                    of the impossibility of
 rational deflationary bubbles in this model for the
                                                     possible
 inception of a rational
                         inflationary bubble. Specifically,
 assume that real money balances
                                 conform to market fundamentals ——
 that is, Xt =     =x  —— for
                              Some t > o. Equations (20) and
 (22) would then imply

 (24)       Etxti =   x.
      Equation (24) shows that, given bt = 0,
                                                  the expected value
 of the rational_bubbles
                         component at date t+1, Etbt+1 =
 Etxt+i —  x,  equals zero. In other
                                       words, the inception of a
 rational_bubbles component after date zero would involve
                                                             an
 innovation in real money balances. Accordingly,
                                                    as the analysis
of the linear model
                     demonstrated, the impossibility of rational
deflationary bubbles would imply that a rational
bubble cannot exist at any date unless it existed inflationary
                                                     during all
previous dates Since the initial issuance of the
                                                   fiat money.
Moreover, an argument Similar to that for the linear
                                                        model would
show that the existence of a rational
                                        inflationary bubble at any
date implies that prior to the introduction of
                                                 the fiat money,
agents who anticipated its
                            introduction expected a rational
inflationary bubble to Occur.
                               — 16 —




6.     Summary
     The inception of a rational—bubbles component after the date
of initial issuance of a fiat money would involve an innovation
in the price level. Accordingly, any rational—bubbles component
that starts after the introduction of fiat money has an expected
initial value of zero. But, given that the empirically relevant
environment precludes the existence of rational deflationary
bubbles, this initial value must be nonnegative and therefore, in
order to have a mean of zero, must equal zero with probability
one.

     This argument means that the impossibility of rational
deflationary bubbles also rules out the inception of a rational
inflationary bubble except at the date of initial issuance of a
fiat money. Thus, the existence of a rational inflationary
bubble at any date, implies that a rational inflationary bubble
has been present since the introduction of the fiat money.
Moreover, the existence of a rational inflationary bubble implies
that prior to the issuance of the fiat money, agents who
anticipated its introduction expected a rational inflationary
bubble to occur.
       This analysis also implies that once a rational inflationary
bubble bursts it cannot restart. In particular, rational
inflationary bubbles cannot conform to the specification
suggested by Blanchard and Watson (1982) in which rational
bubbles start, burst, and restart repeatedly. This analysis,
however, does not preclude the existence of a rational
inflationary bubble that begins on the first date of circulation
of the fiat money and shrinks periodically, but never bursts.
Finally, because a rational bubble in exchange rates would imply
the existence of a rational inflationary bubble in the
depreciating currency, the same restrictions apply to the
inception and existence of rational exchange—rate bubbles.
                                 — 17 —



                               REFERENCES

  O.J. Blanchard,
                   "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes, and Rational
       Expectatjonsi Economics
                                 Letters, 3, 1979, 387—389.
  O.J. Blanchard and M.W. Watson, "Bubbles,
                                             Rational Expectations
       and Financial Markets," in Crises in the
                                                 Economic and
       Financial Structure
                             P. Wachtel, ed. (Lexington Books,
        1982).
  W.A. Brock, "Money and Growth: The Case
                                            of Long—Run Perfect
       Foresjg,lI ernationaJ Economic Review, 15,
       750—777                                    October 1974,
  W.A. Brock, "A Simple Perfect Foresight
        of Monetary Economics 1,           Monetary Model," Journal
                                  April 1975, 133—150.
 R. Flood and P. Garber, "Market Fundamentals
                                                Versus Price Level
       Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of
                                               Political Economy
       88, August 1980, 745—77Q
 J.A. Gray, "Dynamic Instability in Rational
                                                Expectations Models:
       An Attempt to Clarify," International
                                              Economic Review! 25,
       February 1984, 93—122.
J.D. Hamilton and C.H.
                         Whiteman, "The Observable
                                                    Implications of
      Self_Fulfilling Expectations,ui Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 16, 353—373•
G.H. Kingston, "The Semi—Log Portfolio Balance
                                                  Schedule is
      Tenuous," Journal of
      399.
                            Monetary Economics, 9, May 1982, 389—
R.A. Meese,
             "Testing for Bubbles in
                                     Exchange Markets: A Case of
     Sparkling Rates?" Journal of POlitical
     1986, 345—373                          Economy, 94, April
M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff, "Speculative
                                          Hyperinfaj005 in
     Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal
                                                        of
     Political Econoy, 91, August 1983, 675—687.
M. Obstfeld and K.
                   Rogoff, "Ruling Out Divergent Speculative
     Bubbles," Journal of
                          Monetary Economics, 17, May 1986, 349—
     362.
                             — 18 —



                                          Model for Stock Price
D. Quah, "Estimation of a NonfundamentalS
     and Dividend Dynamics," unpublished, September 1985.
K.J. Singleton, "Speculation and the Volatility of Foreign
     Currency Exchange Rates," Carnegie-.ROchester Conference
     Series on Public Policy, Volume 26, Spring 1987.
J. Tirole, "On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational
     Expectations," EconometriCa, 50, September 1982, 1163—1181.
3. Tirole, "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,"
     Econornetrica, 53, September 1985, 1071-1100.
P. Weil, "Confidence and the Real Value of Money in an
     Overlapping Generations Economy," Quarterly Journal of
     EconomicS, 1986, forthcoming.
W.T. Woo, "Some Evidence of Speculative Bubbles in the Foreign
     Exchange Markets," unpublished, October 1985.
