                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOST-COUNTRY FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND MULTINATIONAL ACTIVITY

                                         Kamran Bilir
                                         Davin Chor
                                        Kalina Manova

                                      Working Paper 20046
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20046


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          April 2014, Revised February 2019




We thank Pol Antrás, Bruce Blonigen, Xuehui Han, Elhanan Helpman, Beata Javorcik, Catherine
Mann, Marc Melitz, Daniel Trefler, Jonathan Vogel, David Weinstein, Daniel Xu, Stephen
Yeaple and Bill Zeile for their valuable feedback. Thanks also to audiences at Georgetown,
Harvard, LMU Munich, Toronto, the World Bank, CUHK, HKPU, UIBE, the 2008 CESifo-
NORFACE Seminar, the 2009 Asia Pacific Trade Seminars, the 2009 Midwest International
Economics Group Meeting, the 2012 AEA Annual Meeting, the 2013 West Coast Trade
Workshop, the 2013 Princeton IES Workshop, the 2013 NBER ITI Summer Institute, the 2013
Brandeis Summer Workshop, ERWIT 2014, and the 2016 ADB Conference on Economic
Development. We acknowledge C. Fritz Foley and Stanley Watt, who contributed to earlier
versions of this paper. Mari Tanaka provided excellent research assistance. The statistical
analysis was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce,
under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are
those of the authors and do not reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. We have no relevant sources of funding to disclose.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kamran Bilir, Davin Chor, and Kalina Manova. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Host-Country Financial Development and Multinational Activity
Kamran Bilir, Davin Chor, and Kalina Manova
NBER Working Paper No. 20046
April 2014, Revised February 2019
JEL No. F12,F23,F36,G20

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the influence of host-country financial conditions on the global operations of
multinational firms. Using detailed U.S. data, we establish that financial development in a
country is associated with relatively more entry by multinational affiliates, as well as with higher
aggregate affiliate sales to the local market, back to the U.S. and to third destinations, with these
effects being more pronounced in financially more vulnerable sectors. At the level of individual
affiliates, by contrast, these forces are associated with relatively lower local sales and higher
return and third-country sales. Yet at both aggregate and affiliate levels, the share of local sales in
total sales is smaller, while the shares of U.S. and third-country sales are both bigger. These
empirical regularities hold when using fixed effects to account for unobserved differences across
country-years, sectors, and parent firms. We show theoretically that these patterns are consistent
with host-country financial development affecting multinationals' incentives for horizontal,
vertical and platform FDI through two channels: a financing effect that induces affiliate entry and
expansion by improving their access to external finance, and a competition effect that reorients
affiliate sales away from the local market due to increased entry by credit-constrained domestic
firms.

Kamran Bilir                                       Kalina Manova
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin - Madison                  University College London
1180 Observatory Drive                             United Kingdom
Madison, WI 53706                                  and CEPR
and NBER                                           k.manova@ucl.ac.uk
kbilir@ssc.wisc.edu

Davin Chor
100 Tuck Mall
Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth
Hanover, NH 03755
davinchor@gmail.com
1     Introduction

Multinational firms (MNCs) account for two-thirds of international trade and provide a key channel
through which capital and technology flow across borders. They manage increasingly complex operations,
basing offshore affiliates in multiple countries and serving multiple markets from each location through
a combination of horizontal, vertical and export-platform FDI. However, these firms face exceptionally
high fixed and sunk costs of foreign establishments. While MNCs could finance these costs through
both internal and global capital markets, in practice they receive significant funding for their affiliate
activities in a given country from local sources external to the firm: Among the affiliates of U.S.-based
multinationals, for example, nearly two-thirds of affiliate debt is raised in the host country, while U.S.
headquarters hold only one-sixth. In fact, anecdotal evidence indicates that weak local capital markets
can pose significant obstacles to firms seeking to establish an affiliate, while countries have engaged in
financial reforms in part to stimulate the inflow of FDI.1
    These observations suggest that multinational firms may be responsive to financial conditions in
host economies, and raise the important question of how policy-makers can expect financial market
reforms to influence inbound FDI. Two motivating facts indicate that host-country financial development
might indeed shape the level and composition of MNC activity, and that the latter might in turn have
implications for aggregate growth. First, looking at the pattern of U.S. multinational operations across
three illustrative host countries and adjusting for market size, local financial development is associated
with higher aggregate affiliate sales (see Figure 1). At the same time, it is accompanied by a decline in
the share of sales to the local economy and a rise in sales back to the U.S. and to third countries. Second,
consistent with the idea that MNCs can stimulate growth, host countries that saw a bigger increase in
U.S. MNC affiliate sales during 1989-2009 experienced faster GDP per capita growth over that period
(see Appendix Figure 1 and Appendix Table 1).2 Host-country growth was also stronger when the share
of affiliate sales to the local market expanded faster. While we view these relationships as suggestive
correlations, they nevertheless indicate that the nature of FDI – whether it is horizontal, vertical and/or
export-platform – can matter for the host economy; this could be due for example to the differential
productivity spillovers from MNC subsidiaries to domestic firms in the same industry versus upstream
or downstream industries, that has been documented in the literature.3
    Motivated by these stylized facts, we provide evidence that the financial development of individual
host countries is strongly associated with observable differences in the global operations of multinational
affiliates. Using detailed data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) on U.S.-based multinational
firms during 1989-2009, we establish three sets of empirical regularities. First, countries with high levels
   1
     The summary statistics on the breakdown of affiliate debt of U.S. multinationals is based on Feinberg and Phillips
(2004), which we have corroborated in our own calculations. See also Section 4.2 for more motivating examples of the
importance of host-country sources of financing for facilitating inward FDI.
   2
     These patterns are documented using the public aggregate statistics from the BEA survey of U.S. multinational activity
abroad. Appendix Table 1 documents that they hold when controlling for initial GDP per capita, or when instead considering
non-overlapping five-year intervals.
   3
     See for example Javorcik (2004) and Javorcik and Spatareanu (2009).




                                                            1
of financial development attract more subsidiaries from the United States in sectors that require more
external capital. Second, the distribution of affiliate sales across destination markets varies systematically
with financial development. Stronger financial institutions in the host country are associated with higher
aggregate affiliate sales to the local market, the United States, and third destinations in financially more
vulnerable sectors. At the level of the individual affiliate, by contrast, exports to the United States and to
other markets increase, but local sales decline. Third, the share of affiliates’ local sales in total sales falls
faster with host-country financial development in financially more dependent sectors, while the shares of
return and platform sales rise; these patterns hold at both the aggregate and the affiliate level.
   To rationalize these empirical regularities, we present a stylized three-country model with heteroge-
neous firms, imperfect capital markets in the host country, and variation in external finance dependence
across sectors. The model shows how host-country financial development can influence MNC activity
through two channels. The first is the competition effect: In the presence of credit market frictions, an
improvement in host-country financial conditions stimulates entry by credit-constrained domestic firms
and thereby intensifies competition in the local product market. This discourages multinational affiliate
presence, and conditional on survival, induces affiliates to sell less in the local market and to instead
export more to the home and third-country markets. The second is the financing effect: Host-country
financial development facilitates affiliates’ use of host-country external finance and thus reduces their cost
of operating there, even accounting for their access to global capital markets. This induces more affiliate
entry and raises affiliate sales in the aggregate. Together, these two effects jointly explain why aggregate
measures of affiliate activity can rise with host-country financial development, even while surviving affil-
iates decrease sales to the host market. Importantly, financial conditions exert stronger competition and
financing effects on MNC activity in sectors that require more external finance.
   Our model makes specific assumptions about the nature of capital market imperfections in order to
transparently illustrate the competition and financing effects. In particular, we consider credit rationing
in the host country that arises from endogenous default risk. We also switch the financing effect on and
off, to compare the case where multinationals can perfectly arbitrage capital markets across borders to
the case where they cannot due to cross-border frictions in international lending. As we note in Section
2, however, the same mechanisms will remain active and generate similar predictions for MNC activity
under alternative micro-foundations for the source or type of credit frictions and in settings where MNCs
can more flexibly choose how much host-country financing to use.
   The U.S. BEA data reveal that the relationship between host-country financial development and
multinational activity is of an economically significant magnitude. Comparing two industries at the 10th
and 90th percentile by external finance dependence, improving a country’s financial conditions from the
10th to 90th percentile is associated with 7.8% more MNC subsidiaries and 18.6% higher aggregate affiliate
sales in the financially more vulnerable industry. Sales adjust differentially across markets, however, so
that the share of affiliate sales to the host market falls by 2.8 percentage points more in the financially
more sensitive sector, while the shares of exports to the United States and to third-country destinations
rise by 2.1 and 0.7 percentage points more, respectively.


                                                       2
      Our primary measure of financial development is the amount of bank credit to the private sector
relative to host-country GDP. This is a standard measure in the literature which captures the actual
availability of external finance and reflects the strength of underlying financial institutions and their
ability to support financial contracting. This measure is moreover consistent with our stylized model, as
we can show that it moves monotonically with the key model parameter that governs financial frictions.
Our empirical results are robust nevertheless to using alternative measures of financial development
related to institutional reforms of the financial sector, or to equity instead of debt financing (i.e., stock
market capitalization).
      We pursue several estimation strategies to establish the causal effect of host-country financial condi-
tions on multinational activity. First, we exploit the variation in external finance dependence across
sectors, in the spirit of Rajan and Zingales (1998). The premise of this approach is that sectors’
technologically-determined reliance on outside capital defines firms’ sensitivity to credit availability, but
less so to general institutional or economic conditions. We thus identify the differential effects that fi-
nancial development exerts in financially more sensitive sectors, an approach that is more immune to
endogeneity concerns that may bias its level effects. Second, we condition on a full set of country-year pair
fixed effects, as well as sector fixed effects in specifications for aggregate FDI patterns and parent-firm
fixed effects in regressions for individual affiliate outcomes. These fixed effects absorb various observed
and unobserved supply- and demand-side factors other than financial conditions that may influence MNC
behavior, as well as differences in firm characteristics. Third, we provide a series of sensitivity analyses
that establish the robustness of the results. We find consistent patterns when using alternative measures
of host-country financial development and sector financial dependence, when controlling for potentially
differential effects of financial development based on sector or firm characteristics that are not directly
related to financial frictions, and when performing checks on various subsamples. Finally, we present com-
plementary evidence from affiliates’ observed financing practices and for the level effects of host-country
financial conditions in an average sector that further support our main conclusions.
      This paper contributes to several active literatures. It advances a large body of work on the impact of
financial frictions on firm operations. Evidence indicates that financial development improves aggregate
growth by increasing entry by credit-constrained firms, as well as by encouraging technology adoption and
expansion along the intensive margin (King and Levine 1993, Rajan and Zingales 1998, Beck 2003, Beck et
al. 2005, Aghion et al. 2007, Hsu et al. 2014). Financial reforms also raise firms’ export participation and
aggregate export volumes, with effects concentrated among small firms and in sectors relatively reliant
on external capital (Manova 2008, Manova 2013). Financial crises distort trade by tightening credit
by affected banks, while international bank linkages increase bilateral trade (Amiti and Weinstein 2011,
Caballero et al. 2018). We incorporate these insights into our analysis, and consider their implications
for multinational firms’ activity across countries at different levels of financial development.
      We also extend a related line of research on the role of home- and host-country financial conditions
for FDI.4 Overall, multinational affiliates tend to be less constrained and thus more responsive to growth
  4
      See Foley and Manova (2015) for a detailed review.


                                                           3
opportunities than domestic firms (Desai et al. 2008, Manova et al. 2015). Although MNCs have been
shown to use internal and external capital markets opportunistically to minimize their overall cost of
capital, they nevertheless face frictions that prevent them from perfectly arbitraging differences in the
cost of external capital across countries. In particular, MNCs raise outside finance in the host economy
when possible, and access capital markets abroad or obtain direct financing from the parent company
otherwise.
       However, parent funding does not fully compensate for the shortfall in local financing in hosts with
weak financial systems, such that local financial conditions do influence the scale of MNC operations. For
example, Feinberg and Phillips (2004) report that during 1983-1996, close to two-thirds of the debt of
U.S. MNC subsidiaries abroad was raised locally, while funding from the parent company accounted for
an additional 16%. Moreover, Desai et al. (2004) and Antràs et al. (2009) find that U.S. MNC affiliates
use less external debt in host economies with lower levels of private credit and weaker creditor rights
protection. Conversely, in such environments, U.S. MNC parents finance a bigger share of affiliate assets
and hold a higher share of affiliate equity. Nevertheless, Desai et al. (2004) estimate that parent debt
substituted for only three-quarters of the reduction in external borrowing induced by weak local credit
markets. In addition, Feinberg and Phillips (2004) argue that MNCs operating in countries with weaker
financial markets and more restrictions on FDI are less able to reallocate activity across their affiliates in
response to differential growth shocks. More broadly, there is good evidence that deeper financial markets
and more international banks from the home country support more outward FDI activity, but also host-
country bank financing and bank deregulation encourage inward FDI (Klein et al. 2002, Poelhekke 2015,
Kandilov et al. 2017, Raff et al. 2018); that host-country financing conditions can affect the incidence of
affiliate entry or acquisition in turn suggests that some component of local financing needs is associated
with fixed FDI costs. We build on this earlier work by exploring how financial conditions in a host
economy can shape the global operations of multinational firms by influencing their access to local
capital, as well as where they produce and sell their goods. We thus consider not only MNCs’ financing
practices, but also their entry and sales decisions. Our findings suggest that credit market frictions in
a host country can forestall the entry of less productive prospective multinationals and affect the sales
composition of active multinationals.5,6
       Our paper is also related to recent studies of multinational firms’ complex global strategies. For
example, Ramondo et al. (2016) analyze the importance of horizontal, vertical and export-platform
motives for U.S. multinationals. This literature has developed models that accommodate hybrid activities
and deliver empirically testable predictions for trade flows and multinational operations (Yeaple 2003a,b,
   5
     Firms that offshore production abroad may also have an incentive to integrate their foreign supplier (and thus become
multinational) if the latter faces credit constraints due to weak local financial markets (Bustos 2007, Antràs et al. 2009,
Carluccio and Fally 2012). Conversely, financially constrained firms are less likely to choose horizontal FDI over direct
exporting because of the higher associated fixed costs (Buch et al. 2009).
   6
     Our analysis also contributes to research on the impact of broader institutional frictions on FDI. While we focus on
financial institutions, other recent studies have emphasized the effects of contractual imperfections, investor protection laws,
and intellectual property rights on multinational activity (Antràs 2003, Branstetter et al. 2006, Bénassy-Quéré et al. 2007,
Bernard et al. 2010, Antràs and Chor 2013, Bilir 2014). Similar to Antràs and Caballero (2009), our approach emphasizes
the equilibrium interaction between FDI and trade flows in the presence of financial frictions.


                                                               4
Markusen and Venables 2007, Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare 2013, Irarrazabal et al. 2013, Arkolakis
et al. 2018, Tintelnot 2016).7 Our work speaks to the relative importance of these three FDI motives:
One interpretation of our findings is that stronger financial institutions in the host nation reduce the
incentives to pursue FDI for horizontal motives, and instead favor vertical and export-platform motives.8
    Finally, the competition effect we highlight relates to prior work on the interaction between foreign
affiliates and domestic firms in FDI host countries. Multinationals may crowd out local producers by
raising competition (Aitken and Harrison 1999, De Backer and Sleuwaegen 2003), but they can also
generate productivity spillovers and nudge indigenous companies to remove X-inefficiencies, especially
when local financial markets are strong (Alfaro et al. 2004, Haskel et al. 2007).9 This literature has
identified knowledge spillovers through labor turnover, improvements in the provision of intermediate
inputs, and productivity spillovers to domestic firms in the same industry or upstream/downstream from
foreign affiliates (Javorcik 2004, Javorcik and Spatareanu 2009, Arnold et al. 2011, Poole 2013).10 While
this line of research has primarily emphasized the implications of FDI for the host economy, we also point
out how local financial development and increased competition by domestic firms can affect the activity
of foreign multinationals.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops the theoretical framework and introduces
the competition and financing effects of host-country financial development on multinational activity.
Sections 3 and 4 outline the estimation strategy and the data used. Sections 5 and 6 report the main
empirical findings and a series of sensitivity analyses. The last section concludes.


2     Model: Two Effects of Host-Country Financial Development

We develop a model of FDI with heterogeneous firms which demonstrates how financial market frictions
in the FDI host country affect the entry and sales decisions of multinational affiliates. The model builds
on Helpman et al. (2004) and Grossman et al. (2006), so we will be succinct when presenting the set-up,
while also relegating all proofs and extensions to an Online Appendix. We focus instead on the model’s
novel predictions for the competition and financing effects of host-country financial development.

2.1    Economic environment

Consider a world comprised of three countries, West, East, and South. This provides a parsimonious
baseline setting to examine key features of affiliate activity and specifically the composition of affiliate
sales – to the local market, back to the home country, and to third-country markets.
    7
      Yeaple (2013), Chapter 3, reviews the growing literature on hybrid models of FDI. It is conceptually challenging to write
down a tractable multi-country model that simultaneously accommodates horizontal, vertical and export-platform FDI, due
to the large number of combinatorial possibilities that a multinational firm faces in such a general setting.
    8
      See also Fillat et al. (2015) who demonstrate that the spatial dimension of U.S. MNC affiliate activity is consistent with
risk diversification motives.
    9
      By X-inefficiencies, we mean any deviations in firm behavior from what would be optimal under profit maximization.
These may arise due to rational or irrational factors such as principal-agent problems or behavioral bias, respectively.
   10
      See also Alviarez (2018), who indicates that multinational entry can directly increase aggregate productivity even in
the absence of technological spillovers to domestic firms, as the former are on average more productive than the latter.



                                                               5
       There are K + 1 industries, indexed by k = 0, 1, . . . , K, active in each country. Labor is the only
factor of production. Sector 0 is a constant returns-to-scale, homogeneous-good sector; this good is freely
tradable across borders, and thus serves as the global numeraire. On the other hand, the industries
indexed by k = 1, . . . , K each feature a continuum of differentiated varieties manufactured by heteroge-
neous firms, as in Melitz (2003). These K industries differ in their underlying fixed costs of production,
as well as the degree to which these fixed costs need to be financed externally.
       To facilitate analytical derivations, we assume that West and East are symmetric in their economic
structure. However, South is less productive in the homogeneous-good sector than West and East: While
1/ω workers are needed to make each unit of the numeraire in South (where ω < 1), only 1 worker is
required in West and East. The labor force in each country is sufficiently large, so that a strictly positive
amount of the homogeneous good is produced in equilibrium. The nominal wage in West and East is
thus 1, while the wage in South is ω, so firms manufacturing in South face lower production costs.11
       The utility function of the representative consumer in each country is two-tiered, with the upper tier
being Cobb-Douglas over consumption from the K +1 industries. The sub-utility for each heterogeneous-
firms industry (k ∈ {1, . . . , K}) is in turn a CES aggregate over varieties. We denote by xkij (a) the quantity
of an industry-k variety (indexed by a) consumed in country i that originates from a country-j firm. The
                                                                                 k
demand in country i for this variety is thus: xkij (a) = Akij (pkij (a))−ε , where pkij (a) is its price, and εk > 1
is the constant elasticity of substitution in the industry.12 We further assume that Southern varieties do
not enter into utility in West and East, so that Aes = Aws = 0; this simplifies the analysis, but does not
detract from the general nature of our main effects.13
       Consider the heterogeneous-firms industry k in country j. Upon paying a fixed entry cost, each entrant
draws a unit labor requirement a for producing its distinct variety, from a technology distribution Gkj (a).
After observing its productivity 1/a, each firm chooses whether to incur additional fixed operating costs
in order to: (i) commence production for its home market; (ii) export to foreign markets; and/or (iii)
pursue FDI. We assume that all firms require external capital to cover a fraction φk ∈ [0, 1] of each of
these fixed operating costs upfront. Such a need may arise for example when management has limited
control rights over revenues, must instead distribute them as dividends or profits to stakeholders, and
hence cannot retain sufficient earnings to fund future outlays. Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we
view φk as a parameter that is pinned down by the nature of the production technology in the industry,
which gives rise to variation in the demand for external financing across sectors.
       To highlight the role of credit market imperfections in the FDI host country, we assume that financial
frictions affect external financing in South, but not in West and East.14 Southern firms are therefore
more credit constrained than Western and Eastern producers; this generates the competition effect when
financial development in South improves. Although Western and Eastern firms are not credit constrained
  11
     We consider the case of endogenous wages in South in an extension in the Online Appendix.
  12
     The full expressions for the utility functions and the aggregate demand terms Akij are presented in the Online Appendix.
In particular, the Akij ’s are familiar functions of country expenditure on industry-k varieties and a CES price index.
  13
     We consider the case where South can export its varieties to West and East in the Online Appendix.
  14
     The key feature here is the presence of financial frictions in the FDI host country; whether or not such frictions are also
present but weaker in West and East is not essential for the results.


                                                               6
in their home-country operations, they may or may not be able to fund their multinational affiliates
abroad in full; the financing effect will emerge precisely under the latter scenario.

2.2   Firm Decisions and Industry Equilibrium

West and East: We consider the decisions made by an industry-k firm with unit cost draw a that is
headquartered in West; the decision problem for firms from East is symmetric. We drop the superscript
k below to ease the notation, but all key parameters, including the various fixed costs, are allowed to vary
across industries. If the firm commences production for the home economy, it would incur a per-period
fixed cost of fD units of Western labor. The firm also considers whether to export to East, South, or
both markets. Exporting to each of these foreign markets entails an upfront, per-period fixed cost of fX
units of Western labor and an iceberg transport cost, τ > 1. Under CES utility, firms charge a constant
markup over marginal cost, so that the home price for a Western variety is pww (a) = a/α, and its price
when exported is pew (a) = psw (a) = τ a/α.
   While a fraction φ of the fixed costs, fD and fX , need to be covered using external sources of finance,
the cost of this borrowing for firms in West is low, in line with the assumption that credit markets in
West are frictionless. To ease the exposition, we set the cost of external financing equal to the internal
cost of financing, and normalize this interest rate to 1. It should be emphasized that all results below
hold so long as the cost of outside capital in West is sufficiently low and close to 1, even if it does not
exactly equal the cost of internal funds. When we turn to Southern firms later, we will instead assume
that their external financing cost is strictly greater than 1 as credit markets are under-developed there.
With this structure, one can show that the profits of a Western firm from domestic sales in West, from
exporting to East, and from exporting to South are respectively: π D (a) = (1 − α)Aww (a/α)1−ε − fD ,
π XN (a) = (1 − α)Aew (τ a/α)1−ε − fX , and π XS (a) = (1 − α)Asw (τ a/α)1−ε − fX .
   Each Western firm can further consider whether to become a multinational by locating its production
abroad. This would allow the firm to save on shipping costs on sales to the FDI host country, and would
moreover lower its wage costs if it sets up an affiliate in South. An affiliate can be used not only to
supply the host country, but also to export back to West or to the third-country market; we refer to
these as local, return, and export platform sales, respectively. Affiliate exporting incurs the same fixed
and variable trade costs to each market as above, fX and τ . Each foreign affiliate also bears a per-period
fixed cost of fI units of Western labor, of which a fraction φ needs to be financed externally.
   The presence of financial frictions in South implies that the cost of obtaining capital there exceeds
that in West. A Western multinational would thus have no incentive to raise capital in South as long as
Western financiers are willing to fully fund φfI . We assume first that Western firms are able to fund all
affiliate operations with credit obtained in West, and relax this later in Section 2.4.
   Western firms face a wide array of options for their export-versus-FDI decision over the three markets;
for this reason, multi-country models of FDI with export platforms are analytically complex (Yeaple
2003a,b, 2013, Arkolakis et al. 2018). To illustrate the effects of interest as transparently as possible,
we focus on the case where Western multinationals: (i) locate affiliates only in South; and (ii) use the


                                                     7
Southern plant as a production center for serving all three markets. We show in the Online Appendix
that two conditions are sufficient to guarantee that this will in fact be the optimal FDI strategy: τ ω < 1
and fX < fD < fI . Intuitively, fixed export costs, Southern wages, and trade costs must be low enough
for MNCs to use South as their global production and export center. The fixed cost of FDI also needs to
be sufficiently high so that the Western firm would not set up affiliates in both East and South.15 Under
these parameter conditions, and taking into account the revenues and fixed costs in all three markets,
profits from FDI in South by a Western firm are:
                                            aω 1−ε                                           τ aω 1−ε
                 π I (a) = (1 − α)Asw                       + (1 − α)(Aww + Aew )                            − (fI + 2fX ).             (2.1)
                                              α                                                   α
       Firms in the industry sort into different modes of activity depending on their productivity draw. By
setting profits in π D (a), π XN (a), and π XS (a) to zero, we obtain the cut-offs above which production for
the home market, exporting to East, and exporting to South would respectively be pursued:
                       fD                          fX                                                                   fX
       a1−ε
        D =                        , a1−ε
                                      XN =                      , and                                 a1−ε
                                                                                                       XS =                          .
               (1 − α)Aww (1/α)1−ε         (1 − α)Aew (τ /α)1−ε                                                 (1 − α)Asw (τ /α)1−ε
A fourth cut-off, aI , delineates when FDI is feasible. Becoming a multinational is more profitable than
basing production in West when π I (a) > π D (a) + π XN (a) + π XS (a). The FDI cut-off is thus:
                                                                         fI − fD
             a1−ε
              I   =                                                                                                                 ,    (2.2)
                      (1 −   α)[Aww (( ταω )1−ε   −   ( α1 )1−ε )   + Aew (( ταω )1−ε − ( ατ )1−ε ) + Asw (( ωα )1−ε − ( ατ )1−ε )]

where the conditions fI > fD , τ ω < 1, ω < 1 < τ and ε > 1 ensure that aI > 0.
       We focus on an industry equilibrium in which 0 < a1−ε
                                                         D   < a1−ε   1−ε   1−ε
                                                                XN < aXS < aI , where a
                                                                                       1−ε acts as

a proxy for firm productivity.16 This sorting of Western firms across production modes is in line with
prior evidence that exporters tend to be more productive than non-exporters, while multinationals are
on average more productive than either (e.g., Helpman et al. 2004). Firms with a1−ε < a1−ε
                                                                                       I   base their
production activity in West, and export to East and possibly also to South if they are productive enough.
The most efficient firms with a1−ε > a1−ε
                                      I   instead become multinationals; while still headquartered in
West, these firms locate production in South and serve all three markets from there.
       Credit constraints in South: Southern firms in each differentiated-varieties industry produce only
for domestic consumption. Each Southern firm needs to engage fS units of Southern labor in order to
commence production in a given period; as in West and East, the firm requires external capital to cover
a fraction φ of this fixed cost. Its per-period expense on fixed costs is thus (Rφ + (1 − φ)) fS ω, where
R is the gross interest rate of external finance in South. We assume R > 1, reflecting the higher cost
of outside capital in South relative to the internal cost of funds (which has been normalized to 1).17
Per-period operating profits are thus: (1 − α)Ass (aω/α)1−ε − (Rφ + (1 − φ)) fS ω.
       Unlike in West and East, firms headquartered in South face credit constraints due to weak institutions
  15
     The Online Appendix also shows how our insights can extend to a setting with multiple potential FDI host countries.
  16
     The Online Appendix discusses the parameter conditions that need to be satisfied for this ordering of cut-offs to hold.
  17
     One can view R as the gross interest rate set exogenously by financiers in a large international capital market, at which
they are willing to provide capital to firms producing in South.




                                                                          8
that leave lenders exposed to unprotected default risk, as in Aghion et al. (2005).18 Although lenders
observe firms’ productivity, borrowers could opt to default on repayment. Default, however, incurs a
pecuniary cost equal to a fraction η ∈ [0, 1] of the firm’s appropriable profits, associated with actions
taken to shield the firm’s financial resources from creditors. The parameter η therefore captures the
degree of financial development in South: When credit institutions are stronger, η is higher and it is
more costly for firms to hide their profits. For simplicity, we take appropriable profits to be the firm’s
variable profits. A Southern firm with unit cost a would thus default if and only if the implied profit
                                                           1−ε
loss is smaller than the cost of repayment: η(1 − α)Ass aω
                                                         α      < RφfS ω. Assuming that lenders can
observe firms’ productivity, this implies a threshold (acredit
                                                        S      )1−ε above which Southern firms can credibly
commit against default and raise the external finance they require, where:
                                                          1       RφfS ω
                                        (acredit
                                          S      )1−ε =                         .                                      (2.3)
                                                          η (1 − α)Ass (ω/α)1−ε
At the same time, a Southern firm would not commence operations unless its per-period profits are
positive. This would hold for firms whose productivity exceeds (aprof
                                                                 S
                                                                      it 1−ε
                                                                        ) , where:
                                                           (Rφ + (1 − φ)) fS ω
                                         (aprof
                                           S
                                                it 1−ε
                                                  )    =                       .                                       (2.4)
                                                           (1 − α)Ass (ω/α)1−ε
       The relevant productivity cut-off for Southern firms to commence production is therefore:
                                                  n                            o
                                                                   prof it 1−ε
                                  (aS )1−ε = max (acredit
                                                     S    )1−ε
                                                               , (aS      )      .                                     (2.5)

In order for financial frictions to have a binding effect, we shall assume that (acredit
                                                                                  S      )1−ε > (aprof
                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                       it 1−ε
                                                                                                         ) ,
so that aS = acredit
              S      . There is thus a margin of potential Southern firms – with productivity below
(acredit
  S      )1−ε but above (aprof
                          S
                               it 1−ε
                                 )    – that would earn positive profits if granted credit, but are unable
to given the risk of default.19 From (2.3) and (2.4), the inequality (acredit
                                                                       S      )1−ε > (aprof
                                                                                       S
                                                                                            it 1−ε
                                                                                              )    simplifies
       φ         η
to: R 1−φ >     1−η .   Credit constraints thus bind when external finance dependence φ is sufficiently high.
In contrast, credit would not be rationed when η = 1 regardless of the industry’s reliance on external
finance, which corresponds to the situation in West and East.
       We show in the Online Appendix that with the above formulation, the aggregate amount of credit
extended to firms in the Southern economy as a share of total production is increasing in η. This validates
our later use of an empirical measure of private credit to GDP to capture financial development.
       Industry equilibrium: We close the model with free entry conditions in each industry k for each
country j. As is standard in the literature, we assume that productivity 1/a is Pareto distributed with
shape parameter κ and support [1/āj , ∞).20 To save space, we spell out the free-entry conditions and
the full system of equations that pins down the industry equilibrium in the Online Appendix. Our main
interest is in five dimensions of MNC activity: affiliate entry, affiliate-level sales and their breakdown by
destination market, and aggregate MNC sales and their breakdown by destination market.
  18
      We consider endogenous default risk that generates credit rationing, but similar results would obtain under other
microfoundations for credit rationing such as imperfect contract enforcement or collateral constraints, or under financial
frictions that inflate the cost of capital without credit rationing.
   19
      This is consistent with evidence that smaller firms generally have less access to external finance (Guiso et al. 2004).
   20
      Note that the model can accommodate differences in κ and āj across industries k.


                                                             9
   Outcomes of interest: Let Nn denote the measure of firms and Gn (a) the cdf of productivity draws
                                                                                      R aI
in West. The measure of Western multinational firms (with a1−ε > a1−ε
                                                                  I ) then equals Nn 0 dGn (a) =
Nn Gn (aI ). For a given affiliate in South with productivity 1/a, sales to the local market are HOR(a) ≡
Asw (aω/α)1−ε . We refer to these as horizontal sales, since they allow the MNC to avoid transport costs
while serving the Southern market. Export-platform sales to third-country destinations (here East) are
defined as P LA(a) ≡ Aew (τ aω/α)1−ε . Finally, return sales back to the home market (here West) are
RET (a) ≡ Aww (τ aω/α)1−ε . The affiliate’s total sales are T OT (a) ≡ HOR(a) + P LA(a) + RET (a).
Integrating affiliate-level sales over all Western multinationals, the aggregate levels of horizontal, platform,
and return sales are respectively: HOR ≡ Nn Asw (ω/α)1−ε Vn (aI ), P LA ≡ Nn Aew (τ ω/α)1−ε Vn (aI ), and
                                                  Ra
RET ≡ Nn Aww (τ ω/α)1−ε Vn (aI ), where Vn (aI ) ≡ 0 I a1−ε dGn (a).
   It follows that the affiliate sales shares across the three markets are given by:
                                                                              −1
                          HOR(a)     HOR                    1−ε Aew    1−ε Aww
                                   =                 =  1+τ         +τ             ,                      (2.6)
                          T OT (a)   T OT                       Asw        Asw
                                                                      Aww −1
                                                                          
                           P LA(a)    P LA                  ε−1 Asw
                                    =                =  1+τ         +          , and                      (2.7)
                           T OT (a)   T OT                      Aew   Aew
                                                                      Aew −1
                                                                          
                           RET (a)    RET                   ε−1 Asw
                                    =                =  1+τ         +           .                         (2.8)
                           T OT (a)   T OT                      Aww   Aww

2.3   The Competition Effect

We now study how MNC activity responds to host-country financial development (as captured by an
increase in η), as well as how this response varies across industries that differ in their dependence on
external finance (as reflected in φ). In this subsection, we first establish a competition effect, under the
baseline assumption that foreign subsidiaries do not require financing from host-country sources.
   Improvements in financial institutions in South have a direct effect on the industry equilibrium in that
country. When η rises, the higher cost of default alleviates the moral hazard problem, and hence more
Southern firms gain access to credit. This lowers the productivity cut-off for commencing production,
a1−ε
 S , as illustrated in the bottom panel of Figure 2. However, the free-entry condition requires that the
expected profitability of a Southern firm remain constant. Average demand for each Southern product,
Ass , must subsequently fall. In sum, we have:

                 daS                   dAss
Lemma 1: (i)      dη   > 0; and (ii)    dη    < 0.

   Financial development in South in turn affects industry outcomes in West and East. As more Southern
firms enter, the local market becomes more competitive, and Southern demand for each Western variety,
Asw , declines. This raises the productivity cut-offs for Western firms seeking to penetrate the Southern
market through exports or FDI, a1−ε     1−ε
                                XS and aI . To ensure that the free-entry condition in West holds
even while expected profits from the Southern market decline, total profits from sales to West and East
must increase. This tilts Western firms toward serving those latter markets: The cut-offs, a1−ε    1−ε
                                                                                            D and aXN ,
both fall, while aggregate demand for Western varieties in West and East, Aww and Aew , rises. These


                                                           10
comparative statics are illustrated in the upper panel of Figure 2, and stated below as:

                                                                                        1 daXS            1 daI                1 daXN
Lemma 2: When MNCs do not require host-country financing, (i)                          aXS dη       <    aI dη    < 0; (ii)   aXN dη    =
 1 daD                    1 dAsw                    1 dAew             1 dAww
aD dη     > 0; (iii)     Asw dη    < 0; and (iv)   Aew dη         =   Aww dη       > 0.

       The above shifts in the productivity cut-offs and aggregate demand levels govern how host-country
financial development affects affiliate entry and sales. Proposition 1 states the rich set of predictions
stemming from this competition effect; we also summarize them in the first column of Table 1.

Proposition 1 When MNC affiliates do not require host-country financing, in response to a small im-
provement in financial development, η, in South:

  (i) HOR(a) decreases, while both P LA(a) and RET (a) increase;
         HOR(a)         HOR                            P LA(a)        P LA         RET (a)        RET
 (ii)    T OT (a)   =   T OT   decreases, while both   T OT (a)   =   T OT   and   T OT (a)   =   T OT   increase; and

(iii) Nn , Nn Gn (aI ), HOR, P LA, RET and T OT all decrease.

These effects are stronger in industries with higher external finance dependence, φ, if the initial level of
η is sufficiently high.

       Proposition 1 builds directly on the logic of Lemma 2. For each surviving MNC affiliate, the com-
petition effect leads to a reduction in horizontal sales to South, as well as their share in total sales. At
the same time, demand rises in East and West, inducing each affiliate to re-direct its sales toward those
markets. Platform and return sales thus rise, both in absolute levels and relative to total sales. At the
aggregate level, the competition effect depresses the ex ante expected profits of Western firms, which
leads to a decrease in the measure of these firms, Nn , the measure of multinationals, Nn Gn (aI ), and
consequently the aggregate volume of horizontal, platform and return sales.21 All of these changes are
intuitively stronger in industries where firms are innately more reliant on external financing: A given in-
crease in η would have a greater impact on improving access to credit in a high-φ industry, and hence the
resulting competition effect would be more intense. As we show in the Online Appendix, the condition
that η be sufficiently high for the cross-partial results is a mild requirement in practice.22

2.4      The Financing Effect

We next incorporate into the model a direct financing effect of host-country financial development on
MNC activity. We introduce a role for local financial institutions in meeting the credit needs of MNC
subsidiaries, motivated by the broad evidence that such financing shapes affiliate operations in practice.
Our premise is that multinational firms use internal and external capital markets opportunistically to
minimize their overall cost of capital in the face of financial frictions. We posit that Western financiers
  21
     In particular, for RET and P LA, the decline in Nn and Vn (aI ) can be shown to dominate the expansion along the
intensive margin of Aew and Aww ; see the Online Appendix for the proof.
  22
     The Online Appendix also makes clear that this condition is in fact not needed to sign the cross-partial effects for the
variables in part (i) of the proposition. The proposition has been stated in its current form for the sake of brevity.


                                                                  11
are willing to fund all domestic and export activities of Western firms, but only a portion of their fixed
FDI costs, up to what would be provided for commencing domestic production.23 Since a fraction 1 − φ
of fI is funded internally and interest rates are lower in West than South, MNCs thus optimally raise
the maximum possible amount of external finance φfD in West, and borrow the shortfall φ(fI − fD )
in South’s imperfect capital market. These assumptions grant tractability, but all that our predictions
require is that MNCs cannot perfectly arbitrage cross-country differences in the cost of capital, so that
affiliate activity will be responsive to financial development in South.24
    Affiliates can obtain financing in South only if they can credibly commit to repayment. As above,
defaulting on Southern loans costs a fraction η ∈ [0, 1] of appropriable profits. Since the firm’s outside
option is to move production back to West, we assume appropriable profits from the perspective of
Southern creditors are operating profits from FDI less operating profits from producing in West.25 A
multinational with productivity a1−ε would therefore default on its Southern loan if:
                                                                                     
                τ aω 1−ε  a 1−ε            τ aω 1−ε  τ a 1−ε           aω 1−ε  τ a 1−ε
η(1 − α) Aww             −           + Aew             −             + Asw         −              < Rφ(fI − fD ),
                  α         α                   α         α                   α       α

namely if it is less costly to default than to repay its creditors. This implies a modified FDI cut-off:
                                                                Rφ 1−ε
                                                      ã1−ε
                                                        I   =      a ,                                                      (2.9)
                                                                 η I

where a1−ε
       I   is the cut-off from (2.2) when MNCs do not need host-country financing. Capital market
imperfections in South now directly affect MNC entry: The productivity cut-off ã1−ε
                                                                                 I   for setting up
an affiliate is higher the greater the cost of external finance in South R, the weaker Southern financial
development η, and the higher the degree of external finance dependence φ.26
    Hence, an improvement in host-country financial institutions facilitates entry by more Southern firms
and by more foreign subsidiaries. This affects the industry equilibrium in West as follows:

                                                                                       1 dãI               1 daXS
Lemma 3: When MNC affiliates require host-country financing, (i)                      ãI dη > 0;    (ii)  aXS dη     < 0; (iii)
 1 daXN          1 daD        1 daXS            1 dAsw                     1 dAew         1 dAww          1 dAsw
aXN dη      =   aD dη    >   aXS dη ;   (iv)   Asw dη    < 0; and (v)     Aew dη     = Aww    dη     >   Asw dη .


    In contrast to Lemma 2, an increase in η now triggers a financing effect that makes credit accessible
and FDI feasible for a larger margin of Western firms. This leads to a leftward shift in the FDI cut-off,
ã1−ε
  I , as illustrated in Figure 3. At the same time, the competition effect remains active: The Southern
market becomes more competitive not only because of the entry of local firms, but also because more
  23
     This could be due to institutional frictions: Affiliate assets might not be fully collateralizable, due to expropriation risk
or weak enforcement of cross-border claims; there might be asymmetric information when lenders do not observe how firms
manage operations abroad; and remote financiers might face difficulties in monitoring debtors and claiming collateral.
  24
     For example, our results would be reinforced if the share of fI that can be financed in South plausibly increased with η.
Likewise, the financing effect would remain relevant if external funds were required to finance ongoing variable production
costs rather than just fixed costs.
  25
     While there are alternative ways of defining what constitutes appropriable profits, our general insights would hold so
long as the productivity cutoff for FDI by Western firms is higher the more severe financial constraints in South are.
  26                                         φ       η
     We maintain the assumption that R 1−φ       > 1−η  . This ensures that it is optimal for Western firms with productivity
        1−ε
above ãI to pursue FDI, since their profits would then satisfy: π I (a) > π D (a) + π XN (a) + π XS (a).



                                                                12
MNC affiliates are now present. The cut-off for Western firms exporting to South, a1−ε
                                                                                   XS , thus shifts to
the right. One can moreover show that even if a1−ε    1−ε
                                               D and aXN were to also increase, they would do so to
a smaller extent than a1−ε                                               1−ε
                       XS ; intuitively, this is because firms near the aD   and a1−ε
                                                                                  XN thresholds are less
directly affected by competition in South. This in turn allows us to compare the proportional changes in
Aww , Aew and Asw , and hence derive the following:

Proposition 2 Suppose that the initial level of Southern financial development η is sufficiently high.
When MNC affiliates require host-country financing, in response to a small improvement in η in South:

  (i) HOR(a) decreases, while the effects on both P LA(a) and RET (a) are ambiguous;
         HOR(a)         HOR                            P LA(a)        P LA         RET (a)        RET
 (ii)    T OT (a)   =   T OT   decreases, while both   T OT (a)   =   T OT   and   T OT (a)   =   T OT   increase; and

(iii) Nn Gn (ãI ), HOR, P LA, RET and T OT all increase.
The effects in (i) and (ii) are stronger in industries with higher external finance dependence, φ.

       Parts (i) and (ii) of the proposition confirm that the breakdown of affiliate sales by destination
continue to reflect the competition effect: With an improvement in η, the tendency to sell to the host
market decreases, while rising instead for the shares of sales to the home and third-country markets.27
Intuitively, these effects are once again stronger in financially more sensitive industries.
       Importantly, part (iii) shows that the financing effect alters the behavior of aggregate MNC outcomes
compared to the baseline case with only the competition effect. When η increases, the expansion in
MNC activity on the extensive margin can now be strong enough to dominate the contraction along
the intensive margin of individual affiliate sales. Aggregate sales to any market, HOR, P LA, RET and
T OT , can therefore rise. In particular, when the initial level of host-country financial development is
relatively high, an increase in η would generate only a modest amount of entry by Southern firms, so
that the competition effect is muted relative to the financing effect on entry by MNC affiliates.28 (While
the cross-partial effects for part (iii) cannot be signed unambiguously, what is key is that the model with
host-country financing has a more flexible set of predictions than the baseline model.)
       We summarize the predictions of Proposition 2 in the second column of Table 1. This column shows
the net impact of host-country financial development when the financing effect is sufficiently powerful
to overturn the competition effect on the number of affiliates and aggregate affiliate sales. Should the
financing effect be present but relatively weak, the patterns would revert to those in the first column.
       In the Online Appendix, we develop several extensions to show that the competition and financing
effects remain relevant when: (i) allowing Southern firms to export their varieties to West and East; and
(ii) incorporating multiple FDI host countries. The latter extension implies that Propositions 1 and 2
also apply to the pattern of affiliate activity across countries that differ in their financial development.
  27
     It should be noted that the mild condition that η be sufficiently high is not required to sign the effect of dHOR(a)/dη
in part (i). While dP LA(a)/dη and dRET (a)/dη cannot be signed conclusively, we can show that d2 log P LA(a)/dηdφ and
d2 log RET (a)/dηdφ inherit the same sign as dP LA(a)/dη and dRET (a)/dη respectively when η is sufficiently high. See
the Online Appendix for further details.
  28
     As discussed in the Online Appendix, this condition is not a restrictive one in practice, as η would need to be very small
(< 0.1) to generate a numerical counter-example.


                                                                  13
3     Estimation Strategy

The theoretical framework above delivers specific predictions for the effect of host-country financial
development on multinational activity, including its differential effect across sectors with varying degrees
of external finance dependence. This section describes the empirical strategy we use to evaluate these
predictions in the data.

3.1    Empirical design

We estimate the differential impact of host-country financial conditions on aggregate and affiliate-level
MNC outcomes across sectors with the following baseline specifications:

                               M N Cikt = β F Dit × EF Dk + ϕit + ϕk + ikt , and                                                 (3.1)
                             M N Caikt = β F Dit × EF Dk + ϕit + ϕa + aikt .                                                     (3.2)

    In (3.1), the dependent variable M N Cikt characterizes the aggregate activity in host country i of
U.S.-owned multinational firms from industry k, in year t. The outcomes we examine are: an indicator
variable equal to 1 if at least one industry-k U.S. parent has a foreign affiliate in country i, 1 (Nikt > 0) ;
the log number of such foreign affiliates (totalled across U.S. parent firms), log Nikt ; the log of aggregate
affiliate sales to each destination market, log HORikt , log P LAikt and log RETikt , and across all markets,
                                                                                                 HORikt P LAikt            RETikt
log T OTikt ; and the share of aggregate affiliate sales to each destination,                    T OTikt , T OTikt   and   T OTikt .
    In (3.2), we study instead outcome variables M N Caikt that correspond to the country-i, year-t affiliate
operations of an industry-k parent indexed by a. We consider the log of affiliate-level sales by destination,
log HORikt (a), log P LAikt (a) and log RETikt (a), and across all markets, log T OTikt (a); and the share of
                                               HORikt (a) P LAikt (a)            RETikt (a)
affiliate-level sales to each destination,     T OTikt (a) , T OTikt (a)   and   T OTikt (a) .
    To assess the role of financial conditions, we analyze the interaction between two variables: the
financial development of host country i in year t, F Dit , and the external finance dependence of sector
k, EF Dk . The main coefficient of interest, β, captures the differential effect of F Dit across sectors
with varying degrees of EF Dk . This effect is estimated conditional on country-year fixed effects, ϕit ,
and either industry fixed effects, ϕk , in the aggregate-level equation (3.1), or parent-firm fixed effects,
ϕa , in the affiliate-level equation (3.2). These fixed effects play an important role in controlling for
other potential determinants of FDI. First, the country-year fixed effects, ϕit , subsume the level effect
of financial development, F Dit , as well as broader global demand and supply shocks that might affect
the host country in a given year; these fixed effects also control for any observed or unobserved time-
varying host-country characteristics, including that of corporate tax policies.29 Second, the industry
fixed effects in (3.1) and the parent-firm fixed effects in (3.2) each absorb the main effect of a sector’s
external finance dependence, EF Dk , in the respective specification. They also subsume the role of any
industry-k attributes relevant to MNC operations. The use of parent-firm fixed effects in (3.2) further
  29
     In the context of the model from Section 2, the country-year fixed effects would further pick up the role of factor costs
(ω) and aggregate expenditure, as well as any country-specific components of the fixed costs of production, exporting or
FDI.


                                                              14
accounts for any time-invariant firm characteristics – such as the productivity of the parent firm, 1/a,
in the model – that drives affiliate activity. The error terms, ikt and aikt , contain any residual factors
that shape multinational operations. We cluster standard errors by host country, to allow for correlated
shocks across observations at the country level.
       Equations (3.1) and (3.2) adopt the same coefficient labels across MNC outcomes to economize on
notation, but we permit the estimated β’s to vary across outcomes. For expositional clarity, we sometimes
denote the coefficients in regressions pertaining to horizontal, platform and return sales respectively as
β HOR , β P LA and β RET . We will interpret the sign pattern of these estimated coefficients through the
lens of the model (see Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1).
       Based on Propositions 1 and 2, we expect host-country financial development to have distinct impacts
across the different dimensions of MNC activity. These will moreover depend on the presence and relative
strength of the competition and financing mechanisms. The competition effect arises as host-country
financial development induces entry by domestic firms. The resulting increase in local competition
reduces affiliate-level sales in the host country, log HORikt (a), and raises instead platform and return
sales, log P LAikt (a) and log RETikt (a). The shares of affiliate-level and aggregate sales to the host
            HORikt (a)          HORikt
market,     T OTikt (a)   and   T OTikt ,   both consequently decline, while the shares of export sales to the parent
                                                        RETikt (a) RETikt P LAikt (a)               P LAikt
country and to third-country destinations,              T OTikt (a) , T OTikt , T OTikt (a)   and   T OTikt ,   all rise. These effects
are further expected to be more pronounced in financially more vulnerable industries, which would be
consistent with β HOR < 0, β P LA > 0 and β RET > 0 in the regressions for affiliate sales levels, as well as
in the regressions for sales shares (computed either at the affiliate or aggregate levels).30
       If active and dominant, the financing effect implies that host-country financial development raises
the aggregate level of MNC activity, as more multinational firms can access capital in the host country.
Consequently, the number of offshore affiliates, log Nikt , and aggregate affiliate sales to each destination,
log HORikt , log P LAikt , log RETikt and log T OTikt , all grow, and relatively more so in sectors with high
requirements for external capital. Finding β > 0 for each of these outcome variables would thus be
consistent with the presence of the financing effect, while β < 0 would indicate that it is either moot or
small relative to the competition effect.

3.2      Discussion

The specifications in (3.1) and (3.2) identify the causal differential effect of host-country financial de-
velopment on MNC activity across sectors by exploiting the exogenous cross-sector variation in the
requirement for outside capital. This approach builds on Rajan and Zingales (1998) and has been used
extensively in the finance and trade literature (see Foley and Manova, 2015 for a review). Its main
premise is that isolating the causal level effect of financial conditions in a representative industry faces
  30
      The three sales shares across market destinations sum to 1 by definition, which implies that the estimated coefficients
when the sales shares are the dependent variables will satisfy: β HOR + β P LA + β RET = 0. Each regression nevertheless
still delivers independent information, namely whether the effect of financial development on each outcome is significantly
different from 0. Note that there are no efficiency gains from estimating the three equations simultaneously as seemingly
unrelated regressions, since each includes the same set of explanatory variables and is run on the same set of observations.



                                                                  15
endogeneity concerns, but these can be overcome by exploiting the technologically-determined variation
in financial sensitivity across industries.
    There are specifically two concerns over whether one can estimate the effect of F Dit purely off the
variation in financial conditions across host countries and over time. First, omitted variable bias can
arise if an unobserved country-year characteristic both impacts MNC activity and is correlated with
financial development. For example, countries that strengthen financial institutions might at the same
time implement broader institutional or economic reforms that also affect multinational firms. If the
latter changes are unobserved, the estimates of β may reflect the influence of both financial development
and these omitted country characteristics. Second, reverse causality remains a possibility, albeit one that
is mitigated by the range of dependent variables we consider: In (3.1), even should financial development
respond to aggregate MNC activity (log Nikt and log T OTikt ), it is less clear how the shares of sales by
destination market would affect F Dit . Moreover, for the affiliate-level regressions in (3.2), host-country
financial development is more plausibly exogenous from the perspective of individual MNC affiliates.
    Specifications (3.1) and (3.2) seek to address these concerns, by emphasizing the interaction term
F Dit × EF Dk , which captures the differential effect of financial development across sectors with exoge-
nously varying degrees of financial dependence. The coefficient β is shielded from the above concerns
about omitted variables and reverse causality, to the extent that these considerations are not expected
to exert effects that vary systematically across sectors. In particular, in regression (3.1) for aggregate
MNC outcomes, β, is estimated off the variation across industries in EF Dk within a given host country
and year. In regression (3.2) for affiliate-level activity, the interaction term reflects the sales decisions
that a given multinational company makes across its subsidiaries located in countries with different levels
of financial development, and so β is estimated using the variation in these sales patterns across parent
firms operating in different sectors.
    While (3.1) and (3.2) provide estimates regarding the relevance of host-country financial development
that have a clear interpretation, they strictly capture differential effects across sectors. We thus com-
plement this baseline evidence with a series of regressions in Section 6.5, in which we examine the level
effect of financial development on MNC outcomes for an average industry. These latter estimates should
be interpreted as correlations that contribute to a more complete picture of the effects of host-country
financial development.


4    Data and Motivating Facts

Implementing the empirical strategy in Section 3 requires measures of multinational activity, host-country
financial institutions, and industries’ external finance dependence. This section describes our data and
measurement approach.




                                                     16
4.1      Data

U.S. multinational activity: We examine the global operations of U.S.-based multinationals using
firm-level data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).31 The BEA Survey of U.S. Direct In-
vestment Abroad provides information on U.S. parent firms and their foreign affiliates on an annual
basis during 1989-2009.32 This dataset allows us to construct the dependent variables of interest at the
aggregate and affiliate levels, M N Cikt and M N Caikt , respectively for specifications (3.1) and (3.2).
       A key element of the BEA dataset for our exercise is its detailed records of U.S. multinationals’
affiliate sales. In addition to each subsidiary’s total revenues, T OT (a), the BEA reports its local sales
in the host country, HOR(a), exports to the United States, RET (a), and exports to other destinations,
P LA(a).33 We use these as measures of horizontal, return and export-platform sales, as well as to
calculate sales shares. We compute aggregate MNC outcomes by host country and year for 115 NAICS
4-digit industries based on the primary industry affiliation of each parent company. The BEA data
are most comprehensive in scope and coverage in benchmark years, namely 1989, 1994, 1999, 2004 and
2009.34 We therefore analyze aggregate MNC measures for benchmark years only, and use the entire
panel in affiliate-level regressions. (We have verified that the affiliate-level regression findings also hold
in the subsample of benchmark years.)
       Table 2 summarizes key patterns in U.S. multinational activity. The total revenues of U.S. multina-
tional affiliates amount to $561 million in the average country-industry-year triplet. The typical affiliate
sells primarily to its local market (74%), while earning a smaller share of revenues from exports to the
United States (7%) and to third countries (20%). This composition, however, varies substantially across
affiliates and years: The standard deviations around these means are 36%, 20% and 32%, respectively.
Figure 4 provides a Venn diagram for the distribution of affiliates and affiliate sales by destination type
(local, U.S., third-country). Subsidiaries selling in only one destination capture 22% of U.S. multination-
als’ global sales, while affiliates serving all three destinations contribute over 52%. Multinational firms
also maintain production facilities across a broad set of locations. In 2009 for example, 1,892 parent com-
panies operated 14,804 affiliates in 142 countries. In an average year, there are 1,465 U.S. parents, each
managing 7.38 foreign affiliates, with some large corporations owning many more subsidiaries (standard
  31
     These data are collected for the purpose of producing publicly available aggregate statistics on the activities of U.S.
multinational enterprises.
  32
     A U.S. entity is considered to have a foreign affiliate if it has direct or indirect ownership or control of at least 10% of
the voting securities of an incorporated foreign business enterprise, or an equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign
business enterprise, at any time during a benchmark fiscal year. For very small affiliates that do not own another affiliate,
parents are exempt from reporting with the standard survey form. Foreign affiliates are required to report separately unless
they are in the same country and three-digit industry. Each affiliate is considered to be incorporated where its physical
assets are located.
  33
     Affiliate sales by destination are observed only for majority-owned affiliates. We therefore restrict the sample to affiliates
for which the U.S. parent firm has direct or indirect ownership or control exceeding 50% of the voting securities. There are
changes over time in the affiliate size threshold above which sales by destination need to be reported, but we have checked
that our findings hold for each benchmark year. The sum of the reported local, U.S. and third-country sales falls short of
the total sales recorded for a handful of affiliates. To ensure that the three corresponding sales shares sum to 1, we measure
total sales with the sum of the three sales components; all results are robust to using the raw total sales data instead.
  34
     In a typical benchmark year, the survey covers over 99% of affiliate activity by total assets, sales, and U.S. FDI. In case
of missing survey responses, the BEA may report imputed values; these are flagged and we exclude them from the analysis.



                                                                17
deviation: 15.74).
       Host-country financial development: Our primary measure of F Dit is the total amount of bank
credit extended to the private sector as a share of GDP, from Beck et al. (2009). This is an outcome-based
measure that captures the actual availability of external capital in an economy, and implicitly reflects the
extent to which local institutions support formal lending activity and enforce financial contracts. This
empirical measure of financial development can moreover be justified within the context of the model
from Section 2: As formally shown in the Online Appendix, the ratio of aggregate credit to GDP in the
FDI host country is increasing in the parameter η that governs financial frictions in the model.
       Financial development varies significantly across the 95 host countries and 21 years in the sample
(Table 2, Appendix Table 2). The mean value of F Dit in the panel is 0.51, with a standard deviation of
0.44. Notice that the cross-sectional dispersion of F Dit exceeds its time-series variation: The standard
deviation of private credit across countries was 0.62 in 2009, but it was only 0.15 for the average economy
over the 1989-2009 period. While private credit to GDP is arguably the most commonly-used indicator
of financial development in the trade, growth and finance literatures, we will also demonstrate in Section
6.1 the robustness of our results to using an alternative measure of financial reforms.
       Industry external finance dependence: EF Dk is measured following Rajan and Zingales (1998)
as the empirical counterpart to model parameter φk . We calculate EF Dk as the share of capital ex-
penditures not financed with internal cash flows from operations using data on all publicly-listed U.S.
companies in sector k from Compustat North America.35 This aims to capture industries’ inherent need
for outside capital given their technologically determined cash flow and investment structure. There
is significant variation in observed external finance dependence across the 115 industries in the sample
(mean: −0.22, standard deviation: 1.46, Table 2).36
       Constructing EF Dk with U.S. data has three distinct advantages. First, the United States has a well-
developed financial system; companies’ observed behavior thus plausibly approximates optimal financing
practices. Second, industries’ financial sensitivity is not measured endogenously with respect to host-
country financial conditions. Finally, estimating β in specifications (3.1) and (3.2) requires only that
the true rank ordering of external finance dependence remains relatively stable across countries. The
level of EF Dk may therefore differ across countries without impacting the interpretation of β, although
measurement error could bias the results downwards.

4.2      Motivating facts

Before turning to the formal econometric analysis, we provide some motivating snapshots from the data
that point to a link between host-country financial conditions and multinational activity.
       Figure 1 provides an illustrative example of how the level and composition of affiliate sales vary with
  35
     We first compute the external finance dependence ratio for each firm over the 1996-2005 period. We calculate EF Dk
as the median such ratio across all firms in sector k; sectors with fewer than ten firms are dropped. We provide robustness
exercises with alternative EF Dk measures in Section 6.1.
  36
     While there is data in Compustat to construct this measure of external finance dependence for up to 220 NAICS
four-digit industries, only 115 of these are present after merging into the BEA dataset.



                                                            18
host-country credit conditions in the BEA data. The figure compares U.S. multinational operations in
three hosts whose financial development corresponds to the 50th, 60th and 75th percentiles in the panel:
Brazil in 1999, Chile in 1994, and Norway in 1989. The value of aggregate MNC affiliate sales (scaled by
host-country market size) increases with host-country financial development. At the same time, the share
of aggregate MNC affiliate sales going to the local economy declines with host-country private credit,
and the shares of sales to the parent country (i.e., the U.S.) and to other destinations both rise. While
this figure provides an illustration based on a cross-section of countries, the formal analysis in Section 5
will reveal a consistent message in the variation within countries across sectors as well.
       The above pattern of MNC sales shares to the different destination markets can be explained by
the competition effect (Section 2.3). On the other hand, the increase in aggregate MNC activity with
host-country financial development can be rationalized if firms rely on host-country sources to meet some
portion of their external financing needs (as demonstrated in Section 2.4). The BEA data confirm that
such host-country financing is relevant: The mean and standard deviation of log total affiliate debt are
respectively 9.91 and 1.79 in our sample. The share of affiliates’ total liabilities held by host-country
entities averages 0.63, with a standard deviation of 0.28. Conversely, the average share of affiliate liabilities
held by the parent firm stands at 0.18, with a standard deviation of 0.29.37 This dispersion in observed
affiliate financing practices is moreover related to host-country financial development: The correlation
of host-country private credit as a share of GDP with log total affiliate debt is 0.126, suggesting that
affiliates’ overall access to external credit improves with local financial conditions. In addition, host-
country private credit is positively correlated with the local share of affiliate liabilities (0.022), while
negatively correlated with the share held by the parent firm (−0.041).38 This is consistent with foreign
subsidiaries seeking to fund operations with locally raised external capital particularly when host-country
financial institutions are strong, and to partly compensate the shortfall with financing from the parent
company (Desai et al. 2004).
       The importance of local sources of financing for MNCs is further supported by a range of anecdotal
evidence pointing to how weak financial development in the host economy can pose a significant obstacle.
For example, recent analyses have highlighted the challenges Japanese firms face in funding would-be
profitable operations in emerging markets in Asia, especially when they are small or medium-sized en-
terprises. Firms prefer local financing because home-country financing exposes them to exchange rate
risk, and ties up liquid funds and collateralizable assets that could be otherwise deployed. However,
accessing external capital in the host country is often difficult and costly, especially when local financial
institutions are weak and prospective MNCs have no pre-existing business relationships: Japanese firms
have lamented that they face strict collateral requirements from local banks, who also insist on support-
ing guarantees from Japanese banks (Oba 2012). This experience of Japanese firms has been echoed
  37
     These are consistent with the summary statistics reported in Feinberg and Phillips (2004) mentioned earlier in the
Introduction. Note that the BEA collected this detailed information on the composition of affiliate financing in benchmark
surveys up until 2004, after which the questions were discontinued.
  38
     These correlations are all significant at the 1% level, and are broadly comparable when conditioning further on parent
industry and year fixed effects.



                                                            19
elsewhere. Financing by local banks in emerging economies is often insufficient, expensive, and of shorter
duration; this can altogether deter entry, as in the case of a U.S. telecommunications firm interested in
the post-Soviet Russian market (Gordin 2011). In fact, many countries have implemented financial sector
reforms in part to stimulate FDI inflows, such as measures to tighten accounting standards, strengthen
financial contract enforcement, or relax restrictions on foreign bank entry and cross-border bank alliances.


5     Main Results

We evaluate the impact of host-country financial conditions on the operations of U.S. multinationals
using the estimation strategy in Section 3. For ease of reference, we juxtapose the model predictions in
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 with our empirical results in Column 3. The model has rich predictions
across as many as 15 outcomes of interest, which stand in subtle contrast for the cases with and without
a strong financing effect. As we will see below, the patterns that we find are consistent with host-country
financial development exhibiting a competition effect, in tandem with a strong financing effect, on U.S.
multinational activity abroad.

5.1    Presence of multinational affiliates

We first examine the relationship between the financial environment of the host country and the presence
of multinational affiliates. For this exercise, we work with data only from benchmark years where the
BEA survey in principle covers the universe of U.S. multinational activity abroad. Columns 1 and 2 of
Table 3 provide estimates of equation (3.1), in which M N Cikt is an indicator equal to one if at least one
foreign subsidiary of a sector-k parent is active in country i during year t, 1 (Nikt > 0).39 Economies with
strong financial institutions are significantly more likely to attract multinational activity in industries
more reliant on external finance. This result obtains robustly whether we use OLS (Column 1) or the
Probit estimator (Column 2).
    In Column 3, we focus on the subsample of country-industry-year triplets in which there is at least
one U.S. multinational affiliate, and define the dependent variable M N Cikt as the log number of affiliates
present, log Nikt . We find that conditional on multinational presence, financially advanced countries
host more affiliates in financially more dependent sectors.40 Finally, we consider in Column 4 the size
of the smallest subsidiary active, as captured by the log sales at the first percentile of the distribution
for affiliates within each country-sector-year triplet. We document that the threshold MNC affiliate, as
proxied for in this manner, is systematically smaller in host countries with stronger financial markets for
sectors that are financially more sensitive.
    In light of Propositions 1 and 2, the above results are consistent with the presence of a financing effect
   39
      The regression sample in Columns 1 and 2 includes all country-sector-year triplets where the country hosts at least one
affiliate from a sector-k parent in at least one year in the panel.
   40
      In the model from Section 2, each foreign affiliate serves all three markets of interest (host, home and third countries).
This need not be the case in practice due to the presence of other economic forces outside the model. We have nevertheless
confirmed that the finding in Column 3 holds when we examine instead the number of subsidiaries that sell respectively to
each of the three destinations.



                                                              20
that is strong enough to overturn the competition effect on the extensive margin of multinational activity
and stimulate greater affiliate entry. Our findings are both statistically and economically significant.
Taking the Column 3 estimates as an example, when comparing two industries at the 10th and 90th
percentiles by external finance dependence EF Dk , improving private credit F Dit from the 10th to 90th
percentile would generate 7.8% more MNC subsidiaries in the financially more vulnerable industry.41

5.2     Level of aggregate MNC sales

We next quantify the impact of host-country credit conditions on the aggregate volume of MNC operations
in Panel A of Table 4. In Columns 1-3, we estimate (3.1) setting M N Cikt as the log sales totalled across
all affiliates in country i and industry k during year t, separately for each destination market, log HORikt ,
log P LAikt and log RETikt . In Column 4, we then consider the log aggregate sales across all destination
markets, log T OTikt .
    We document patterns that once again align with the case of a strong financing effect in Table 1:
Compared to host countries with weak financial institutions, aggregate MNC sales in financially advanced
hosts are larger in financially more sensitive sectors. This is true of overall sales, as well as of sales to
each market. The economic magnitude of these relationships is sizeable: A rise in F Dit from its 10th
to 90th percentile value is associated with total affiliate revenues expanding 18.6% more in the industry
at the 90th percentile by EF Dk relative to the industry at the 10th percentile (based on the Column
4 estimates). Breaking down these revenues by destination, the analogous cross-country, cross-sector
10th -90th percentile effects implied would be an increase of 12.8% for sales to the host-country market,
17.3% for sales to third-countries, and 37.9% for return sales to the U.S. (based on Columns 1-3).

5.3     Composition of aggregate MNC sales

We also assess the influence of host-country financial development on the composition of aggregate MNC
sales. Should the competition effect be present, subsidiaries would be more export-oriented when based
in recipient countries with strong financial institutions and sell a smaller share of their output to the
local market due to its heightened competitiveness. Of note, this result is independent of the financing
effect and holds whether or not multinationals rely on local credit for their operations.
    Columns 5-7 of Panel A in Table 4 provide the corresponding estimates. The three dependent variables
                                                                                                HORikt
are in turn the fraction of aggregate affiliate sales destined for the local market,            T OTikt ,   third countries,
P LAikt                              RETikt
T OTikt ,   and the United States,   T OTikt .   We find evidence strongly consistent with the competition channel:
MNC subsidiaries in financially more sensitive industries direct a smaller share of their sales to the local
economy when it has mature credit markets. At the same time, they sell a larger share of their output
to consumers in their parent country and in the rest of the world. As for the magnitude of these effects,
consider a host nation where access to capital improves from the 10th to the 90th percentile in the sample.
The share of aggregate MNC horizontal sales would then be 2.8 percentage points lower for the industry
  41
     The 90th to 10th percentile gap in F Dit in our panel is 1.029, while the corresponding gap across sectors for EF Dk is
2.393. This leads to the implied effect of 7.8% reported in the main text, as: 0.032 × 1.029 × 2.393 = 0.078. The economic
magnitudes of other coefficient estimates reported in the rest of the paper are calculated analogously.


                                                             21
at the 90th percentile by EF Dk relative to the industry at the 10th percentile. Conversely, the differential
increase in the shares of platform and return sales would be 2.1 and 0.7 percentage points, respectively.
   As we show in the Online Appendix, the finding that the return sales share is less sensitive to host-
country financial conditions than the platform sales share is consistent with an extension of the model
with home bias in consumption: Intuitively, when the elasticity of substitution between varieties of
the same nationality is higher than that between varieties of different nationalities, and when there is
selection into exporting and FDI, U.S. multinationals face more competition from other U.S. producers
in the U.S. than in third countries. As a result, changes in host-country financial conditions trigger a
bigger adjustment in platform sales to third markets than in return sales to the U.S.

5.4   Level of individual affiliate sales

We next examine the effects on affiliate-level outcomes in Panel B of Table 4. We now estimate spec-
ification (3.2), where M N Caikt refers to an active subsidiary of parent firm a from sector k which is
located in country i during year t. We expect affiliates in financially more advanced hosts to sell less
locally due to the competition mechanism and to instead export more to the United States and to third
countries. Indeed, Columns 1-4 show that at the affiliate level, log local sales, log HORikt (a), decrease
with host-country financial development in financially more vulnerable industries, although the effect is
weak in terms of statistical significance. On the other hand, log sales to the United States, log RETikt (a),
and to third-country destinations, log P LAikt (a), both rise with F Dit , and disproportionately more in
financially sensitive sectors. The overall impact on log total sales, log T OTikt (a), is indistinguishable
from zero.
   It is instructive to compare the pattern of response in affiliate-level sales in Panel B against that in
aggregate sales in Panel A. Host-country financial development is associated with weakly lower horizontal
sales and unchanged total sales at the intensive margin of affiliate-level activity, which is consistent with
the competition effect. By contrast, the regression results point to a strong positive effect on both
horizontal and total sales at the aggregate level. These findings can be jointly rationalized if financial
development increases the extensive margin of FDI in the host country. This would be the case when
the financing effect on affiliate entry is sufficiently strong, in line with the evidence seen earlier in Table
3 that improvements in host-country financial conditions attract more foreign affiliates. Taken together,
the results are therefore consistent with the presence of both the competition effect and a strong financing
effect on multinational activity.

5.5   Composition of individual affiliate sales

Finally, we study the composition of affiliate-level sales across destinations in the rest of Table 4. In
Columns 5-7 of Panel B, we estimate (3.2) with the shares of subsidiary revenues earned in the host
           HORikt (a)                          P LAikt (a)                                 RETikt (a)
country,   T OTikt (a) ,   in third markets,   T OTikt (a) ,   and in the United States,   T OTikt (a) ,   as dependent variables.
   In line with the results in Section 5.3 for aggregate sales shares, the evidence corroborates the com-
petition effect: Affiliates in financially more vulnerable industries sell a smaller fraction of their output


                                                                   22
locally when they operate in financially more advanced countries, compared with affiliates in financially
less sensitive industries based in financially less developed hosts. By contrast, such affiliates export a
higher proportion of their output back home to the U.S. and to other destinations. In addition, the
return sales share is less sensitive to host-country financial conditions than the platform sales share.


6     Additional Results and Robustness

The baseline results in Section 5 demonstrate that host-country financial development has far-reaching
effects on multinational activity, and that these effects are consistent with a combination of increased
competition and easier access to external finance for MNC subsidiaries. In this section, we establish the
robustness of these findings to a series of sensitivity analyses. We also present additional evidence that
sheds further light on the mechanisms through which affiliates’ access to financing influences the pattern
of FDI. We report below results based on the affiliate-level specification (3.2), as this allows us to exploit
the rich micro data. In unreported results, we have confirmed a similar set of findings for those exercises
that can be performed using the aggregate-level specification (3.1).

6.1   Alternative measures and specifications

Alternative F Dit measures:         We first verify that the findings are robust when adopting alternative
measures of host-country financial development. Our baseline variable for F Dit is an outcome-based
measure of the availability of bank-originated debt financing in a country. In Panel A of Table 5, we
instead use an index that captures structural reforms to financial institutions, as coded up by Abiad
et al. (2010). In particular, F Dit is now a binary variable equal to 1 in all years after country i has
undergone various reforms deemed necessary for a well-functioning financial system, such as removing
excessively high reserve requirements, interest controls, and entry barriers in the banking sector. Using
this financial reforms index produces patterns similar to the baseline reported in Panel B of Table 4 in
terms of coefficient signs and statistical significance for the full range of affiliate outcomes.
    In separate regressions (available on request), we have found robust results when considering a broader
measure of access to debt financing, namely the credit extended by banks and other non-bank financial
institutions as a share of GDP (from Beck et al. 2009). Likewise, we have obtained similar results when
using a measure of total stock market capitalization, defined as the total value of publicly-listed shares
normalized by GDP (from Beck et al. 2009), to account for the potential role of equity financing as an
alternative source of capital.
    Alternative EF Dk measures:          We next consider alternative constructions for the measure of a
sector’s dependence on external finance. Our baseline variable, EF Dk , reflects the financial sensitivity
of the primary industry of activity of the parent firm. This would be an appropriate measure insofar
as the headquarters of a multinational company makes joint production and financing decisions across
all its affiliates worldwide. In practice though, the affiliates of the same parent firm may have different
main industries of activity either because they perform different production stages and/or because the


                                                      23
firm in fact produces output in multiple industries. To account for this possibility, we construct a parent
firm-specific measure of reliance on outside capital, EF Da , by taking the sales-weighted average of EF Dk
across firm a’s affiliates in different sectors k. This yields qualitatively similar findings, as reported in
Panel B of Table 5.
       In Appendix Table 3, we further confirm the robustness of the results under two other EF Dk measure.
First, we have constructed EF Dk using data on U.S. firms from 1990-1999 instead of the 1996-2005
baseline, to show that the analysis is not overly sensitive to this choice of time period for the underlying
Compustat data. Second, we have computed a variant of EF Dk using only those firms that are above
the 25th percentile of the sales distribution in a given industry in Compustat. This latter measure in
principle better captures the external financing needs of larger firms, who are themselves more likely to
be multinational companies.42 In practice, both exercises deliver quantitatively and qualitatively similar
results as in our baseline regressions. This is consistent with the interpretation that there is a persistent
technological component – such as the importance of upfront R&D or investment costs – that drives
sectors’ reliance on outside capital.
       Alternative estimators and subsamples:                     We have performed a series of checks to address
potential concerns with sampling (available in Appendix Table 4 or on request). Since some country-
sector-year observations feature no multinational activity in one of the three sales categories, we have
verified that the results for aggregate MNC sales by destination market in (3.1) hold also under Tobit
estimation instead of OLS. We have also confirmed that the affiliate-level findings are not driven by
small firms that contribute little to overall multinational activity, by estimating (3.2) with Weighted
Least Squares using total affiliate sales as weights.
       Separately, we have checked that the baseline patterns are unaltered when restricting the sample
to 1989-2006, instead of the full 1989-2009 panel. The findings are therefore not driven by the global
financial crisis years. Given the distinctiveness of the E.U. as an integrated economic region with low
trade barriers, we have also verified that E.U. host countries do not drive the results for affiliates’ export-
platform sales by removing E.U. members from the estimation sample.

6.2      Additional controls

The coefficient on the interaction term F Dit × EF Dk in principle identifies the differential effect of finan-
cial development on multinational activity across sectors with varying dependence on external finance.
This interpretation would be compromised if EF Dk were picking up instead the effect of other sector
characteristics that systematically correlate with FDI patterns across countries for reasons unrelated to
financial frictions. To allay this concern, we show in Panel A of Table 6 that the baseline findings are
similar when controlling for the interaction of F Dit with measures of the capital and skill intensity of
  42
    Our preferred measure of EF Dk is based on the full set of firms across the sales distribution for two reasons. First, the
competition effect in the model reflects the impact of host-country financial development on all firms in the host economy
and especially those in the left tail of the distribution that respond to movements in the productivity cut-off for survival.
Second, a firm’s observed use of external finance reflects exogenous, technologically-determined requirements at the sector
level, and the firm’s own ability to raise capital which could be endogenous to firm size; using the full sample of firms thus
better captures the former exogenous component.


                                                             24
industry k.43 Since physical capital investment in machinery and equipment purchases is often incurred
upfront, capital-intensive sectors typically require significant amounts of external finance. Our coefficient
estimates are thus dampened in this set of regressions, although the qualitative pattern of the effect of
F Dit × EF Dk is preserved across the affiliate outcome measures. In a further specification check, Panel
B of Table 6 corroborates the baseline results even when controlling for the interaction of F Dit with
affiliate-level measures of R&D intensity (R&D expenditures divided by total sales) and skill intensity
(log average wage) constructed from the BEA data. To the extent that different production technologies
are associated with different needs for external capital, this constitutes a conservative sensitivity check
that our findings are not driven by multinationals that happen to be more research- or skill-intensive.

6.3      Firm heterogeneity

The specification in (3.2) includes parent firm fixed effects, so that identification comes from the variation
within a firm across its subsidiaries in different countries and over time. A potential concern is omitted
variable bias related to time-varying firm or affiliate characteristics that might affect MNCs’ operations,
such as productivity, managerial practices, labor skill composition, or R&D intensity. To accommodate
this possibility, Panel A in Table 7 adds controls for productivity (log value-added per worker), R&D
intensity, and skill intensity at the affiliate-year level. The baseline findings on the interaction term
between host-country financial development and sectors’ external finance dependence remain robust. In
addition, the results confirm that more productive affiliates feature a higher level of sales to all three
markets (Columns 1-3). At the same time, affiliate value-added per worker does not significantly affect
the share of sales destined for each market (Columns 5-7). Both patterns are consistent with the model
where sales levels depend on productivity, while sales shares do not (c.f., equations (2.6)-(2.8)). In
short, firm heterogeneity along the productivity dimension affects the level of affiliate sales, but not its
composition in terms of destination markets.
       In Panel B of Table 7, we further allow for the possibility that host-country financial development
might affect multinational affiliates differentially along the productivity distribution. To do so, we expand
specification (3.2) to include the above measure of affiliate productivity and its interaction with F Dit .
This once again leaves the findings for the key interaction term F Dit × EF Dk unaffected. For each of
the outcome measures, we also find that the effect of host-country financing conditions tends to be more
pronounced for affiliates that are more productive, in that the coefficient of F Dit interacted with log
value-added per worker inherits the same sign as the β coefficient on F Dit × EF Dk . This pattern is in
line with the logic of the model for the log affiliate sales measures in Columns 1-4: From the expressions
for log HOR(a), log RET (a), log P LA(a) and log T OT (a) in Section 2.2, one can see that host-country
financing conditions affect these sales levels through the aggregate demand terms (Aww , Aew , and Asw ),
and these effects are in turn amplified when productivity (as captured by a1−ε ) is higher. That said, the
sales shares that are the dependent variables in Columns 5-7 do not depend directly on firm productivity
  43
    We compute capital and skill intensity from the NBER CES Manufacturing Dataset as the log real capital stock divided
by total employment and as the log number of non-production workers divided by total employment, respectively.



                                                          25
in the model; the significant coefficients we find in these latter columns suggest that there are potentially
forces outside the scope of our model contributing to a larger response of these sales shares to financing
conditions for more productive firms.44

6.4      Affiliate financing practices

The baseline evidence in Section 5 is consistent with financial conditions shaping multinational activity
via both the competition and the financing effects. When only the competition effect is active, host-
country financial development induces affiliates to reduce local sales and to instead increase exports back
to the U.S. and to third destinations. When the financing effect is also present, strengthening local
financial markets improves an affiliate’s overall access to outside capital and tends to stimulate sales to
all three markets. We now directly exploit detailed information on the financing practices of U.S.-owned
MNC affiliates to shed more light on these two effects.
       The BEA records each subsidiary’s total debt by year, comprising both current liabilities and long-
term debt. Conceptually, total debt reflects an affiliate’s overall ability to raise external financing given
its optimal production scale. Controlling for an affiliate’s log total debt directly in equation (3.2) would
thus capture the financing effect of credit conditions, such that the coefficient β on F Dit × EF Dk would
now reflect the residual competition effect of credit conditions. This is precisely what we observe when we
implement this exercise in Panel A of Table 8: Affiliate sales to each consumer market are increasing in log
affiliate debt (Columns 1-4), consistent with the financing effect of host-country financial development.
At the same time, the point estimates for β remain positive and significant in the case of affiliates’ return
and platform sales shares, while retaining their negative and significant sign in the case of horizontal
sales, consistent with the competition effect.
       We have thus far focused on how host-country financial development increases affiliates’ total available
external funding by allowing them to borrow more in local credit markets and to rely less on parent
financing. This can be rationalized with asymmetric information or contractual frictions that incentivize
financiers to fund production activities that take place in their home country rather than abroad. In the
same spirit, one could envision too that host-country lenders may be more willing to finance affiliates’
production for sales to the local market rather than to other destinations, for example because of higher
monitoring costs for foreign sales.
       We explore these questions with BEA data on the sources of MNC affiliates’ debt, namely the fraction
held by the U.S. parent firm, by host-country lenders, or by other entities. Since this information is
available only for affiliates above a minimum size threshold and only in benchmark years in our panel,
the sample size for this analysis is substantially reduced. We nevertheless find qualitatively similar results
when we include in specification (3.2) either the local share or the parent share of affiliate liabilities in
  44
      While we obtain significant estimates for the main effect of log value-added per worker in Columns 5-7 of Panel B in
Table 7, one should bear in mind that the overall effect of this variable would need to be evaluated taking into account
the effect through its interaction with F Dit . This latter interaction term bears the opposite sign as the main effect of log
affiliate productivity, which helps to reconcile why no significant effect of log affiliate value-added per worker is found in
Columns 5-7 of Panel A in Table 7.



                                                             26
Panels B and C of Table 8, respectively: Controlling for these affiliate financing practices, host-country
financial development is still associated with a shift in affiliate sales away from the local market towards
the U.S. and other destinations, that is disproportionately larger in financially more sensitive sectors.45
The evidence moreover suggests that increased use of host-country financing facilitates affiliates’ local
sales (Column 5) but reduces the propensity to export to third-country markets (Column 6); on the
other hand, the share of parent financing tends to play the converse role. The financing that affiliates
receive from host-country sources thus appears to affect the composition of affiliate sales, but this does
not detract from the competition effect captured by the F Dit × EF Dk interaction term.

6.5    Level effects of financial development

The baseline specifications have identified the differential impact of financial development across sectors
with varying reliance on external capital. In order to also assess the level effect of host-country financial
development, we now estimate two alternative regressions that replace the fixed effects in equations (3.1)
and (3.2) with a more parsimonious set that comprises sector dummies, ϕk , and year dummies, ϕt :

                    M N C(a)ikt = αF Dit + ΓXit + ϕk + ϕt + (a)ikt ,                                                    (6.1)
                    M N C(a)ikt = αF Dit + β F Dit × EF Dk + ΓXit + ϕk + ϕt + (a)ikt .                                  (6.2)

Note that each of the above specifications can be run either at the aggregate level (with M N Cikt as
the outcome variable) or at the affiliate level (with M N Caikt instead). The right-hand side of these
regressions features a vector Xit of host-country variables to control for forces that could be relevant for
MNC activity. This includes log GDP from the Penn World Tables (PWT) Version 7.0, as a measure
of aggregate demand in the host country, as well as log GDP per capita and the stocks of physical
and human capital per worker, as proxies for factor costs.46 As further controls, we add the average
corporate tax rate faced by U.S. firms in the host country (computed using BEA data on observed tax
incidence) and a rule of law index from the International Country Risk Guide, both of which help to
capture country-specific components of the fixed cost of investment.47 We also account for the fixed
and variable trade costs between country i, the United States, and third-country markets, with the log
distance between i and the U.S. (from CEPII), as well as time-varying dummies for i’s membership in 11
U.S. regional trade agreements (RTAs) and 8 other major multilateral agreements.48 Of note, controlling
  45
     Despite the smaller sample size, the magnitudes of all coefficients on F Dit × EF Dk remain comparable to those in the
baseline. The point estimates for the horizontal sales share (and by extension, for the combined share of return and platform
sales) are significant, even while the coefficients on the two components of the export share are not always precisely pinned
down.
  46
     For physical capital, we apply the perpetual inventory method to data from the PWT, setting the initial capital stock
equal to I0 /(g + d), where I0 is investment in the initial year, g is the average growth rate of investment over the first ten
years, and d = 0.06 is the assumed depreciation rate. For human capital, we calculate the average years of schooling from
Barro and Lee (2013), weighted by the Mincerian returns to education function adopted by Hall and Jones (1999).
  47
     The BEA reports the profits and corporate taxes paid for each US multinational affiliate. For each year in the panel,
we calculate the corporate tax rate paid by each affiliate and average across affiliates to the country level.
  48
     The United States participates in 11 RTAs: US-Israel, NAFTA, US-Jordan, US-Singapore, US-Chile, US-Australia,
US-Morocco, CAFTA-DR (Dominican Republic-Central America), US-Bahrain, US-Peru, US-Oman. The 8 multilateral
trade agreements are: GATT/WTO, EU = European Union, EFTA = European Free Trade Area, CARICOM = Caribbean



                                                              27
for GDP per capita, corporate taxes and rule of law helps isolate the impact of financial development
from that of overall economic development, tax arbitrage motives and broader institutional capacity.
    In principle, the coefficient α in equation (6.1) picks up the effect of host-country financial development
on MNC activity in a representative industry with average financial vulnerability, while the coefficient
α in equation (6.2) can capture the impact of F Dit on a benchmark industry with no need for external
finance. However, α is identified from the variation in financial conditions across host countries and over
time, and faces the endogeneity concerns discussed in Section 3.2. By contrast, coefficient β in equation
(6.2) reflects the differential effect of F Dit across sectors with exogenously varying degrees of EF Dk .
    We report estimation results for equations (6.1) and (6.2) in Appendix Tables 5 and 6. In line with
Propositions 1 and 2 and consistent with limited estimation bias, we systematically find that α and β
have the same sign, that α is typically as statistically significant as β, and that the point estimates for
β from the baseline specifications (3.1)-(3.2) are very similar to those in specification (6.2).49
    The estimates indicate that both the level and the cross-sector effects of financial conditions are
substantial. For instance, increasing private credit from the 10th to the 90th percentile is associated with
13.9% more MNC subsidiaries on average (based on Column 2, Panel A of Appendix Table 5). This
impact is 10.9% higher in the industry at the 90th percentile by external finance dependence relative
to the industry at the 10th percentile (based on Column 2, Panel A of Appendix Table 6). Moving
F Dit from the 10th to the 90th percentile also implies a 36% expansion in total affiliate revenues in the
typical sector (Column 6, Appendix Table 5), with a differential increase of 21.8% between sectors at
the 90th and 10th percentile by EF Dk (Column 6, Appendix Table 6). In terms of sales composition,
such an improvement in F Dit entails an average decline of 5.8 percentage points in the share of local
sales, with an inter-percentile spread of 3.2 percentage points across industries that differ in external
finance dependence. The corresponding average increase in the shares of platform and return sales to
the U.S. stands at 3.4 and 2.4 percentage points, with an inter-percentile sector difference of 2.4 and 0.8
percentage points (based on Columns 6-8, Appendix Tables 5 and 6).
    In unreported regressions, we have confirmed the above results when adding further controls Xit
that are available for a subsample of countries in the panel. These include an additional proxy for
entry and FDI costs, which we construct as the first principal component of the log cost, log number of
procedures and log number of days required to establish a new business, from the World Bank Doing
Business Report.50 We have likewise checked that the results hold when using an additional measure
of trade costs, namely the first principal component of the log cost per shipping container, log number
Community, CACM = Central American Common Market, ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations, ASEAN-
China, Mercosur. All trade agreement data come from Rose (2004), augmented with information from the World Trade
Organization’s website.
  49
     The results (available on request) also indicate that the controls Xit correlate with MNC activity in an intuitive way.
For example, larger hosts attract more MNC activity and a bigger share of affiliate sales, consistent with a market-size effect
that favors horizontal FDI. Bilateral distance to the U.S. deters the level of multinational activity, but has only a limited
impact on the composition of MNC sales. E.U. membership has a positive effect on the export-platform share of affiliate
revenues, while NAFTA membership induces a higher share of sales back to the U.S. Consistent with profit-shifting motives,
multinationals direct sales away from host countries with high corporate taxes and towards the U.S.
  50
     These data are available for a subset of countries in 2003-2009; we use the average value for each country in our panel.



                                                              28
of procedures and log number of days necessary for exporting from the host country.51 The results are
also unaffected when controlling for a measure of export-platform potential, which we compute as the
log average GDP of all destination markets excluding i and the United States, weighted by their inverse
bilateral distance from i, à la Blonigen et al. (2007).


7         Conclusion

This paper brings new insights to the literature examining how conditions in recipient countries affect
multinational activity. Using comprehensive data on U.S. multinational activity abroad, we uncover
several novel effects of financial development in the host economy. Financially advanced countries attract
more MNC subsidiaries. Strong financial institutions in the host country also induce higher aggregate
affiliate sales to the local market, to the United States, and to third-country destinations. For individual
affiliates, however, exports to the United States and to other markets are increased, but local sales are
reduced. Yet both in the aggregate and at the affiliate level, the share of local sales in total affiliate
sales falls with host-country financial development, while the shares of U.S. and third-country sales rise.
Importantly, all of these patterns are more pronounced in financially vulnerable sectors that require
more external capital. This suggests that financial development in the host country is a key institutional
characteristic that dampens the horizontal motive for FDI and favors vertical and export-platform forms
of multinational activity.
         We propose that these empirical regularities are consistent with two effects of financial development
on multinational activity in the presence of capital market imperfections: 1) a competition effect that
reduces individual affiliates’ revenues in the local market due to increased entry by domestic firms; and 2)
a financing effect that encourages MNC entry and aggregate activity in the host country due to improved
access to external financing for MNC affiliates. These effects point to important factors governing MNCs’
global operations, and have policy implications for developing countries seeking to attract FDI as a means
to technology transfer and foreign capital inflows.
         There remains much scope for further research. One promising avenue is understanding how host-
country financial development jointly affects the decisions of multinational companies regarding the
location, ownership (i.e., integration versus arm’s length sourcing), financing, and type (i.e., horizontal
versus vertical versus platform FDI) of their affiliates worldwide. Of related interest is how local economic
conditions and financial policies in different host countries and consumer markets shape MNCs’ global
activity in light of their network of affiliates. Separately, we have focused on the effects of local credit
conditions on FDI patterns, and more work is needed to understand how foreign subsidiaries and domestic
firms interact in local and international capital markets. Finally, our findings suggest that the state of
the financial system in different countries might affect the organizational and operational structure of
global supply chains more broadly, beyond the behavior of multinational companies.



    51
         These data are available for a subset of countries in 2006-2009; we use the average value for each country in our panel.


                                                                 29
8   References

Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel, (2010), “A New Database of Financial Reforms,”
     IMF Staff Papers 57(2): 281-302.
Aghion, Philippe, Thibault Fally, and Stefano Scarpetta, (2007), “Credit Constraints as a Barrier to
     the Entry and Post-Entry Growth of Firms,” Economic Policy 22(52): 731-779.
Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, and David Mayer-Foulkes, (2005), “The Effect of Financial Development
     on Convergence: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1): 173-222.
Aitken, Brian J., and Ann E. Harrison, (1999), “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Foreign Direct In-
     vestment? Evidence from Venezuela,” American Economic Review 89(3): 605-618.
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek, (2004),“FDI and Economic
     Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,” Journal of International Economics 64(1): 89-112.
Alviarez, Vanessa, (2018), “Multinational Production and Comparative Advantage”, Journal of Inter-
     national Economics (forthcoming).
     Amiti, Mary, and David Weinstein, (2011), “Exports and Financial Shocks,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 126(4): 1841-1877.
Antràs, Pol, (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4):
     1375-1418.
Antràs, Pol, and Ricardo Caballero, (2009), “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial Frictions Perspec-
     tive,” Journal of Political Economy 117(4): 701-744.
Antràs, Pol, and Davin Chor, (2013), “Organizing the Global Value Chain,” Econometrica 81(6): 2127-
     2204.
Antràs, Pol, Mihir Desai, and C. Fritz Foley, (2009), “Multinational Firms, FDI Flows and Imperfect
     Capital Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1171-1219.
Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple, (2018), “Innovation
     and Production in the Global Economy,” American Economic Review 108(8): 2128-73.
Arnold, Jens M., Beata S. Javorcik, and Aaditya Mattoo, (2011), “Does Services Liberalization Benefit
     Manufacturing Firms? Evidence from the Czech Republic,” Journal of International Economics
     85(1): 136-146.
Barro, Robert, and Jong-Wha Lee, (2013), “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World,
     1950-2010,” Journal of Development Economics 104(C): 184-198.
Beck, Thorsten, (2003), “Financial Dependence and International Trade,” Review of International Eco-
     nomics 11(2): 296-316.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, (2009), “Financial Institutions and Markets
     across Countries and over Time – Data and Analysis,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
     #4943.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic, (2005), “Financial and Legal Con-
     straints to Firm Growth: Does Size Matter?” Journal of Finance 60(1): 137-177.
Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Maylis Coupet, Thierry Mayer, (2007), “Institutional Determinants of Foreign
     Direct Investment,” World Economy 30(5): 764-782.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, (2010), “Intrafirm
     Trade and Product Contractibility,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100(2):
     444-448.
Bilir, L. Kamran, (2014), “Patent Laws, Product Lifecycle Lengths, and Multinational Activity,” Amer-
     ican Economic Review 104(7): 1979-2013.
Blonigen, Bruce A., (2005), “A Review of the Empirical Literature on FDI Determinants,”Atlantic
     Economic Journal 33(4): 383-403.
Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, Glen R. Waddell, and Helen Naughton, (2007), “FDI in Space:


                                                 30
     Spatial Autoregressive Relationships in Foreign Direct Investment,” European Economic Review
     51(5): 1303-1325.
Branstetter, Lee, Raymond Fisman, and C. Fritz Foley, (2006), “Do Stronger Intellectual Property
     Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel
     Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): 321-349.
Buch, Claudia, Iris Kesternich, Alexander Lipponer, and Monika Schnitzer, (2009), “Financial Con-
     straints and the Margins of FDI,” CEPR Discussion Paper 7444.
Bustos, Paula, (2007), “FDI as a Source of Finance in Imperfect Capital Markets: Firm-Level Evidence
     from Argentina,” Pompeu Fabra University - CREI mimeo.
Caballero, Julian, Christopher Candelaria and Galine Hale, (2018), “Bank Linkages and International
     Trade,” Journal of International Economics 115: 30-47.
Carluccio, Juan, and Thibault Fally, (2012), “Global Sourcing under Imperfect Capital Markets,” Review
     of Economics and Statistics 94(3): 740-763.
De Backer, Koen, and Leo Sleuwaegen, (2003), “Does Foreign Direct Investment Crowd Out Domestic
     Entrepreneurship?” Review of Industrial Organization 22(1): 67-84.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and Kristin J. Forbes, (2008), “Financial Constraints and Growth:
     Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Depreciations,” Review of Financial Studies
     21(6): 2857-2888.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., (2004), “A Multinational Perspective on Capital
     Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets,” Journal of Finance 59(6): 2451-2487.
Feinberg, Susan, and Gordon Phillips, (2004), “Growth, Capital Market Development and Competition
     for Resources within MNCs,” NBER Working Paper #9252.
Fillat, Jose L., Stefania Garetto, and Lindsay Oldenski, (2015), “Diversification, Cost Structure, and the
     Risk Premium of Multinational Corporations,” Journal of International Economics 96(1): 37-54.
Foley, Fritz and Kalina Manova, (2015), “International Trade, Multinational Activity, and Corporate
     Finance,” Annual Review of Economics 7:119-146.
Gordin, Alexander, (2011), “How to Find Financing for an Overseas Venture,” Business Finance, busi-
     nessfinancemag.com.
Grossman, Gene, Elhanan Helpman, and Adam Szeidl, (2006), “Optimal Integration Strategies for the
     Multinational Firm,” Journal of International Economics 70(1): 216-238.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, (2004), “Does Local Financial Development Matter?”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 929-969.
Hall, Robert, and Charles Jones, (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
     Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 83-116.
Haskel, Jonathan, Sonia Pereira and Matthew Slaughter, (2007), “Does Inward Foreign Direct In-
     vestment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(3):
     482-496.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple, (2004), “Exports Versus FDI with Hetero-
     geneous Firms,” American Economic Review 94(1): 300-316.
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Xuan Tian, and Yan Xu, (2014), “Financial Development and Innovation: Cross-
     Country Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics 112(1): 116-135.
International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) Researchers, (2013), Harvard Dataverse.
Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla, (2013), “The Margins of Multina-
     tional Production and the Role of Intra-firm Trade,” Journal of Political Economy 121(1): 74-126.
Javorcik, Beata, (2004), “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms?
     In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages,” American Economic Review 94(3): 605-627.
Javorcik, Beata S., and Mariana Spatareanu, (2009), “Tough Love: Do Czech Suppliers Learn from
     Their Relationships with Multinationals?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(4): 811-833.


                                                   31
Kandilov, Ivan, Asli Leblebicioglu, and Neviana Petkova, (2017), “Cross-Border Mergers and Acqui-
     sitions: The Importance of Local Credit and Source Country Finance,” Journal of International
     Money and Finance 70, 288-318.
King, Robert, and Ross Levine, (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 108(3): 717-737.
Klein, M.W., J. Peek and E.S. Rosengren, (2002), “Troubled Banks, Impaired Foreign Direct Investment:
     The Role of Relative Access to Credit,” American Economic Review 92(3), 664-682.
Manova, Kalina, (2008), “Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and International Trade,”
     Journal of International Economics 76(1): 33-47.
Manova, Kalina, (2013), “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade”, Review
     of Economic Studies 80(2): 711-744.
Manova, Kalina, Shang-Jin Wei, and Zhiwei Zhang (2015), “Firms Exports and Multinational Activity
     under Credit Constraints,” Review of Economics and Statistics 97(3): 574-588.
Markusen, James R., and Anthony Venables, (2007), “Interacting Factor Endowments and Trade Costs:
     A Multi-Country, Multi-Good Approach to Trade Theory,” Journal of International Economics
     73(2): 333-354.
Melitz, Marc J., (2003), “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
     Productivity,” Econometrica 71(6): 1695-1725.
Nunn, Nathan and Daniel Trefler (2013), “Domestic Institutions as a Source of Comparative Advan-
     tage.” NBER Working Paper #18851.
Oba, Yoshiyuki, (2012), “Japanese SMEs’ Asian Dreams: The Bottleneck is Financing,” Japan Business
     Press, jbpress.ismedia.jp/articles/-/36011.
Poelhekke, S. (2015), “Do Global Banks Facilitate Foreign Direct Investment?” European Economic
     Review 76: 25-46.
Poole, Jennifer P., (2013), “Knowledge Transfers from Multinational to Domestic Firms: Evidence from
     Worker Mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 393-406.
Raff, Horst, Michael Ryan, and Frank Stahler, (2018), “Financial Frictions and Foreign Direct Invest-
     ment: Evidence from Japanese Microdata,” Journal of International Economics 112(C): 109-122.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Eco-
     nomic Review 88(3): 559-586.
Ramondo, Natalia, Veronica Rappoport, and Kim Ruhl, (2016), “Intra-firm Trade and Vertical Frag-
     mentation in U.S. Multinational Corporations,” Journal of International Economics 98(1): 51-59.
Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, (2013), “Trade, Multinational Production, and the
     Gains from Openness,” Journal of Political Economy 121(2): 273-322.
Rose, Andrew, (2004), “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” American Economic
     Review 94(1): 98-114.
Tintelnot, Felix, (2016), “Global Production with Export Platforms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     forthcoming.
Yeaple, Stephen R., (2003a), “The Role of Skill Endowments in the Structure of U.S. Outward Foreign
     Direct Investment,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(3): 726-734.
Yeaple, Stephen R., (2003b), “The Complex Integration Strategies of Multinationals and Cross Country
     Dependencies in the Structure of Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of International Economics
     60(2): 293-314.
Yeaple, Stephen R., (2013), “The Multinational Firm,” Annual Review of Economics 5: 193-217.




                                                32
                        Table 1. Empirical Hypotheses and Results Overview
                                                           Competition Effect Competition Effect
                                                              + No/Weak            + Strong                    Data
                                                            Financing Effect   Financing Effect
                                                                    (1)                   (2)                   (3)

Aggregate Affiliate Activity
  Number of MNC Affiliates, N                                                                          
  Total Sales, TOT                                                                                     
  Local Sales, HOR                                                                                     
  US Sales, RET                                                                                        
  3rd Country Sales, PLA                                                                               
  Local Sales / Total Sales, HOR/TOT                                                                   
  US Sales / Total Sales, RET/TOT                                                                      
  3rd Country Sales / Total Sales, PLA/TOT                                                             

Individual Affiliates
  Total Sales, TOT(a)                                                                                  
  Local Sales, HOR(a)                                                                                  
  US Sales, RET(a)                                                                                     
  3rd Country Sales, PLA(a)                                                                            
  Local Sales / Total Sales, HOR(a)/TOT(a)                                                             
  US Sales / Total Sales, RET(a)/TOT(a)                                                                
  3rd Country Sales / Total Sales, PLA(a)/TOT(a)                                                       

Notes: This table summarizes the hypothesized and observed effects of host-country financial development on
multinational activity there. Column 1 presents the empirical hypotheses for the case where the financing effect is either
absent or weak (so that the competition effect dominates), while Column 2 presents the analogous hypotheses for the
case where the financing effect is sufficiently strong. In each of Columns 1 and 2, the first sign indicates the model
prediction for the level effect of host-country financial development, while the second sign indicates the prediction for the
cross-partial effect with respect to external finance dependence. Predictions are derived under the assumption that initial
host-country financial development in South is sufficiently high; as discussed in the Online Appendix, this is a mild
condition in practice. For comparison, Column 3 reports the sign of the effects actually obtained in our empirical analysis.
                                 Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                                                                              Standard
                                                               N               Mean
                                                                                              Deviation

Country-Industry-Year Level
    Total Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)                    17,811           561,256          2,450,158
    Local Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)                    17,811           363,112          1,502,995
    3rd Country Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)              17,811           147,074          1,009,672
    US Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)                       17,811           51,070            626,707
    Local / Total sales                                     17,811            0.78               0.32
    3rd Country / Total sales                               17,811            0.16               0.27
    US / Total sales                                        17,811            0.06               0.17
    Number of Affiliates                                    17,811            4.08               6.56

Affiliate-Year Level
    Total Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)                    163,215          172,902           710,310
    Local Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)                    163,215          103,395           372,961
    3rd Country Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)              163,215          49,471            366,203
    US Affiliate Sales (thousand USD)                       163,215          20,035            253,507
    Local / Total sales                                     163,215           0.74              0.36
    3rd Country / Total sales                               163,215           0.20              0.32
    US / Total sales                                        163,215           0.07              0.20
    Log Total Affiliate Debt                                140,899           9.91              1.79
    Local Share Affiliate Liabilities                       30,933            0.63              0.28
    Parent Share Affiliate Liabilities                      30,933            0.18              0.29

Industry Level
    External Finance Dependence                               115              -0.22             1.46

Country-Year Level
    Private Credit / GDP                                     1,794               0.51             0.44
    Financial Reform Indicator                               1,114              14.56             4.66

General
    Number of Parent Companies per Year                        --              1,465             304
    Number of Affiliates per Parent-Year                       --               7.38            15.74


Notes: This table summarizes multinational activity, host-country institutions, and industry characteristics
across 95 countries and 115 industries for 1989-2009. External finance dependence follows the
methodology of Rajan and Zingales (1998). The financial development and financial reforms measures are
from Beck et al. (2009) and Abiad et al. (2010) respectively. All other variables are from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.
                    Table 3: Number of Multinational Affiliates

                                     N>0,             N>0,                              Log Min
Dependent variable:                                                     Log N
                                     OLS              Probit                         Affiliate Sales

                                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

Fin Development ×                  0.007             0.078             0.032             -0.087
  Ext Fin Dependence               (2.50)**          (3.44)***         (3.33)***         (-2.65)***

Country-Year FE                       Y                 Y                 Y                Y
Industry FE                           Y                 Y                 Y                Y
# Obs                               45,540            45,540            11,357           11,357
R2                                   0.47               --               0.63             0.24


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by
country appear in parentheses. The unit of observation is the country-industry-year triplet and the
sample includes all benchmark years during 1989-2009. The dependent variable in columns 1-2 is a
binary indicator equal to 1 if there is at least one US multinational affiliate present. The dependent
variables in columns 3-4 are the log number of US multinational affiliates present, and the log first
percentile affiliate sales, respectively. Financial Development is measured by the ratio of private
credit to GDP. All regressions include country-year and parent industry fixed effects.
                      Table 4: Level and Composition of Multinational Affiliate Sales


Dependent variable:                                                                     Local sales     3rd ctry sales     US sales
                                             3rd ctry        US           Total
                             Local sales      sales         sales         sales         Total sales      Total sales      Total sales
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)               (5)              (6)             (7)

Panel A. Aggregate Level

Fin Development ×              0.052         0.070         0.154        0.076              -0.011          0.009            0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence           (2.42)**      (2.88)***     (5.48)***    (4.08)***          (-3.25)***      (2.66)***        (1.91)*

Country-Year FE                   Y             Y             Y            Y                 Y               Y                Y
Industry FE                       Y             Y             Y            Y                 Y               Y                Y
# Obs                           10,977        7,146         5,428        11,357            11,357          11,357           11,357
R2                               0.51         0.44           0.35         0.50              0.32            0.32             0.20


Panel B. Affiliate Level

Fin Development ×              -0.009        0.039         0.110        0.004              -0.007          0.005            0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence           (-0.88)       (2.46)**      (4.42)***    (0.43)             (-4.12)***      (2.62)**         (1.74)*

Country-Year FE                   Y            Y             Y             Y                 Y               Y                Y
Parent Firm FE                    Y            Y             Y             Y                 Y               Y                Y
# Obs                          150,099       86,148        58,700       163,215           163,215         163,215          163,215
R2                              0.24          0.32          0.34         0.21              0.31            0.30             0.26


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses. In
Panel A, the unit of observation is the country-industry-year triplet and the sample includes all benchmark years during 1989-2009.
In Panel B, the unit of observation is the affiliate-year and the sample includes all years during 1989-2009. The dependent variables
in Columns 1-4 are the log of local sales, 3rd-country sales, US sales, and total sales by all US multinational affiliates (Panel A) or
of each US multinational affiliate (Panel B). In Columns 5-7, they are the ratio of local sales, 3rd-country sales and US sales to total
sales at the affiliate level (Panel B) or at the aggregate level after the numerator and the denominator have been summed across all
US multinational affiliates (Panel A). The regressions in Panel A include country-year and parent industry fixed effects, while the
regressions in Panel B include country-year and parent firm fixed effects.
                                             Table 5: Alternative Measures


Dependent variable:                                                                    Local sales    3rd ctry sales     US sales
                                            3rd ctry        US           Total
                             Local sales     sales         sales         sales         Total sales     Total sales      Total sales
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)               (5)             (6)             (7)

Panel A. Financial Development = Financial Reform Indicator

Fin Reform ×                   -0.0024      0.0077        0.0120       0.0002          -0.0011          0.0007          0.0004
  Ext Fin Dependence           (-2.85)***   (2.97)***     (3.84)***    (0.15)          (-3.73)***       (3.12)***       (2.99)***

# Obs                         123,761        70,023       47,703       133,529           133,529         133,529         133,529
R2                             0.24           0.33         0.35         0.21              0.31            0.30             0.27


Panel B. External Financial Dependence = Firm Specific Sales-Weighted Average EFD across Affiliates

Fin Development ×              -0.010       0.047         0.151        0.009             -0.009           0.006           0.004
  Ext Fin Dependence           (-0.70)      (2.00)**      (3.92)***    (0.62)            (-3.94)***       (2.26)**        (1.88)*

# Obs                         149,319        85,749       58,372       162,315           162,315         162,315         162,315
R2                             0.24           0.32         0.35         0.21              0.31            0.30             0.26


Country-Year FE                   Y             Y            Y             Y                Y                Y               Y
Parent Firm FE                    Y             Y            Y             Y                Y                Y               Y


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses.
Panel A replicates Panel B in Table 4 using an indicator for financial reforms instead of the baseline measure of financial
development. Panel B replicates Panel B in Table 4 using a firm-specific measure of external finance dependence that is the sales-
weighted average external finance dependence across the industries of a parent and all its affiliates, instead of the external finance
dependence of the parent's industry. All regressions include country-year and parent-firm fixed effects.
                                Table 6: Robustness to Additional Interactions


Dependent variable:                                                                   Local sales     3rd ctry sales    US sales
                                            3rd ctry        US          Total
                            Local sales      sales         sales        sales         Total sales      Total sales     Total sales
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)

Panel A. Controlling for FD x Industry Capital and Skill Intensity

Fin Development ×             0.001         0.032        0.093         0.007             -0.004          0.002           0.002
  Ext Fin Dependence          (0.12)        (1.79)*      (4.68)***     (0.56)            (-2.14)**       (1.06)          (1.88)*
Fin Development ×             -0.092        0.041        0.055         -0.072            -0.020          0.012           0.008
  Industry K Intensity        (-1.91)*      (0.59)       (0.41)        (-1.83)*          (-2.17)**       (1.45)          (0.98)
Fin Development ×             0.119         0.198        0.597         0.158             -0.027          0.007           0.020
  Industry H Intensity        (0.82)        (0.86)       (2.52)**      (1.12)            (-0.98)         (0.33)          (0.95)

# Obs                         111,434       73,260        48,709       121,054          121,054         121,054         121,054
R2                             0.24          0.31          0.34         0.19             0.28            0.29             0.27


Panel B. Controlling for FD x Affiliate R&D Intensity and Average Wage

Fin Development ×             -0.003        0.031        0.091         0.007             -0.005          0.003           0.002
  Ext Fin Dependence          (-0.31)       (1.82)*      (4.11)***     (0.87)            (-3.30)***      (1.97)*         (1.74)*
Aff R&D / Sales               -0.0007       0.0024       0.0330        -0.0008           0.0000          -0.0000         0.0000
                              (-2.96)***    (8.68)***    (7.28)***     (-4.79)***        (0.96)          (-1.60)         (0.87)
Fin Development ×             0.0002        -0.0024      -0.0452       0.0002            -0.0000         0.0000          -0.0000
  Aff R&D / Sales             (1.90)*       (-8.88)***   (-7.36)***    (2.75)***         (-0.08)         (0.96)          (-1.06)
Log Aff Wage                  0.094         -0.548       -0.613        -0.058            0.086           -0.036          -0.050
                              (1.76)*       (-5.03)***   (-5.04)***    (-0.93)           (4.78)***       (-2.56)**       (-1.96)*
Fin Development ×             0.080         0.414        0.421         0.155             -0.056          0.025           0.031
  Log Aff Wage                (1.74)*       (3.18)***    (3.22)***     (2.42)**          (-3.48)***      (1.75)*         (1.52)

# Obs                         139,915       82,765        56,774       150,629          150,629         150,629         150,629
R2                             0.32          0.34          0.36         0.31             0.34            0.33            0.29


Country-Year FE                   Y            Y             Y            Y                Y                Y               Y
Parent Firm FE                    Y            Y             Y            Y                Y                Y               Y


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses. The
table replicates Panel B in Table 4 but additionally controls for the interaction of financial development with parent industries'
physical and human capital intensity (Panel A) or with affiliates' R&D and skill intensity, measured respectively by the R&D-to-sales
ratio and log wage (Panel B). All regressions include country-year and parent-firm fixed effects.
                           Table 7: Affiliate Controls and Heterogeneous Effects


Dependent variable:                                                                  Local sales    3rd ctry sales    US sales
                                           3rd ctry        US          Total
                            Local sales     sales         sales        sales         Total sales     Total sales     Total sales
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)

Panel A. Controlling for Affiliate Productivity, R&D and Skill Intensity

Fin Development ×             -0.003       0.031        0.096         0.007            -0.006          0.004           0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence          (-0.33)      (1.80)*      (3.96)***     (0.86)           (-3.47)***      (2.07)**        (1.76)*
Log Aff Value Added           0.103        0.176        0.232         0.122            0.002           0.002           -0.004
  per Worker                  (5.82)***    (3.93)***    (3.55)***     (5.03)***        (0.28)          (0.57)          (-0.97)
Aff R&D / Sales               -0.0003      -0.0000      -0.0003       -0.0004          0.0000          -0.0000         0.0000
                              (-4.91)***   (-0.54)      (-13.0)***    (-6.44)***       (2.12)**        (-2.24)**       (0.56)
Log Aff Wage                  0.084        -0.345       -0.453        -0.028           0.044           -0.020          -0.024
                              (2.87)***    (-4.22)***   (-3.82)***    (-0.72)          (3.90)***       (-2.68)***      (-2.59)**

# Obs                         132,294       79,475       54,758       142,204          142,204         142,204         142,204
R2                             0.35          0.35         0.36         0.35             0.34            0.33            0.30


Panel B. Heterogeneous Effects across Affiliates: Productivity

Fin Development ×             -0.004       0.030        0.090         0.006            -0.006          0.004           0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence          (-0.41)      (1.80)*      (3.93)***     (0.73)           (-3.68)***      (2.08)**        (1.88)*
Log Aff Value Added           0.152        -0.147       -0.200        0.071            0.047           -0.019          -0.028
  per Worker                  (4.24)***    (-2.31)**    (-2.33)**     (2.19)**         (3.66)***       (-2.52)**       (-1.80)*
Fin Development ×             -0.032       0.259        0.335         0.049            -0.039          0.018           0.021
  Log Aff VA per Worker       (-0.93)      (3.54)***    (4.58)***     (1.45)           (-3.21)***      (2.05)**        (1.67)*

# Obs                         132,297       79,475       54,758       142,207          142,207         142,207         142,207
R2                             0.35          0.35         0.36         0.34             0.34            0.33             0.30


Country-Year FE                  Y             Y            Y            Y                Y               Y               Y
Parent Firm FE                   Y             Y            Y            Y                Y               Y               Y


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses.
Panel A expands the regressions in Panel B in Table 4 to include an affiliate's time-varying log value added per worker, R&D-to-
sales ratio, and log average wage per worker. Panel B expands the regressions in Panel B in Table 4 to include an affiliate's time-
varying log value added per worker and its interaction with financial development. All regressions include country-year and parent-
firm fixed effects.
                                         Table 8: Affiliate Financing Practices


Dependent variable:                                                                      Local sales    3rd ctry sales     US sales
                                             3rd ctry        US           Total
                             Local sales      sales         sales         sales          Total sales      Total sales     Total sales
                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)             (6)              (7)

Panel A. Controlling for Affiliate Total Debt

Fin Development ×              -0.010        0.030         0.090         0.002             -0.006           0.004            0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence           (-1.40)       (1.80)*       (3.17)***     (0.25)            (-3.47)***       (2.28)**         (1.72)*
Log Aff Debt                   0.517         0.650         0.552         0.571             -0.023           0.020            0.003
                               (19.6)***     (21.8)***     (21.6)***     (33.8)***         (-5.84)***       (5.34)***        (1.71)*

# Obs                          129,553        75,097        51,331       140,685           140,685         140,685          140,685
R2                              0.38           0.43          0.41         0.40              0.32            0.32              0.27


Panel B. Controlling for Local Share of Affiliate Liabilities

Fin Development ×              -0.020        0.043         0.070         -0.004            -0.005           0.003            0.002
  Ext Fin Dependence           (-1.26)       (2.12)**      (2.31)**      (-0.36)           (-2.31)**        (1.60)           (1.46)
Local Share Aff Liab           -0.075        -0.625        -0.057        -0.278            0.072            -0.073           0.001
                               (-1.26)       (-3.56)***    (-0.46)       (-2.89)***        (3.47)***        (-3.89)***       (0.18)

# Obs                           28,522        12,796        9,447        30,562            30,562           30,562           30,562
R2                               0.26          0.36         0.37          0.22              0.30             0.29             0.28


Panel C. Controlling for Parent Share of Affiliate Liabilities

Fin Development ×              -0.020        0.045         0.073         -0.003            -0.005           0.003            0.002
  Ext Fin Dependence           (-1.26)       (2.27)**      (2.36)**      (-0.30)           (-2.44)**        (1.73)*          (1.46)
Parent Share Aff Liab          -0.192        0.084         -0.274        -0.170            -0.015           0.017            -0.002
                               (-4.05)***    (0.72)        (-2.22)**     (-3.53)***        (-1.28)          (1.78)*          (-0.41)

# Obs                           28,522        12,796        9,447        30,562            30,562           30,562           30,562
R2                               0.26          0.35         0.37          0.22              0.30             0.29             0.28


Country-Year FE                    Y             Y             Y            Y                 Y                Y                Y
Parent Firm FE                     Y             Y             Y            Y                 Y                Y                Y


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses.
Panels A, B and C replicate Panel B in Table 4 controlling for affiliate time-varying log total debt (Panel A), local share of total debt
(Panel B), or parent share of total debt (Panel C). All regressions include country-year and parent-firm fixed effects.
        Appendix Table 1: Economic Growth and Multinational Activity

                                        Cumulative GDP Per Capita          5-Year GDP Per Capita
Dependent variable:
                                           Growth, 1989-2009                 Growth, 1989-2009
                                             (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)

Aggregate MNC Sales Growth               0.165***        0.189***          0.107***         0.137***
                                         (0.032)         (0.028)           (0.030)          (0.020)
Growth in Local MNC Sales Share                          0.618*                             0.193**
                                                         (0.324)                            (0.082)
Growth in US MNC Sales Share                             0.479                              -0.131
                                                         (0.349)                            (0.087)
Initial log GDP per capita               -0.053          -0.058            -0.015*          -0.020**
                                         (0.037)         (0.039)           (0.008)          (0.009)

# Obs                                         44             38              204              164
R2                                           0.55           0.59             0.20             0.33


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; robust standard errors in Columns 1-2 and clustered by country in
Columns 3-4 appear in parentheses. The unit of observation is the country in columns 1-2 and the country-
period in columns 3-4, where a period is a 5-year interval between benchmark years in 1989-2009. The
dependent variable is the cumulative growth in GDP per capita over the period indicated in the row
heading. The right-hand side variables are cumulative growth rates in aggregate MNC sales or in the
composition of aggregate MNC sales over the concurrent period.
                        Appendix Table 2: Host-Country Financial Development

Country              Mean     St Dev    Country                     Mean    St Dev     Country               Mean    St Dev

Algeria               0.15     0.16     Guatemala                    0.21     0.08     Peru                  0.17     0.08
Argentina             0.16     0.05     Guyana                       0.43     0.08     Philippines           0.29     0.10
Australia             0.82     0.23     Haiti                        0.13     0.02     Poland                0.25     0.09
Austria               0.99     0.10     Honduras                    0.35     0.10      Portugal              1.05     0.45
Bahrain               0.41     0.07     Hong Kong                   1.43     0.14      Qatar                 0.29     0.04
Bangladesh            0.28     0.06     Hungary                     0.38     0.14      Russia                0.19     0.12
Belgium               0.71     0.18     Iceland                     0.88     0.76      Saudi Arabia          0.26     0.07
Bolivia               0.41     0.13     India                       0.30     0.09      Senegal               0.20     0.04
Botswana              0.14     0.04     Indonesia                   0.33     0.13      Singapore             0.92     0.12
Brazil                0.35     0.08     Iran                         0.21     0.04     Slovakia              0.41     0.07
Bulgaria              0.34     0.22     Ireland                      1.01     0.59     Slovenia              0.44     0.22
Cameroon              0.12     0.07     Israel                       0.71     0.14     South Africa          0.63     0.10
Canada                0.96     0.24     Italy                       0.71     0.18      Spain                 1.05     0.42
Chile                 0.55     0.12     Jamaica                     0.22     0.05      Sri Lanka             0.23     0.08
Colombia              0.30     0.07     Japan                       1.49     0.41      Sudan                 0.04     0.02
Congo                 0.06     0.05     Jordan                      0.71     0.12      Sweden                0.69     0.35
Costa Rica            0.22     0.12     Kenya                       0.22     0.02      Switzerland           1.61     0.07
Cote D'Ivoire         0.20     0.09     Kuwait                      0.47     0.19      Syria                 0.09     0.01
Croatia               0.61     0.13     Luxembourg                   1.24     0.47     Tanzania              0.09     0.05
Cyprus                1.42     0.36     Malawi                       0.07     0.02     Thailand              1.03     0.28
Czech Republic        0.49     0.14     Malaysia                    1.09     0.22      Trinidad & Tobago     0.30     0.03
Denmark               0.97     0.70     Malta                        0.97     0.15     Tunisia               0.54     0.04
Dominican Rep         0.21     0.05     Mexico                       0.19     0.06     Turkey                0.17     0.07
Ecuador               0.23     0.06     Morocco                     0.43     0.17      Uganda                0.05     0.02
Egypt                 0.38     0.12     Netherlands                 1.24     0.43      United Kingdom        1.31     0.30
El Salvador           0.35     0.09     New Zealand                 1.05     0.25      Uruguay               0.32     0.15
Finland               0.69     0.14     Norway                      0.64     0.09      Venezuela             0.13     0.07
France                0.91     0.09     Oman                         0.34     0.04     Vietnam               0.51     0.28
Gabon                 0.11     0.04     Pakistan                    0.24     0.02      Yemen                 0.06     0.01
Germany               1.05     0.10     Panama                      0.69     0.18      Zambia                0.07     0.03
Ghana                 0.08     0.04     Papua New Guinea             0.18     0.05
Greece                0.50     0.24     Paraguay                     0.22     0.05


 Panel Variation:     0.51     0.44      Cross-Section Variation:   0.50     0.15


Notes: This table summarizes the variation in financial development in the panel, as measured by private credit normalized by
GDP.
            Appendix Table 3: Alternative Measures of External Finance Dependence


Dependent variable:                                                         Local sales    3rd ctry sales   US sales
                                       3rd ctry      US         Total
                         Local sales    sales       sales       sales        Total sales    Total sales     Total sales
                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)

Panel A. Alternative Time Period: 1990-1999

Fin Development ×          -0.017      0.052       0.162       0.003         -0.010           0.006           0.004
  Ext Fin Dependence       (-1.14)     (2.19)**    (4.08)***   (0.18)        (-3.69)***       (2.20)**        (1.83)*

# Obs                      149,492     85,991      58,519      162,547        162,547        162,547         162,547
R2                          0.24        0.32        0.34        0.21           0.31           0.30             0.25


Panel B. Alternative Firm Sample: Firms above 25th Percentile

Fin Development ×          -0.016      0.055       0.140       0.007         -0.010           0.007           0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence       (-1.11)     (2.66)***   (3.47)***   (0.45)        (-4.11)***       (2.98)***       (1.75)*

# Obs                      150,099     86,148      58,700      163,215        163,215        163,215         163,215
R2                          0.24        0.32        0.34        0.21           0.31           0.30            0.26


Country-Year FE               Y           Y           Y           Y              Y               Y              Y
Parent Firm FE                Y           Y           Y           Y              Y               Y              Y


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in
parentheses. The regressions replicate Panel B in Table 4 using industries' external finance dependence in the 1990-
1999 period (Panel A), and constructed across firms above the 25th size percentile within each industry (Panel B),
instead of the baseline measure based on all firms in Compustat in 1996-2005. All regressions include country-year and
parent-firm fixed effects.
                              Appendix Table 4: Multinational Affiliate Selection


Dependent variable:                                                                  Local sales     3rd ctry sales    US sales
                                            3rd ctry       US           Total
                            Local sales      sales        sales         sales         Total sales     Total sales     Total sales
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)

Panel A. Aggregate Level: Tobit

Fin Development ×             0.026         0.090        0.277            --            -0.012          0.006           0.005
  Ext Fin Dependence          (6.62)***     (8.14)***    (20.6)***                      (-18.9)***      (9.41)***       (12.9)***

Country-Year FE                  Y            Y            Y                              Y               Y               Y
Industry FE                      Y            Y            Y                              Y               Y               Y
# Obs                          11,392       11,392       11,392                         11,392          11,392          11,392


Panel B. Affiliate Level: Weighted Least Squares

Fin Development ×             0.004         0.040        0.154        0.035             -0.011          0.008           0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence          (0.26)        (1.47)       (4.34)***    (2.42)**          (-3.39)***      (2.36)**        (1.40)

Country-Year FE                  Y            Y            Y             Y                Y               Y               Y
Parent Firm FE                   Y            Y            Y             Y                Y               Y               Y
# Obs                         150,099       86,148       58,700       163,215          163,215         163,215         163,215
R2                             0.59          0.55         0.60         0.65              0.47            0.49            0.46


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses. The
dependent variables in Panel A are aggregate sales in levels and shares, as in Panel A of Table 4. Estimation is via tobit
regressions; no results are reported under the "Total sales" column as the set of host country by industry pairs in the sample are
those for which there is at least one multinational affiliate recording positive total sales. The dependent variables in Panel B are
affiliate sales in levels and shares, as in Panel B of Table 4. Estimation is by weighted least squares with the total sales of the
affiliate as weights, controlling for country-year and parent firm fixed effects.
                 Appendix Table 5: Level Effects of Financial Development: Industry and Year FE

Dependent                 N>0,         Log N        Local       3rd ctry        US           Total      Local sales     3rd ctry sales     US sales
variable:                 OLS                       sales        sales         sales         sales       Total sales     Total sales      Total sales
                           (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)              (8)              (9)

Panel A. Aggregate Level

Fin Development          0.109        0.135        0.233         0.376        0.756         0.350        -0.057           0.033            0.023
                         (3.41)***    (2.00)**     (1.49)        (1.51)       (3.20)***     (2.30)**     (-2.81)***       (1.88)*          (3.53)***

                                     Log GDP, Log GDP per capita, Log Distance, Log K/L, Log H/L, Rule of Law, Tax Rate,
Controls
                                                 GATT/WTO Dummy, RTA Dummies, Industry FE, Year FE

# observations           73,684       11,188        14,988        8,832        6,880        15,528         15,528           15,528           15,528
R-squared                 0.43         0.41          0.44          0.32         0.26         0.42           0.22             0.23             0.13


Panel B. Affiliate Level

Fin Development             --           --        -0.153        0.237        0.469         -0.031       -0.047           0.030            0.018
                                                   (-2.27)**     (1.84)*      (2.94)***     (-0.60)      (-2.46)**        (1.86)*          (2.20)**

                                     Log GDP, Log GDP per capita, Log Distance, Log K/L, Log H/L, Rule of Law, Tax Rate,
Controls
                                                 GATT/WTO Dummy, RTA Dummies, Industry FE, Year FE

# observations                                     198,103      103,892       71,146       215,120        215,120          215,120          215,120
R-squared                                            0.12         0.18         0.16          0.11           0.14             0.16             0.08


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses. The regressions
report level effects of financial development on an average industry without interaction terms for its differential effect across industries. The unit of
observation in Panel A is the country-industry-year and the outcome variables are the same as in Table 3 and Table 4, Panel A. The unit of
observation in Panel B is the affiliate-year and the outcome variables are the same as in Table 4, Panel B. All regressions control for log(K/L),
log(H/L), Rule of Law, Corporate Tax Rate, a GATT/WTO dummy, and Regional Trade Agreement (RTA) dummies. Rule of Law is from the
International Country Risk Guide. The RTA dummies are from Rose (2004) and WTO. All other variables are as described in the notes to Table 2.
All regressions include industry and year fixed effects.
        Appendix Table 6: Level and Differential Effects of Financial Development: Industry and Year FE


                              N>0,                                  3rd ctry       US          Total       Local sales    3rd ctry sales     US sales
Dependent variable:           OLS         Log N       Local sales    sales        sales        sales       Total sales     Total sales      Total sales
                               (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)              (8)             (9)

Panel A. Aggregate Level

Fin Development              0.131        0.142        0.148        0.403        0.684        0.298        -0.058           0.037           0.021
                             (3.50)***    (1.89)*      (0.95)       (1.50)       (2.61)**     (1.92)*      (-2.87)***       (1.99)**        (3.27)***
Fin Development ×            0.005        0.044        0.058        0.103        0.188        0.089        -0.013           0.010           0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence         (2.01)**     (4.05)***    (2.70)***    (4.16)***    (6.47)***    (4.78)***    (-3.67)***       (3.02)***       (2.28)**

                                         Log GDP, Log GDP per capita, Log Distance, Log K/L, Log H/L, Rule of Law, Tax Rate,
Controls
                                                     GATT/WTO Dummy, RTA Dummies, Industry FE, Year FE

# observations               38,870       7,522         10,108       6,561        5,045       10,434         10,434          10,434           10,434
R-squared                     0.46         0.43          0.47         0.35         0.28        0.45           0.24            0.24             0.15


Panel B. Affiliate Level

Fin Development                 --           --        -0.231       0.216        0.418        -0.091       -0.040           0.030           0.010
                                                       (-3.13)***   (1.59)       (2.51)**     (-1.65)      (-1.90)*         (1.69)*         (1.10)
Fin Development ×                                      -0.001       0.044        0.126        0.014        -0.007           0.004           0.003
  Ext Fin Dependence                                   (-0.07)      (2.69)***    (4.35)***    (1.39)       (-3.88)***       (2.39)**        (1.98)*

                                         Log GDP, Log GDP per capita, Log Distance, Log K/L, Log H/L, Rule of Law, Tax Rate,
Controls
                                                     GATT/WTO Dummy, RTA Dummies, Industry FE, Year FE

# observations                                         148,538      85,339       58,433       161,384       161,384          161,384         161,384
R-squared                                               0.13         0.18         0.16          0.11          0.15             0.17            0.10


Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by country appear in parentheses. The regressions report
level and differential effects of financial development across industries. The unit of observation in Panel A is the country-industry-year and the outcome
variables are the same as in Table 3 and Table 4, Panel A. The unit of observation in Panel B is the affiliate-year and the outcome variables are the same
as in Table 4, Panel B. All regressions control for log(K/L), log(H/L), Rule of Law, Corporate Tax Rate, a GATT/WTO dummy, and Regional Trade
Agreement (RTA) dummies. Rule of Law is from the International Country Risk Guide. The RTA dummies are from Rose (2004) and WTO. All other
variables are as described in the notes to Table 2. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects.
                                Figure 1: An Example
     MNC Sales Shares in Host Countries at Different Levels of Financial Development


                  Local MNC Sales             US MNC Sales             3rd Country MNC Sales

      0.9

      0.8

      0.7

      0.6

      0.5

      0.4

      0.3

      0.2

      0.1

         0

                   Brazil, 1999                    Chile, 1994                    Norway, 1989
                  Fin Devt: 0.29                  Fin Devt: 0.43                  Fin Devt: 0.61
               MNC Sales/GDP: 0.042            MNC Sales/GDP: 0.048            MNC Sales/GDP: 0.057

Notes: This figure illustrates how the level and composition of aggregate MNC affiliate sales vary across three host countries
at the 50th, 60th and 75th percentiles of the distribution of financial development. Financial Development is measured by the
ratio of private credit to GDP.
                                Figure 2
Response of Cutoffs to an Improvement in Southern Financial Development:
           Competition Effect and Weak or No Financing Effect


  In West:




                                                                                              a1-
Firm              Production            Export to              Export to             FDI in
Exits             for Home              East                   East and              South
                  only                                         South



        aD 1-             aXN 1-                aXS 1-               aI 1-




  In South:




           Cutoff for entry in South,
           in the absence of credit
           constraints




                                                                                              a1-
                               Firm Exits                           Production for
                                                                    South only



                                                        aS 1-
                                Figure 3
Response of Cutoffs to an Improvement in Southern Financial Development:
             Competition Effect and Strong Financing Effect


  In West:




                                                                                            a1-
Firm              Production          Export to              Export to             FDI in
Exits             for Home            East                   East and              South
                  only                                       South



        aD 1-            aXN 1-               aXS 1-               ãI 1-
                                                                         
                                                   Figure 4a
                         The Distribution of MNC Affiliates by Active Sales Destinations



                                                                                      Horizontal Sales

                                                            44.3%




                                            5.6%                        21.6%

                                                           21.6%


                            2.0%                           1.7%                             3.0%



 Return Sales                                                                                             Platform Sales

                                                   Figure 4b
                           The Distribution of MNC Affiliate Sales across Destinations



                                                                                      Horizontal Sales

                                                            19.8%




                                            6.0%                        17.5%

                                                           52.3%


                            0.6%                           2.1%                             1.7%



 Return Sales                                                                                             Platform Sales

Notes: This figure summarizes the breakdown of multinational firms' affiliate activity by market destination in 1989. Affiliates in the red circle
are engaged in horizontal sales; in the blue circle - in return sales to the US; and in the yellow circle - in export-platform sales to third-
countries. Affiliates in overlapping segments of the three circles pursue multiple sales destinations. The percentages reported sum to 100%.
Each segment reports the percentage share of affiliates active in a given set of destinations (Figure 4a) or the percentage share of total
affiliate sales captured by affiliates in that segment (Figure 4b).
