                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ECONOMIC WELL-BEING AND ANTI-SEMITIC, XENOPHOBIC, AND RACIST
                        ATTITUDES IN GERMANY

                                            Naci H. Mocan
                                           Christian Raschke

                                         Working Paper 20059
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20059


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2014




We thank Luiza Pogorelova and Bahadir Dursun for research assistance. Anna Piil Damm, Marianne
Simonsen, Alex Koch, Leyla Mocan, Carmine Guerriero, James Garand, and seminar participants
at Aarhus University, Galatasaray University and LSU provided helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Naci H. Mocan and Christian Raschke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Economic Well-being and Anti-Semitic, Xenophobic, and Racist Attitudes in Germany
Naci H. Mocan and Christian Raschke
NBER Working Paper No. 20059
April 2014
JEL No. I30,J15,Z1

                                               ABSTRACT

The fear and hatred of others who are different has economic consequences because such feelings
are likely to translate into discrimination in labor, credit, housing, and other markets. The implications
range from earnings inequality to intergenerational mobility. Using German data from various years
between 1996 and 2010, we analyze the determinants of racist and xenophobic feelings towards foreigners
in general, and against specific groups such as Italians and Turks. We also analyze racist and anti-Semitic
feelings towards German citizens who differ in ethnicity (Aussiedler from Eastern Europe) or in religion
(German Jews). Individuals’ perceived (or actual) economic well-being is negatively related to the
strength of these feelings. Education, and having contact with foreigners mitigate racist, anti-Semitic
and xenophobic feelings. People who live in states which had provided above-median support of the
Nazi party in the 1928 elections have stronger anti-Semitic feelings today. The results are not gender-driven.
They are not an artifact of economic conditions triggering feelings about job priority for German males,
and they are not fully driven by fears about foreigners taking away jobs. The results of the paper are
consistent with the model of Glaeser (2005) on hate, and with that of Akerlof and Kranton (2000, 2005)
on identity in the utility function.


Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
3039 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu

Christian Raschke
Sam Houston State University
Department of Economics and International Business
237L Smith-Hutson Building
1821 Ave. I
Huntsville, TX 77340
Raschke@shsu.edu
     Economic Well-being and Anti-Semitic, Xenophobic, and Racist
                        Attitudes in Germany



I. Introduction


        Different societies around the world have different values. For example, attitudes

towards the importance of the family, opinions on the extent to which children should respect

their parents, and the significance of family ties vary substantially across countries. Such cultural

differences have an influence on economic behavior. Alesina and Giuliano (2010) show that

labor force participation of women, the propensity to live with parents, geographic mobility, and

family size of immigrants in the Unites States are influenced by the strength of family ties in

their country of origin, and that this influence persists even among the second generation of

immigrants. Similarly, Fernandez and Fogli (2009) show that work and fertility decisions of

second-generation American women are influenced by their cultural attitudes, approximated by

the past female labor force participation rate and the fertility rate of the woman‘s country of

ancestry. Luttmer and Singhal (2011) report a strong positive relationship between immigrants‘

own preferences for income redistribution and the average preference for redistribution of the

citizens of their country of birth.


         A dimension of culture, which is widely employed in current research, is the extent to

which one group of people trust or distrust others who are ―different.‖ Guiso et al. (2009) report

the existence of substantial differences in the level of trust among the residents of various

European countries. They show that cultural biases that determine the lack of bilateral trust

between countries have a significant impact on the level of trade between countries, on portfolio



                                                  1
investment and on foreign direct investment. Bottazzi et al. (2011) find that the extent of trust

among different nations has an impact on investment decisions. Helliwell at al. (2014) find that

social trust and social norms in the source country have a substantial impact on immigrants‘ level

of trust in the destination country.


       Attitudes of the members of a given society towards people who are different from them

may be shaped by a variety of factors, including economic and military conflicts, interactions

with other societies in the form of trade and travel, similarities in religion and language, as well

as historical accidents (e.g. Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013). Attitudes, such as trust, which

are part of the fabric of culture, are assumed to be rather stable and not to change quickly. Guiso

et al. (2006) and Luttmer and Singhal (2011) define culture as ―those customary beliefs and

values that ethnic, religious, and social groups transmit fairly unchanged from generation to

generation.‖ Yet, beliefs and attitudes, even those that are deeply ingrained in human psyche,

may be more malleable than presumed. For example, Mocan (2013) shows that the extent of

vengeful feelings of individuals is impacted by economic and social circumstances of the

individuals and the country in which the live. Thus, it is possible that even very strong beliefs,

such as those that are racist or borderline racist, may be influenced by economic circumstances.


       Research that focuses on trust/mistrust as a dimension of culture measures trust placed in

others with questions such as “I would like to ask you a question about how much trust you have

in people from [country X].” In this paper we measure sentiments that are much stronger than

trust/mistrust. Specifically, we analyze the determinants of Germans‘ xenophobic, anti-Semitic

and racist feelings, measured by their reactions towards ―others‖ who live in Germany. In this

case ―others‖ represent either Jewish people, ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe, or foreigners

such as Italians and Turks who reside in Germany. We analyze responses to such statements as

                                                  2
“Jews (alternatively, Italians, Turks, or ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe) living in

Germany should not have the same rights as Germans in every respect,” “Foreigners living in

Germany should choose to marry people of their own nationality,” “Foreigners living in

Germany should be prohibited from taking part in any kind of political activity.” We use the

answers to these and similar questions to investigate the extent to which these anti-Semitic,

xenophobic or racist attitudes are impacted by personal characteristics and economic well-being

of the respondents. The details of the questions are given in the data section.


        Some related research exists that investigates the extent to which economic conditions

alter individuals‘ support for extreme political views. For example, parents‘ unemployment

status is shown to have an impact on their offspring‘s propensity to support extreme right-wing

parties (Siedler 2011). On the other hand, evidence is mixed on the impact of aggregate

economic conditions on hate crime. Hovland and Sears (1940) reported a negative association

between lynchings in 14 southern states of the United States and several indicators of economic

conditions, which is confirmed by Hepworth and West (1988), although Green, Glaser and Rich

(1998) could not find a significant relationship between violence directed to minorities and

economic conditions. Kruger and Pischke (1997) could not detect a relationship between

unemployment, wages and anti-foreigner crime in Germany, while Falk, Kuhn and Zweimueller

(2011) find that the occurrence of right-wing extremist crimes takes place more frequently when

unemployment is high in Germany. 1



1
  In a different domain, Mayda (2006) and Facchini and Mayda (2009) investigate the determinants of
attitudes towards migration, and Mayda and Rodrik (2005) analyze why some people favor protectionist
trade policies while others are pro-trade. Dustmann and Preston (2007) investigate the extent to which
attitudes towards immigration are influenced by the labor market, welfare benefit spending, and cultural
and racial prejudice in the U.K, and Card, Dustmann and Preston (2012) conduct a similar analysis of
preferences over immigration using the 2002 European Social Survey.


                                                    3
        As we explain in the data section, the questions we use do not refer to foreigners who

reside illegally in Germany. Unlike some other countries, illegal immigration is not a wide-

spread phenomenon in Germany. It is estimated that illegal foreigners constitute less than 0.5%

of the general population (Database on Irregular Immigration 2013). This is primarily because

Germany does not share borders with countries that are vastly different economically. Residents

of Germany who are not of German origin are typically former Gastarbeiter (guest workers) or

the offspring of guest workers, who migrated to Germany legally under official arrangements of

the German government and the governments of referral countries.2 Alternatively, they are

citizens of European Union countries. Thus, both of these groups hold work and residency

permits and qualify for almost all rights as native Germans, ranging from political rights to

retirement benefits. Therefore, questions analyzed in the paper refer to groups of people who are

in Germany legally, but whose cultural heritage is of another country, such as Italians or Turks.

Importantly, some of the questions refer to Germans (non-foreigners) who are either religious or

ethnic minorities.



Theoretical Underpinnings

        Glaeser (2005) provides a theoretical framework to analyze the political economy of hate.

In his model, the supply of hate (in a variety of forms such as anti-Semitism or hatred of Blacks

and other minorities) is produced by politicians in the form of hate-creating stories. Hate is

supplied against economically disadvantaged minorities by politicians with anti-distribution



2
 Being born in Germany does not automatically confer German citizenship. German nationality law is
based on the principle of jus sanguinis (right of blood). One or more parent being a citizen determines the
citizenship of a child. It is therefore possible to be a 2nd or 3rd generation foreigner living in Germany.
This contrasts the jus soli (right of soil) principle, which makes citizenship a right for anyone born in the
territory (e.g. in the United States).

                                                     4
platforms and it is spread against rich minorities by pro-redistribution politicians. The

willingness of individuals to accept these stories, propagated by politicians, as fact is the

demand-side of the hatred. Costs of obtaining information about the hated group and the private

benefit of that information will impact the demand. Two predictions emerge from this model.

First, education should reduce hate and racism if it is easier for the more educated to obtain

information and to distinguish between the correct and incorrect information about the hate-

propagated groups. Second, having contact with the hated groups should reduce costs of

acquiring information and therefore should result in a reduction in racist feelings. We are able to

test both of these predictions.


       Akerlof and Kranton (2000) introduce the notion of individual identity as a variable in

determining individual behavior. They propose a variation to the neoclassical utility function

which includes identity as a component. Identity (or self-image), consistent with social

psychology, is defined as belonging to a social category such as race and gender. Everyone in the

population is assigned to categories. These identity categories are associated with behavioral

prescriptions describing the ideals for each category, ranging from appropriate behavior to

physical appearance. An individual‘s identity depends on the level of consistency between the

prescribed level for that category and the person‘s actions, and identity has a positive impact on

utility. For example, consider two identity categories as ―Native‖ and ―Foreigner,‖ where the

former has higher status than the latter. These categories have prescriptions that include a variety

of dimensions, including how to interact with the members of other categories. A prescription

for the Native category could be an expectation to not intermingle with foreigners. If somebody

who is in the Native category does not intermingle with foreigners, this constitutes a match

between his attributes and the prescribed behavior for his category, and it would generate an


                                                  5
increase in identity and therefore in utility. On the other hand, if the Native interacts with

foreigners, this would produce a decline in identity and a decrease in utility. In this model

individuals choose actions to maximize utility, and actions determine identities. Akerlof and

Kranton (2000) use this model to gain insights into gender discrimination, social exclusion and

poverty.


       In a different version of the model, Akerlof and Kranton (2005) formulate a utility

function which explicitly includes income in addition to the match quality between the person‘s

identity and the prescribed level for that category. In this model, income and identity are

substitutes, indicating that a higher level of income allows the individual to deviate from the

prescribed level of behavior. That is, a loss in utility due to the decline in identity (because of the

deviation from prescribed behavior) can be compensated by higher levels of income. This model

provides a theoretical rationale of the relationship between higher economic well-being and

lower levels of xenophobia and racism. That is, even if one aspect of the identity of being

―native‖ is the rejection of ―foreigners,‖ the decline in identity and loss of utility generated by

disregarding this particular prescription can be afforded when the individual‘s utility is increased

due to higher economic well-being.3



Summary of the Findings

       We analyze German General Social Survey data between 1996 and 2010. We find that

anti-Semitic, xenophobic and racist feelings are influenced by individuals‘ economic well-being.

In addition to personal attributes such as age, gender, education, labor market activity and

location of residence, the data set contains questions on the respondents‘ evaluation of their own

3
 Applications of this concept include Humlum, Kleinjans and Nielsen (2012) and Antecol and Cobb-
Clark (2008).

                                                   6
economic situation, and how they rate the current economic conditions in Germany. We find

that, xenophobic, anti-Semitic and racist feelings are tempered when people believe that their

own economic situation is in good shape, and these feelings are magnified when people think

that their personal economic situation is bad. The same relationship exists for beliefs about

national economic conditions. These results suggest that economic well-being of individuals

influence how they perceive others who are ―different‖ from them. More specifically, the

negative/intolerant/prejudiced feelings about minorities are mitigated if economic well-being is

improved.


       Consistent with the prediction of Glaeser (2005) we find that more educated Germans

have weaker xenophobic, anti-Semitic or racist feelings. The same is true for those who have

contact with foreigners in the workplace, or through family or friends. As noted by Glaeser

(2005, p. 56), it is possible that the more educated may be better in hiding racist feelings.

Similarly, caution should be exercised in the interpretation of the impact of contact with

foreigners because interaction with foreigners may itself be determined by the extent of racist

and xenophobic feelings of the person. That is, racists may avoid contacts with foreigners and

minorities, while non-racists may choose to have interactions with them. However, we show that

the impact of exposure to foreigners is not sensitive to inclusion/exclusion of self-employed

people from the analysis, who can clearly pick-and-choose the individuals with whom they

interact in the workplace.


       Along the same lines of most recent research that has reported persistence of cultural

traits, Voigtlaender and Voth (2012a) find that the extent of anti-Semitism 600 years ago,

manifested by persecutions and executions of Jews during the plague-era, predicts the support of

the Nazi Party in the 1928 elections in Germany. This suggests that anti-Semitic sentiments

                                                  7
continued to exist in local areas for centuries. We use this idea and include in some of our

specifications a measure of local support of the Nazi Party in 1928. We find that people who

reside in states that have provided above-median support for the Nazi Party in 1928 are more

anti-Semitic today in comparison to those who live elsewhere.4 This provides evidence that local

cultural traits in terms of anti-Semitism persisted over the last 80 years. This persistence result is

consistent with that of Voigtlaender and Voth (2012b) who investigate the extent to which anti-

Semitic attitudes today are impacted by support for anti-Semitic parties between 1890 and 1933

and how various types of de-Nazification policies implemented under different occupying forces

after WWII impacted anti-Semitism in Germany.


        We show that the results are not driven by men; that is, very similar results are obtained

by analyzing samples of just men or women. Nonetheless, it could be the case that the

relationship between economic condition and racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic feelings is a

reflection of men‘s concern about economic conditions and their beliefs about ―men having

priority in the job market.‖ If this is true, men‘s frustration about economic conditions would

manifest itself in negative attitudes toward all others competing for jobs, including women. The

survey includes questions gauging attitudes on women‘s involvement in the labor market and on

their household responsibilities. These include agreements/disagreements with statements such

as ―A married woman should give up working if jobs are scarce and husband can provide for

family,‖ and ―It is better if the husband works and wife stays at home tending to household and

children.‖ Analyzing men‘s responses to such statements, we find that economic conditions

have no impact on men‘s attitudes towards women‘s attachment to the labor market. This


4
  As detailed later, support of the Nazi Party in 1928 is not correlated with the level of development in
those areas today; that is, areas that produced more votes for the anti-Semitic Nazi platform in 1928 are
not systematically different from other areas today in terms of economic development or level of income.

                                                    8
indicates that perceptions about economic well-being do not trigger across-the-board negative

reactions stemming from job insecurity.


          In section II we present the data. Section III includes the empirical results, and section

IV discusses the robustness of the results. Section V is the conclusion.



II. Data

          Data used in this study are taken from various waves of the German General Social

Survey (ALLBUS) between 1996 and 2010. The German General Social Survey consists of

repeated cross sections that are representative of the resident adult population in Germany. The

survey is administered every other year. We exclude non-German citizens from our sample. We

make use of several questions regarding the attitudes of German citizens towards Jews and ethnic

Germans from Eastern Europe, as well as towards foreigners who reside in Germany, such as

those with Italian or Turkish heritage.5 Each survey year used in the analyses contains about

3,000 observations.

          The first variable in Table 1, Foreigners Should Marry Their Own, is based on the

response to the statement ―Foreigners living in Germany should choose to marry people of their

own nationality.‖ Potential answers range from 1: Strongly disagree, to 7: Strongly agree.

―Foreigners Should Marry Their Own” takes the value of 1 if the respondent agreed or strongly

agreed with this statement (options 5, 6 or 7). Table 1 shows that about 18% of the sample

thinks that foreigners should marry people of their own nationality. The variable titled No

Politics for Foreigners takes the value of one if the respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the




5
    Depending on the specification, we use up to 13,146 observations.

                                                      9
statement that “Foreigners living in Germany should be prohibited from taking part in any kind

of political activity.”


        To say that somebody should not marry anyone outside their own nationality is an

indication of racism. Similarly, despite the fact that German law allows for political

participation of foreigners at the local level, trying to prohibit a group of people from

participating in any kind of political activity is an attempt to disfranchise that target group

economically and socially. While German law does not allow non-German citizens to vote in

federal or state elections or to be elected for state or federal office, non-Germans who are

citizens of the European Union countries (such as Italy, Greece, Bulgaria, Romania, Poland and

Spain) have the right to vote in local elections (city and community elections) and they are

eligible to run for office at the local level. Furthermore, any foreigner may be appointed to serve

on local committees to represent the interests of a group. They may also participate in

community initiatives, labor and trade unions, schools, etc.6


        The respondents were also given the following statement: ―Jewish people living in

Germany should have the same rights as other Germans in every respect.‖ Once again, the

alternatives ranged from ―strongly disagree‖ to ―strongly agree‖ on a scale from 1 to 7. If the

respondent disagreed with this statement (chose 1, 2 or 3), the variable No Equal Rights for Jews

takes the value of one. Note that ―the Jewish people‖ here does not refer to citizens of the state

of Israel. Rather, they are Jewish citizens of Germany. To declare that Jewish people should not

have the same rights as (non-Jewish) Germans is an indication of anti-Semitism. Table 1 shows

6
  (German Federal Ministry of the Interiors web site, accessed on Dec 28, 2013: http://www.bmi.bund.de/
DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Verfassung/Staatliche-Ordnung/Wahlrecht/Auslaenderwahlrecht/
auslaenderwahlrecht_node.html)



                                                  10
that 22 percent of the respondents indicated agreed that German Jews should not have the same

rights.


          A similar attitude is observed towards the ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe

(Aussiedler). This group of individuals are of German descent who have the right to return to

Germany and claim German citizenship. Primarily, the term refers to German citizens (and their

descendants) who remained in the former German territories east of the Oder-Neisse line after

1945, as well as refugees or expellees (and their descendants) of German ethnic origin who were

admitted to the territories of the German Reich as defined by the boundaries existing in 1937.7

Note that this group includes individuals who may never have lived in Germany. Although some

knowledge of the German language is formally required in order to obtain citizenship as an

Aussiedler, many Aussiedler do not speak or write German well, and do not use German as their

primary language spoken at home (Frick and Wagner 2001). Twenty-eight percent of the

sample thinks that these ethnic Germans should not have the same rights as other Germans.


          The descriptive statistics of “No Equal Rights for Italians” shows that 26 percent of

Germans think that Italians should not have rights equal to Germans. Racism against Turks is

stronger; about 45 percent of Germans think that Turks should not have the same rights as

Germans.


          The next group of variables listed in Table 1 measures feelings that can be described as

xenophobia and anti-Semitism. These variables gauge the extent to which respondents would

like to avoid having an ethnic German (Aussiedler), a Jewish person, an Italian or a Turk as a

neighbor, and whether it would be unpleasant if such a person married into their family. As
7
  Sometimes a distinction is made between Aussiedler and Spätaussiedler (―Late Aussiedler‖), depending
on how soon after World War II the individuals came to present-day Germany. We make no such
distinction and refer to all such individuals as ―Aussiedler‖ or ―ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe‖.

                                                  11
shown in Table 1, 39% of Germans think that it would be unpleasant to have a Turkish person as

a neighbor, and about 23% think the same for ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe. Twelve

percent think that it would be unpleasant to have a Jewish neighbor and 7% feel the same for an

Italian neighbor. These negative feelings are even stronger when it comes to the possibility of a

Turkish person, ethnic German, Jewish person, or an Italian being married into the family of the

respondent, but the pecking order remains the same: More than half of Germans indicate that it

would be unpleasant to have a Turkish person married into the family, and about 31% percent

have the same feeling about an ethnic German from Eastern Europe (Aussiedler) Jewish person.

One-in-four Germans do not like the idea of a Jewish person marrying into the family, and 17%

think it would be unpleasant to have an Italian in the family.

       The survey includes questions that ask about perceptions regarding current economic

conditions. The respondents were asked ―How would you generally rate your own economic

situation?‖ They answered on a five-point scale (Very good, good, neutral, bad, very bad). We

combined ―good‖ and ―very good‖ under a dichotomous indicator titled ―Good Personal

Economic Conditions‖ and we similarly combined ―bad‖ and ―very bad‖ under ―Bad Personal

Economic Conditions.‖ The respondents were also asked ―How would you generally rate the

current economic situation in Germany?‖ In the same manner we created dichotomous variables

―Good National Economic Condition‖ and ―Bad National Economic Condition.‖

       Table 2 shows that about 50 percent of the respondents think that their personal economic

conditions are good or very good, and 13 percent think that their personal economic conditions

are bad or very bad. The remainder (37%) thinks that their personal economic condition is

neutral. Regarding the economic conditions in Germany, half of the respondents think that it is

neutral. While 20 percent think that economic conditions of the country are good or very good,



                                                 12
29 percent think Germany‘s economic conditions are bad or very bad. These variables that

gauge sentiments of personal or national economic conditions move in tandem, but not perfectly

so. For example, of those people who reported that their personal economic conditions were

good or very good, only 30 percent indicated that they felt that Germany‘s economic condition

was good or very good.

        The survey contains information on personal characteristics of the respondents, such as

age, gender, education, and marital status. Survey administrators have merged information

regarding the location of residence of the respondent to local area characteristics. This allows us

to control for local area attributes in addition to the personal characteristics of the respondents.

These characteristics include such variables as the city size and whether the respondent lives in

the inner city. The data set also contains information on whether individuals have contact with

foreigners at work or through family and friends. The survey question is: ―Do you have personal

contact with foreigners living in Germany, at your job [… in your immediate family?]‖ Thirty-

eight percent of the people have contact with foreigners at work and 20 percent have contact with

foreigners through family.

        Religious affiliation is measured by three mutually exclusive categories: Protestant,

Catholic, and No Religion/Other Religion. Thirty-six percent of the sample are Protestant, and

28 percent are Catholic. Less than 2 percent are adherents of other religions, and 33 percent have

declared having no religion.8 Thus, we have merged these last two groups into No

Religion/Other Religion category.




8
 There are about 102,000 Jews in Germany, which is 0.13% of the 80 million population
(http://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/1232/umfrage/anzahl-der-juden-in-deutschland-seit-dem-jahr-
2003/)


                                                    13
        There are geographic patterns in religious denomination in Germany. While the South

and West of the country are primarily Catholic, the North and central locations tend to be more

heavily Protestant. Participation in religion was strongly discouraged in former East Germany

and as a result, today most individuals in the eastern states of the country report not having a

religion. For example, data from the 2011 German Census show that 62.9 percent of individuals

from Saarland (located in the West) are Catholic, while only 6.2 percent of individuals from

Schleswig-Holstein (the northernmost state) are Catholic. Schleswig-Holstein is 53.7 percent

Protestant. Mecklenburg-Vorpommern is a formerly East German state bordering Schleswig-

Holstein, and in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern 79.1 percent of individuals have no religion. 9


        In some specifications we include a variable that measures the extent of the support of the

National Socialist German Workers‘ Party (NSDAP, or Hitler‘s Nazi Party) in the state during

the May 1928 elections. While the NSDAP earned only a small share of the overall votes in

1928, we use this election year because the party was most Anti-Semitic at that time, and

thereafter toned down the rhetoric in order to appeal to a broader base of voters (Voigtlaender

and Voth 2012a). Data, which are taken from King et al. (2008), are at the voting district level;

districts as defined in 1928. We match the voting districts from 1928 with the current state

boundaries in Germany. We then sum across all voting districts within each current state the

number of valid votes cast, as well as the number of votes earned by the Nazi Party. This allows

us to calculate the percent of the votes earned by the Nazi Party in 1928 for regions as defined by

today‘s state lines. We then create a state level dummy variable that is equal to one if the state
9
  The reason for the geographic differences in religious denomination are largely rooted in history. After
the Protestant Reformation in the 1500s, the rulers of the different territories of the Holy Roman Empire
either chose to follow the Reformation or to remain Catholic. Areas where the rulers of that time chose to
follow the Reformation are still largely protestant, and the predominantly Catholic areas today tended to
have rulers that chose to remain Catholic.



                                                    14
has a percentage of votes cast for the Nazi party in 1928 that is larger than the median, and is

zero otherwise.


       Each respondent lives in one of the 16 German states.10 Regressions control for state

fixed-effects. They also control for year fixed-effects to account for the fact that we pool

surveys from multiple years (See Table 1). The specifications that include the Nazi State in

1928 cannot include state fixed-effects because this variable does not change over time. In these

models we also include variables that measure the age distribution of the state, percent foreigners

living in the state and per capita GDP of the state.



III. Empirical Framework and the Results

       We estimate models of the following form.


(1)    Rtis = β0 + β1 EconGoodtis + β2 EconBadtis +Xtis Ψ +μs+πt +εtis,


where Rtis represents the extent of anti-Semitic, xenophobic and racist feelings of individual (i)

who resides in state (s), who is surveyed in year (t). EconGood and EconBad are mutually

exclusive dummy variables to indicate if the person thinks his/her personal economic conditions

are good/very good, or bad/very bad, respectively. The left-out category is personal economic

conditions being neutral. Alternatively, we estimate equation (1) by using sentiments about

National Economic Conditions, rather than Personal Economic Conditions. We also estimate

models that include both personal and national economic conditions jointly. The vector X


10
  The states are Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, Niedersachsen, Bremen, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Hessen,
Rheinland-Pfalz, Baden-Württemberg, Bayern, Saarland, Berlin, Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-
Vorpommern, Sachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt, and Thüringen.




                                                 15
incudes personal attributes of the respondent such as age, education, marital status, labor force

activity, city size, and whether he/she lives in the inner city.

          Benchmark models include state fixed-effects (μs), as well year dummies (πt) to account

for the fact that surveys are administered in multiple waves in different years. City and state

characteristics that vary over time are matched with the appropriate survey year. For example,

those surveyed in 2006 are matched with city and state characteristics in 2006. Standard errors

are clustered by age group-and-state of residence.

          Table 3A presents the results of the estimated models where the dependent variables

measure the extent of anti-Semitic and racist feelings. The dependent variable in column (1)

takes the value of one if the respondent indicated that foreigners living Germany should only

marry people of their own nationality. More educated individuals have a lower propensity for

racism as measured by this question, and education has a monotonic effect: those with a

vocational education are 8 percentage points less likely (in comparison to those with only the

basic level of education) to indicate that foreigners should only marry people of their own

nationality. Those with advanced technical education are about 14 percentage points less likely,

and those with a college degree are about 18 percentage points less likely to agree with this racist

statement. 11 People who work in the labor market are about two percentage points less likely to

agree with the statement, and people who live in cities that are larger than 100,000 residents are

about 3 percentage points less likely to agree with it in comparison to those who live in smaller

cities.

          The first two explanatory variables in Table 3A show that, all else the same, people are

about 3 percentage points less likely to agree that foreigners living Germany should only marry

people of their own nationality if they believe that their personal economic conditions are good.
11
     Dustmann, Fabbri and Preston (2011) also find that higher education is associated with lower prejudice.

                                                      16
On the other hand if they think that their personal economic conditions are bad, they are about 3

percentage points more likely to agree with the racist statement. The same result is obtained in

the analysis of the statement ―Foreigners living Germany should not be allowed to take part in

any political activity.” People who believe that their personal economic conditions are in good

shape are less likely to agree with the statement and those with bad personal economic

conditions are more likely to agree.

       Columns (3) to (6) present the results of models where we analyze the determinants of

anti-Semitism and racism targeted at specific groups. Column (3) is the model where the

dependent variable is a dichotomous indicator of whether the respondents agreed with the

statement that ―Jewish people living in Germany should not have the same rights as other

Germans in every respect.‖ Columns (4) to (6) pertain to the same question targeted to ethnic

Germans, originally from Eastern Europe, Turks, and Italians, respectively. The same regularity

emerges in all models. The proclivity to declare that people should not have the same rights as

Germans if they are Jewish, ethnic German, Turk or Italian goes down if the respondent‘s

personal economic conditions are good, and the opposite is true if the respondent‘s economic

conditions are bad. Using the coefficients across the models and using the baseline means of the

dependent variables, we find that personal economic conditions being good reduces these racist

feelings by 11 to 23 percent, and bad personal economic conditions enhances the racists feelings

by 10 to 27 percent.

       The estimated coefficients of other explanatory variables are consistent across models.

Educated people are less racist. The propensity for racism is lower for people with no religious

affiliation in comparison to Protestants (which is the left-out category). The impact of being a

Catholic is no different than that of being a Protestant with the exception of the model in column



                                                17
(5), where being a Catholic increases the propensity to declare that Turks living in Germany

should have not have the same rights as Germans by 3 percentage points in comparison to

Protestants.

          Table 3B presents the results where we analyze the determinants of a set of xenophobic

and anti-Semitics attitudes. The questions are whether the respondent feels that it would be

unpleasant to have a Jewish person (or an ethnic German, Turk or Italian) as a neighbor and

whether it would be unpleasant if a Jewish person, an ethnic German, a Turk or an Italian were

married into the family of the respondent. The results are consistent with those reported in Table

3A. If the respondent thinks that his/her personal economic conditions are good, this reduces the

extent of anti-Semitic and xenophobic feelings. More education and being female have

dampening effects on these feelings. Religious affiliation has no impact in these regressions

with the exception of the impact on Turks. Columns (3) and (7) show that Catholics are more

likely to indicate that it would be unpleasant to have a Turkish neighbor, and it would be

unpleasant if a Turk married into the family. In column (7) we also show that those with no

religion are less likely to indicate that it would be unpleasant if a Turkish person married into the

family.

          Age has a positive impact on racist feelings. To investigate the impact of age further, we

re-estimated a more flexible form by including age dummies for 10-year age intervals. The

results, shown in Appendix Tables 1A-B, reveal that age has a monotonic impact on racist, ant-

Semitic and xenophobic attitudes, where these feelings are stronger for older people. Given that

we use data from various years between 1996 and 2010, those who are 65 and older have

experienced the Nazi Germany and the World War II. The point estimates are larger for this

group, which is consistent with the results of Voigtlaender and Voth (2012b), who report that



                                                  18
cohorts that grew up under the Nazi regime are more anti-Semitic today. It is also interesting to

note, however, that the age effect exists also among the younger cohorts: those who are 25-34 are

more racist in comparison to those who are 18-24 (the left-out category in regressions of

Appendix Tables 1A-B).

        Tables 4A and 4B present the same regressions, but in these models we replace the

variables that measure how the respondents feel about their personal economic circumstances

with the variables that gauge how they feel about the current economic situation in Germany.

The results in Tables 4A and 4B are similar to those reported in Tables 3A and 3B. The belief

that current economic conditions in Germany are good (bad) has a diminishing (enhancing)

effect on racist, xenophobic and anti-Semitic feelings.       The impact is stronger, both in

magnitude and statistical significance, when the person believes that the German economy is

doing badly.12

        The benchmark models do not include household income because income could be

endogenous to racist attitudes. However, religious affiliation could be correlated with income,

even conditional on education. Thus, we added household income to the models. The results,

reported in Appendix Tables 3A and Appendix 3B show that all results remain the same

although the impact of being Catholic becomes insignificant in some cases. Income has an

additional negative impact on anti-Semitic, xenophobic and racist feelings.



Contact with Foreigners and the Impact of the 1928 Nazi Vote

        In this sub-section we report the results of the models that include indicators of contact

with foreigners. As predicted by the model of Glaeser (2005) having contact with minorities

12
  The models that include perceptions on both personal economic well-being and national economic
conditions provided very similar results although in some cases the precision of the estimated coefficients
were reduced. These results are reported in Appendix Table 2.

                                                    19
should provide information about them and should alleviate xenophobic and racist feelings. It is

also possible that racist and xenophobic people avoid contact with minorities. We address this

potential reverse causality in a number of ways as explained in the Robustness section below.

       It is easier to avoid contact with family members who are foreigners, but it is more

difficult to avoid contact with foreigners in the place of work. That is, the extent of contact with

foreigners at work may not be at full discretion of the individual. (In the robustness section we

make use of the information on the self-employed). Thus, we add to the models a variable that

gauges whether the respondent has contact with foreigners at work. Specifically, this dummy

variable takes the value of one if the respondent answered in the affirmative to the following

question: “Do you have personal contact with foreigners living in Germany at your job?” The

results are reported in Table 5A for comparison. The top panel of Table 5A displays the main

results reported in Table 3A. For brevity, we only show the coefficients of Good Personal

Economic Conditions and Bad Personal Economic Conditions. Panel B of Table 5A displays the

results of the regressions which also include the variable that measures contact with foreigners at

work. There are two key observations. First, the variable Foreign Contact at Work is negative

and highly significant in each model, suggesting that those who have contacts with foreigners at

work have less racist tendencies. Second, inclusion of the contact variable has no meaningful

impact on the magnitude of the coefficients of the personal economic conditions.

       In panel C of Table 5A we report the results of the specifications that include two

additional variables: Foreign Contact in Family and Nazi State in 1928. The former variable

measures whether the respondent has personal contact with foreigners living in Germany through

his/her own family or other immediate relatives. Nazi state in 1928 is a dichotomous variable

that takes the value of one if the Nazi party has received more than the median vote in



                                                 20
respondent‘s state in 1928. The regressions behind Panel C of Table 5A include every variable

that is included in all previous regressions with the exception of state fixed effects. The reason

for this is the fact that the variable Nazi State in 1928 does not vary within states. Therefore, the

regressions in Panel C include some other state-level variables (that vary over time), such as the

proportion of people in various age groups in the state, state per capita GDP and the proportion

of state population that is foreigners. A comparison of panels B and C of Table 5A shows that

adding these variables has no impact on the coefficients of economic condition variables or on

the coefficients of Foreign Contact at Work. In addition, the estimated coefficients of Foreign

Contact in Family are always negative and highly significant suggesting that contact with

foreigners through family or immediate relatives mitigates racist feelings.


        Those who live in states which provided above-median support for the Nazi Party in the

1928 elections are about 7 percentage points more likely to reveal that Jewish people living in

Germany should not have the same rights as Germans. This result is in line of that reported by

Voigtlaender and Voth (2012b). They show that historical voting patterns for anti-Semitic parties

between 1890 and 1933 are strong predictors of anti-Jewish attitudes in Germany today.13 The

states where the Nazi Party received above-median votes in the 1928 elections are Schleswig-

Holstein, Hamburg, Niedersachsen, Hessen, Rheinland-Pfalz, Bayern, Sachsen, and

Thüringen. These states are located all throughout Germany. For example, Schleswig-Holstein

is in the North, bordering Denmark, whereas Bayern is in the South, bordering Austria and the

Czech Republic. Thüringen is in the middle of Germany with no borders to other countries.

There is also significant variation in their population size, ranging from small states such as


13
  They also show that anti-Semitism is stronger among the cohort that grew up under the Nazi regime
and that different zones of Germany, occupied by different countries after the WW II, exhibit different
patterns of anti-Semitism.

                                                    21
Hamburg and Thüringen with about 2 million residents in 2010 to Bayern with about 13 million

people and Niedersachsen with 8 million residents. More importantly, there is no correlation

between the current level of development in a state and voting outcomes in 1928. The correlation

coefficient of a dummy variable indicating a higher than national median vote for the Nazi party

in 1928 and state-level GDP per capita in 2009 is 0.15. Thus, it is unlikely that the Nazi State in

1928 variable is capturing an economic aspect of the states.


       Table 5B is similar to Table 5A, but here we analyze the feelings regarding

―unpleasantness‖ of neighbors who are foreigners, Jewish or ethnic German (Aussiedler), and

―unpleasantness‖ of them marrying into the family. These are the extensions of the regression

reported in Table 3B, where the contact variables and Nazi state in 1928 are added as additional

regressors. Panel A of Table 5B re-displays the coefficients of the benchmark model reported in

Table 3B. Panel B reports the coefficients of the models that include Foreign Contact at Work,

and Panel C displays the results of the models that include Foreign Contact at Work, Foreign

Contact in Family and Nazi State in 1928.      The results are in line with those reported in Table

5A. Adding variables that measure contact with foreigners and the Nazi State in 1928 does not

impact the magnitude of the economic condition variables. The contact variables are always

negative and significant, suggesting that having contact with foreigners alleviates the extent of

anti-Semitic and xenophobic feelings. Panel C of Table 5B shows that those who live in states

that have casted above-median Nazi-Party votes in 1928 are about 3 percentage points more

likely to indicate that ―it would be unpleasant to have a Jewish neighbor.‖

       It is interesting to note that the Nazi State in 1928 is statistically significant only in the

outcomes that measure anti-Semitism: ―Jewish people living in Germany should not have the

same rights as Germans‖ and ―It would be unpleasant to have a neighbor who is Jewish.‖ (Panel


                                                  22
C, column 3 of Table 5A, and Panel C, column 1 of Table 5B.) This finding suggests that

whatever anti-Semitic culture that existed in 1928 in those states, it still has an impact on anti-

Semitic feelings today. It is of course possible that those with anti-Semitic feelings migrate from

other parts of Germany to those states that have provided strong support for the Nazi Party in

1928. Even if this phenomenon is prevalent, it would still underline the persistence in anti-

Semitism and the prevalence of some state-wide anti-Semitic attitude that would attract such

people to those states.



IV. Extensions and Robustness

Intense Dislike of “Others”

       So far we have investigated the determinants of attitudes targeted towards specific

groups, such as Jewish people or ethnic Germans as well as attitudes towards minorities as a

group. In this section we identify strong racists and investigate if economic well-being has an

impact on racist attitudes among this group of people.

       We create three new variables. Intense Dislike of Foreigners is dichotomous variable

that takes the value of one if the respondent indicated that ―Foreigners living in Germany should

only marry people of their own nationality,‖ and if they also agreed with the statement that

―Foreigners living in Germany should not be allowed to take part in any political activity.” As

Table 1 shows, 18 percent of the sample agreed with the former statement and 28 percent agreed

with the latter. The mean of Intense Dislike of Foreigners is 0.105, meaning that about 11

percent of the respondents agreed with both of these statements.

       Intense Dislike of Equal Rights intends to gauge stronger racist feelings. To qualify for

Intense Dislike of Equal Rights, one has to agree with the following five statements: ―Foreigners



                                                  23
living in Germany should not be allowed to take part in any political activity,” “Jewish people

living in Germany should not have the same rights as Germans,” “Ethnic Germans from Eastern

Europe living in Germany should not have the same rights as Germans,” Italians living in

Germany should not have the same rights as Germans,” and “Turkish people living in Germany

should not have the same rights as Germans.” Slightly less than seven percent of the sample

agreed with these five statements.

       Intense Dislike of Intermarriage takes the value of one if the individual believes that

―Foreigners living in Germany should only marry people of their own nationality,‖ and in

addition, he/she feels that it would be unpleasant if either a Jewish person, or a Turk, an Italian

or an ethnic German married into their family. About 5 percent of the sample feels this strongly

negative about intermarriage.

       Table 6 reports the summary results of the regressions using three types of strong racist

feelings. All models in Panels A and B include all variables that are included in Table 3A,

including state fixed-effects and year dummies. Panel C includes the same variables with the

exception of state state-fixed effects. Instead of state fixed-effects these models include state

attributes as was the case in Panels C of Tables 5A and 5B. In all cases we observe that racist

attitudes are subdued when the person thinks his/her personal economic conditions are good, and

they are intensified when personal economic conditions are bad. The impact of bad personal

economic conditions is two-to-three three times as strong as the impact of good economic

conditions.




                                                 24
Models that Exclude Individuals with Strong Racist Attitudes

       To investigate if the results are sensitive to the exclusion of those with strong racist

attitudes we dropped from the sample those individuals for whom Intense Dislike of

Intermarriage is equal to one or Intense Dislike of Equal Rights is equal to one. This exercise

eliminates strong racists from the sample and allows us to investigate whether economic well-

being still has an impact on anti-Semitics, xenophobic and racist attitudes in the rest of the

sample. The results, summarized in Tables 7A and 7B, demonstrate that all previous results

hold: If the respondent believes that his/her personal economic conditions are good, racist

xenophobic and anti-Semitic feelings are lessened, and the reverse is true if they feel negatively

about their economic well-being. Having contact with foreigners has a positive impact and those

in states that have casted strong Nazi Party vote in 1928 are more anti-Semitic.



The Impact of Sector of Work and Self-Employment

       The models estimated so far include a variable that measures whether the person is

working in the labor market. We also estimate models that introduce detailed job classification

for those who work. Specifically, in the data set each individual is classified into a job

classification such as self-employed farmer, self-employed professional, other self-employed,

civil servant or member of the military, laborer, employee (non-laborer), and trainee. As Table 2

shows 56% of the sample is working in the labor market (non-workers include students,

homemakers, retired people as well as those who are otherwise not in the labor force). Table 2

also shows that we have information on sector of work for 52% of the sample, indicating that

some workers have not provided information about their type of work.




                                                 25
       Tables 8A and 8B display the result of the models that include the variables on sector of

work. These are the same models as in benchmark models of Tables 3A and 3B, but the variable

Worker is replaced by variables identifying employment category. The results show that laborers

and self-employed farmers have stronger xenophobic, anti-Semitics and racist feelings in

comparison to those who are not in the labor force. Civil servants and self-employed

professionals seem to have weaker racist feelings. Note that these results emerge despite the fact

that the models control for the impact of education. Other results, including the impact of

economic well-being, are consistent with those reported earlier. Some coefficients are not

reported in Tables 8A and 8B and they are consistent with previous results as well. For example,

as in all previous models, men have consistently stronger racist attitudes. The specifications that

include the Nazi State in 1928 variable showed that this variable is significant in explaining anti-

Semitic feelings as reported in earlier regressions. The impact of religion, displayed in Tables

3A-4B is the same in these models as well. We also ran these models by excluding non-workers.

In these models we used the ―Employee‖ category as the left-out comparison group. We found

the same results: Self-employed farmers and laborers have stronger racist feelings than

employees, and civil servants and self-employed professionals have weaker racist feelings.

       It is possible that those with stronger negative feelings towards ―others‖ decide to

become self-employed to avoid contact with foreigners and with those of other ethnic or

religious backgrounds. The data, however, do not support this hypothesis as the mean value of

Foreign Contact at Work is 0.48 among the self-employed and it is 0.37 among those who are

not self-employed. Similarly, the rate of Foreign Contact in Family is higher among the self-

employed (26% vs. 18%); and both of these differences are statistically significant.

Nevertheless, we dropped all self-employed individuals and re-estimated the models. The



                                                 26
summary of the results, obtained from this sample of non-self-employed workers are reported in

Tables 9A and 9B. The results are very similar to those reported earlier, including the

coefficients of ―Foreign Contact‖ at work and in family, indicating that the results are not

sensitive to the exclusion of the self-employed from the analysis.



Are the Results Gender-specific?

       To investigate if these results are driven my males or females, we re-estimated the entire

set of regressions using only males or only females. Appendix Table 4 displays the descriptive

statistics of the dependent variables by gender. The mean values of the variables are very similar

between sexes. Appendix Tables 5A-5B and Appendix Tables 6A-6B display the results

estimated in male- and female samples, respectively. There is remarkable similarity in the

results. The point estimates are similar in both samples. For both males and females, good

economic conditions have a dampening effect on racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic feelings

and bad economic conditions strengthen these feelings.



Are the Results driven by Males’ Frustration about “Lack of Job Priority for German Men”?

       Although Appendix Tables 4A-5B show that the results are not driven by gender

differences, it could be the case that in case of men, the relationship between economic

conditions and racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic feeling could be a reflection of men‘s concern

about economic conditions and their perceptions of ―men‘s priority in the job market.‖ More

specifically, assume that German men get upset about not having sufficient job opportunities for

them during economically difficult times and they blame ―others‖ for such lack of opportunity.




                                                27
Under this scenario, this frustration would manifest itself in having negative attitudes towards

―all others,‖ including women.

        To test this hypothesis we use five questions from the survey that gauge attitudes toward

women‘s employment in the labor market and responsibilities at home. The descriptions of these

variables are provided below. The survey asks the respondents whether they strongly disagree,

disagree, agree, or strongly agree with each of these statements. We coded each variable as one if

the respondent agreed or strongly agreed with the statement. In this analysis we use only men

and the mean value of men‘s agreement with each statement is provided following the variable

description below.

        It is more important for a woman to help husband’s career than have a career herself

(mean=0.26), An infant will certainly suffer if the mother is working in the market (mean=0.61),

It is better if a husband works and the wife stays at home tending to household and children

(mean=0.39), It is not good for a child if the mother is working in the market instead of just

concentrating on the household (mean=0.51),14 A married woman should give up working if jobs

are scarce and husband can provide for family (mean=0.37).

        We ran the models using men only, replacing the variables measuring racism, anti-

Semitism and xenophobia with the variables that gauge attitudes towards women‘s work. The

results, displayed in Table 10, show that economic conditions have no impact on men‘s attitudes

toward women‘s attachment to the labor market or on women‘s responsibilities at home. This

indicates that men‘s perceptions of economic well-being do not trigger across-the-board

reactions toward all others (in this case, women) who may be competing with men for jobs.

Rather, economic well-being alters racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic feelings.

14
  This question was asked in converse as ―It is actually good for a child if the mother is working in the
market instead of just concentrating on the household.‖ For consistency with other questions, we reversed
the question and the answers.

                                                   28
Are the Results due to Directly “Being Upset About Job Scarcity Because of Foreigners”?

       When economic well-being or the perception of economic well-being declines,

individuals could be hostile towards foreigners on the grounds that foreigners are taking away

jobs from natives. If this job market-related sentiment is strong enough, it could trigger racist and

xenophobic feelings. Under this scenario, racist feelings are a by-product of fears about job loss

because of foreigners, and not a direct consequence of economic well-being.

       Note that this conjecture pertains to natives being fearful about the scarcity of jobs, and

therefore reacting negatively towards foreigners in a variety of ways, ranging from revealing

displeasure to having them as neighbors to trying to prevent them from marrying anyone other

than their own nationality. Because German Jews and German ethnic minorities (Aussiedler) are

not foreigners, job and wage-related fear should not trigger racism or anti-Semitism against these

groups. If it does, his could be an indication of behavior along the lines suggested by

Loewenstein (2000). For example, Card and Dahl (2011) and Rees and Schnapel (2009) show

that an unexpected loss of a football game triggers violence by men against women, suggesting

the importance of reference points in behavior (DellaVigna 2009).

       To investigate this hypothesis, we utilized a question in the German Social Survey that

was used to ask the respondents the extent to which they agreed/disagreed with the statement that

“When jobs get scarce, foreigners living in Germany should be sent home.” About 26 percent of

the sample agreed or strongly agreed with this statement, and for this group the variable Kick Out

Foreigners when Jobs are Scarce takes the value of one. Regression results that include this

additional variable are presented in Appendix Tables 7A and 7B. They are counterparts to

Tables 3A and 3B. Table Appendix 6A shows that the coefficient of Kick out Foreigners when



                                                 29
Jobs are Scarce is always positive and different from zero. Having this variable in the

regression reduces the impact of economic conditions on racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic

feelings, but it does not eliminate it. The reduction in the magnitude of the coefficients is

sometimes sizable. For example, the coefficient of Good Personal Economic Conditions in the

model reported in column (1) of Table 3A – where the dependent variable is ―Foreigners should

marry only people of their own nationality‖ is -0.0272, and it is -0.0111 when the model

includes the variable Kick out Foreigners when Jobs are Scarce (in column (1) of Appendix

Table 7A). This suggests that part, but not all, of the impact of economic well-being on racist

attitudes is driven by concerns about competition with foreigners for jobs. It is interesting to

note that the impact of economic well-being gets smaller also in regressions about anti-Semitic

attitudes, and attitudes against ethnic Germans (columns 3 and 4), although the decline in

magnitude is not as significant as in columns (1) and (2). This suggests that fears about job

security trigger anti-Semitic and racist reactions, much like an unexpected loss of a football

match triggers violence against women (Card and Dahl 2012). Nevertheless, controlling for the

sentiment about sending foreigners off when jobs are scarce does not eliminate the impact of

economic well-being on xenophobic, anti-Semitic and racist attitudes.



V. Conclusion and Discussion

       Recent research in economics has demonstrated that cultural attributes of individuals

have significant impact on their economic behavior. While culture consists of many dimensions,

certain attributes of a society, such as people‘s beliefs about the importance of the family, and

whether people of a given country trust or distrust people from other countries have been used as

indicators of culture (Alesina and Giuliano 2010, Bottazzi et al. 2011, Helliwell et al. 2014).



                                                 30
Cultural traits of countries, such as distrust of others, are believed to be very stable; i.e. they

change very slowly from generation to generation. This implies that culture has persistent, long-

lasting impacts on behavior. On the other hand, economic conditions of individuals are shown to

have an impact even on strong feelings, such as vengeance (Mocan 2013).

        In this paper we use data from Germany to investigate the extent to which attitudes of

Germans towards foreigners, Jews and ethnic Germans are impacted by personal characteristics

of the respondents as well as the extent to which they believe that their personal economic

circumstances or the economic conditions in Germany are good or bad.

        The questions posed to Germans in the data set gauge the extent of anti-Semitic,

xenophobic and racist feelings. They range from statements about foreigners such as

―Foreigners should not be allowed to marry anyone other than their own nationality,‖ to

statements about a specific group such as ―Jews in Germany should not have the same rights as

other Germans,‖ or ―It would be unpleasant to have a Turkish person as a neighbor.‖ Note that

―foreigners‖ does not refer to illegal immigrants because illegal immigration is practically non-

existent in Germany. Instead, foreigners in the survey questions refer to non-Germans who are

legal residents of Germany (such as guest workers or citizens of other EU countries). Similarly,

―Jews‖ does not refer to citizens of Israel, but it refers to Jewish German citizens.

        A variety of empirical specifications yield very consistent results. Consistent with

theoretical predictions of Glaeser (2005), education weakens anti-Semitic, xenophobic and racist

feelings, and higher levels of education are associated with monotonically lower level of

negative feelings. Those who have contact with foreigners at work or through family have

weaker racist feelings. These results are not driven by selection into self-employment and the

results hold among strong racists as well as those who have weaker racist feelings.



                                                   31
          Negative feelings towards religious and ethnic minorities (Jews, or Aussiedler) and

towards foreigners are not substantially different between Protestants and Catholics although

there is evidence of negative feelings of Catholics towards Turks, who are, by and large, Muslim.

Non-religious Germans have weaker negative feelings towards foreigners, Jews and ethnic

Germans. Controlling for household income does not alter the results.

          Voigtlaender and Voth (2012a) find that the extent of anti-Semitism 600 years ago,

measured by persecutions and executions of Jews during the plague-era, predicts the extent of

support of the Nazi Party in the 1928 elections in Germany. This suggests that anti-Semitic

sentiments continued to exist in local areas for centuries. We extend on this idea and include in

our specifications a measure of local support for the Nazi Party in 1928. Economic conditions of

the German states today are not correlated with whether they were more supportive of the Nazi

Party in the 1928 elections. We find that people who currently reside in states that have provided

above-median support for the Nazi Party in 1928 are more anti-Semitic today in comparison to

those who live elsewhere. This provides evidence that local cultural traits in terms of anti-

Semitism persisted over the last 80 years.15

          Importantly, we find that people‘s perceptions of their economic circumstances have an

impact on their anti-Semitic, xenophobic and racist feelings. The data set contains questions on

the respondents‘ evaluation of their own economic situation, and how they rate the current

economic conditions in Germany. We find that, xenophobic, anti-Semitic and racist feelings are

mitigated when people believe that their own economic situation is in good shape, and these

feelings are magnified when people think that their personal economic situation is bad. The

results are the same regardless of whether we use individuals‘ assessment of their personal



15
     This point in also made by Voigtlaender and Voth (2012b).

                                                  32
economic well-being or the economic well-being of Germany. The results are similarly robust to

using these measures jointly and also adding household income to the models.

       We show that very similar results are obtained when men and women are analyzed

separately. It could still be the case that the relationship between economic conditions and racist,

anti-Semitic and xenophobic feelings is a reflection of men‘s frustration about the job market in

general, which then produces negative reactions against anyone who would compete for jobs,

including women. We analyze men‘s responses to statements such as “A married woman

should give up working if jobs are scarce and husband can provide for family,‖ and ―It is better

if the husband works and wife stays at home tending to household and children,‖ and find that

economic conditions have no impact on men‘s attitudes towards women‘s attachment to the

labor market. This indicates that perceptions about economic well-being do not trigger across-

the-board negative reactions stemming from job insecurity.


       These results suggest that economic well-being of individuals influence how they

perceive others who are ―different‖ from them. More specifically, the

negative/intolerant/prejudiced feelings about minorities are mitigated if economic well-being is

improved. These results are consistent with the model proposed by Akerlof and Kranton (2000,

2005) that underline the importance of identity in economic behavior and suggest that income

(economic well-being) and identity are substitutes.

       The results are important for a number of reasons. For example, the rise in international

labor mobility and migration over the last two decades has made domestic populations more

heterogeneous in many countries and changed the landscape of labor markets. This phenomenon

created debates ranging from job displacement of natives of the country by foreigners, to

whether or not the inflow of the immigrants has an impact on economic productivity in the


                                                33
receiving country. A parallel debate centers around the extent to which immigrants adopt the

mainstream lifestyle of the country to which they migrated, and economic and social problems

that may have been generated by the presence of immigrants. A few recent and prominent

examples include the debate on a law banning veils and other face coverings in public places

(mostly applicable for Muslim immigrants) in France, the debate on the relationship between

illegal immigration and crime in the United States.


        Nevertheless, the trend of the change in the demographic composition of many developed

countries, and the associated repercussions are expected to continue.16 For example, the U.K.

and eight other European Union countries have lifted restrictions in 2014 for Bulgarians and

Romanians to work and reside in their countries. But, the expectation of Bulgarians and

Romanians to move to the U.K. has created political turmoil that included comments of Prime

Minister David Cameron against the predicted jump in migration on the one hand, and the

warnings of the EU officials against ―knee-jerk xenophobia‖ on the other hand (The Guardian;

March 30, 2013); and the EU Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso warned EU countries

against nationalism, xenophobia and racism (Reuters, October 30, 2013). In February 2014 a

referendum in Switzerland supported a quota on immigration, spearheaded by the right-wing



16
  It is predicted that 55 percent of the U.S. population will consist of African-Americans and those with
Hispanic or Asian descent (U.S. Census Bureau). Populations of the EU countries are becoming more
heterogeneous as well. A visible example of the inflow of foreigners and increased prevalence of second-
generation immigrants in Europe can be seen in the soccer industry. In 1990, the prominent German
soccer team Bayern Munich had three players on its 22-player roster who were not German (13.6% of the
roster). In 2013, almost half of the Bayern roster (46%) consisted of foreign players. The same is true for
any other soccer team in Europe. For example, the share of foreign players rose from 19% in 1990 to
33% in 2013 for the prominent Spanish soccer team Barcelona. The picture is even more striking
regarding the national soccer teams. A player must have citizenship of that country to be eligible to play
on the national team. In 1990, the French national soccer team had two black French players (14 % of 25
players). In 2013 the same team includes 9 black players (41% of 22 players). German national soccer
team had no player who was not of German descent in 1990. The team has 8 players in 2013 that have a
migration background.

                                                    34
Swiss People‘s party (SVP), prompting a reaction from the EU leaders, including German

Chancellor Angela Merkel (Reuters, February 18, 2014).


          Attitudes towards ―others‖ have economic implications. For example, racist and

xenophobic attitudes are likely to have discriminatory effects in a number of markets including

the labor market, housing market and the money market with consequences on wage disparities,

credit constraints and economic mobility. Such attitudes would also yield to under-utilization of

resources and loss of productivity. An example is provided by Freeman and Huang (2014) who

show that homophily in research collaborations generates weaker scientific contributions.

Similarly, Hong and Page (2004) show theoretically that a team of randomly selected agents

from a diverse population outperforms a homogenous team of high ability agents. The intuition

is that within-group diversity in perspective and problem solving becomes more important than

average group ability. Lazear (1999) discusses that a multi-cultural team in a corporate

environment, which combines workers of different cultures and exploits worker

complementarities, could have a positive impact on productivity although costly communication

can pose a constraint. On the other hand, ethno-linguistic fragmentation of a population can

generate challenges regarding governance, especially if the institutions are weak. A more

detailed discussion of costs and benefits of diversity is provided by Alesina and La Ferrara

(2005).


          Although the impact of perceived economic conditions on racist attitudes becomes

smaller in some cases when we control for the sentiment that foreigners should be sent home

when jobs get scarce, it does not vanish. This indicates that job-related fears are not the only or

even principal source of the racist and xenophobic attitudes. Furthermore, controlling for the

foreigner-induced job-related fears reduces the impact of economic well-being on anti-Semitic

                                                 35
and racist feelings towards Jews and German ethnic minorities (Aussiedler), both of whom are

German citizens. This provides some support for the potential importance of reference points in

behavior, similar to that of Card and Dahl (2011) who report that an unexpected loss of a football

game triggers violence against women.


       In summary, our results show that xenophobic and racist reactions against ―others‖ from

foreign countries and cultures are alleviated when people feel more secure about their economic

conditions and that, more generally and more importantly, perceived economic circumstances of

people have an impact on feelings as strong as anti-Semitism and racism.




                                                36
                      Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of Outcome Variables

Variable                Details                                            Years               Std.
                                                                                       Mean              N
                                                                          available            Dev.
Foreigners Should       ―Foreigners living in Germany should             1996, 2000,
Marry Their Own         choose to marry people of their own              2002, 2006,   0.180   0.384   13,146
                        nationality.‖                                       2010
No Politics for         ―Foreigners living in Germany should be          1996, 2000,
Foreigners              prohibited from taking part in any kind of       2002, 2006,   0.283   0.450   13,102
                        political activity‖                                 2010
No equal rights for     ―Jewish people living in Germany should not
Jews                    have the same rights as Germans in every         1996, 2006    0.224   0.417    5,905
                        respect.‖
No equal rights for     ―Ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe living
Aussiedler              in Germany should not have the same rights       1996, 2006    0.282   0.450    6,100
                        as Germans in every respect.‖
No equal rights for     ―Turkish people living in Germany should
Turks                   not have the same rights as Germans in every     1996, 2006    0.450   0.498    6,090
                        respect.‖
No equal rights for     ―Italians living in Germany should not have
Italians                the same rights as Germans in every              1996, 2006    0.261   0.439    6,096
                        respect.‖
Unpleasant Neighbor     ―It would be unpleasant to have a Jewish
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.122   0.327    6,024
– Jewish                person as a neighbor‖
Unpleasant Neighbor     ―It would be unpleasant to have an ethnic
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.227   0.419    6,134
– Aussiedler            German from Eastern Europe as a neighbor‖
Unpleasant Neighbor     ―It would be unpleasant to have a Turkish
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.393   0.488    6,141
– Turkish               person as a neighbor‖
Unpleasant Neighbor     ―It would be unpleasant to have an Italian
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.074   0.261    6,141
– Italian               person as a neighbor‖
Unpleasant Marriage     ―It would be unpleasant if a Jewish person
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.258   0.437    5,985
– Jewish                married into my family‖
Unpleasant Marriage     ―It would be unpleasant if an ethnic German
– Aussiedler            from Eastern Europe married into my              1996, 2006    0.307   0.461    6,107
                        family‖
Unpleasant Marriage     ―It would be unpleasant if a Turkish person
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.554   0.497    6,111
– Turkish               married into my family‖
Unpleasant Marriage     ―It would be unpleasant if an Italian person
                                                                         1996, 2006    0.176   0.381    6,120
– Italian               married into my family‖
                                                                       … Table continued on the following page



                                                  37
                                            Table 1 (concluded)

Intense Dislike of       Individual thinks that foreigners should
Foreigners               choose to marry people of their own              1996, 2000,
                         nationality and that any kind of political       2002, 2006,   0.105   0.306   13,029
                         participation for foreigners should be              2010
                         prohibited
Intense Dislike of       Individual thinks any kind of political
Equal Rights             participation for foreigners should be
                         prohibited, and that neither Jews, Turks,        1996, 2006    0.064   0.245   5,864
                         Italians, or Aussiedler should have the same
                         rights as Germans
Intense Dislike of       Individual thinks that foreigners should
Intermarriage            choose to marry people of their own
                         nationality and that a Jew, Turk, Italian, or    1996, 2006    0.050   0.217   5,954
                         Aussiedler marrying into their family would
                         be unpleasant.
See the text for detailed description of the variables and their measurement.




                                                    38
 Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of Demographic Variables and Local Area Characteristics

   Variable               Details                                                         Std.
                                                                                Mean                 N
                                                                                          Dev.
Age                       Age of the respondent                                 48.743   17.103    13,146
Married                   Dummy variable (Married = 1)                          0.604     0.489    13,146
Female                    Gender dummy variable. Female = 1                     0.511     0.500    13,146
Education                 Highest level of schooling attained
   Minor                  No formal education beyond basic secondary school     0.180     0.384    13,146
   Vocational             Completed apprenticeship                              0.478     0.500    13,146
   Advanced Technical     Degree from advance trade or technical school         0.182     0.386    13,146
   College Degree         Individual has a degree from a research university
                          or a university of applied science                    0.161     0.367    13,146
Religion
   Protestant                                                                   0.363     0.481    13,146
   Catholic                                                                     0.280     0.449    13,146
   No Religion/Other
   Religion                                                                     0.357     0.479    13,146
Working                   Dummy variable (=1 if currently working)              0.563     0.496    13,146
Household Income          Real net monthly household income (1000s)             2.170     1.385    10,573
Personal Economic         Answer to the question: ―How would you generally
Conditions                rate your own current economic situation?‖
   Good                                                                         0.490     0.500    13,146
   Neutral                                                                      0.377     0.485    13,146
   Bad                                                                          0.132     0.339    13,146
National Economic         Answer to the question: ―How would you generally
Conditions                rate the current economic situation in Germany?‖
   Good                                                                         0.188     0.391    13,110
   Neutral                                                                      0.499     0.500    13,110
   Bad                                                                          0.313     0.464    13,110
Contact with Foreigners   Individual has personal contact with foreigners…
   At Work                                                                      0.382     0.486    12,834
   In their own family                                                          0.199     0.399    12,830
                                                                   … Table continued on the following page




                                                  39
                                                Table 2 (concluded)
City Size                      The size of the city where the respondent lives.
   0-49,999                                                                              0.381     0.486     13,146
   50,000-99,999                                                                         0.087     0.281     13,146
   100,000-499,999                                                                       0.227     0.419     13,146
   500,000+                                                                              0.305     0.460     13,146
Inner City                     Dummy (=1 if the respondent live in the inner city,       0.381     0.486     13,146
                                                =0 if suburb)
Type of worker                 Worker classification of the individual
   Non-worker                  The person is retired, homemaker, a student, etc.         0.472      0.499     12,723
   Self-employed farmer                                                                  0.005      0.072     12,723
   Self-employed Professional                                                            0.009      0.095     12,723
   Other self-employed                                                                   0.050      0.217     12,723
   Civil Servant or military                                                             0.035      0.183     12,723
   Employee                                                                              0.265      0.441     12,723
   Laborer                                                                               0.149      0.356     12,723
   In Training                                                                           0.016      0.124     12,723
State Age Group                Share of the state‘s population in the age group as a
                               proportion of a state‘s total population.
   0-6 years                                                                             5.279      1.018     10,375
   6-18                                                                                  12.815     1.727     10,375
   18-25                                                                                 8.184      0.680     10,375
   25-30                                                                                 6.352      1.009     10,375
   30-50                                                                                 30.838     1.076     10,375
   50-65                                                                                 18.941     0.852     10,375
   65 plus                                                                               17.594     2.142     10,375
Percent Foreign                Percent of foreigners in state population.                7.574      4.247     10,375
Nazi State                     State-Level indicator for whether the Nazi party          0.518      0.500     13,146
                               earned more than the national median percent of
                               votes in the 1928 elections
GDP per capita                 State-level GDP per capita                                23.916     5.752     10,375

Notes: Respondents were asked to evaluate their personal economic condition and the national economic conditions using
a five point scale. We have combined the categories ―Good‖ and ―Very Good‖, as well as ―Bad‖ and ―Very Bad‖. State
level variables are taken from ―Indikatoren und Karten zur Raum- und Stadtentwicklung (INKAR 2011)‖ from the Federal
Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs, and Spatial Development.




                                                       40
           Table 3A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                                    Foreigners regarding their Rights
                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
                             Foreigners living in Germany           Jewish people         Ethnic         Turkish people     Italians living
                                        Should…                        living in      Germans from          living in        in Germany
                               …marry            …not be               Germany            Eastern           Germany           should not
                             only people        allowed to            should not      Europe living        should not       have the same
                                                                    have the same      in Germany        have the same         rights as
                             of their own      take part in            rights as        should not          rights as          Germans
                              nationality     any political            Germans        have the same         Germans
                                                  activity                               rights as
                                                                                         Germans
Good Personal                 -0.0272***          -0.0374***         -0.0507***         -0.0332***         -0.0680***         -0.0287**
Economic Conditions            (0.0071)            (0.0069)           (0.0129)           (0.0125)           (0.0140)          (0.0135)
Bad Personal                   0.0242**            0.0459***          0.0634***          0.0644***          0.0463**           0.0481**
Economic Conditions            (0.0119)            (0.0101)           (0.0194)           (0.0243)           (0.0215)          (0.0238)
Age                             0.0025*            0.0048***            0.0019           0.0048**            0.0011             0.0006
                               (0.0014)            (0.0014)           (0.0020)           (0.0023)           (0.0024)          (0.0022)
Age-squared                     0.0000              -0.0000            -0.0000           -0.0000*            0.0000             0.0000
                               (0.0000)            (0.0000)           (0.0000)           (0.0000)           (0.0000)          (0.0000)
Married                         -0.0003             0.0256**           0.0043            -0.0047             0.0283             0.0070
                               (0.0080)            (0.0109)           (0.0141)           (0.0159)           (0.0181)           (0.0139)
Female                           0.0018             -0.0053          -0.0313***           0.0023           -0.0246**          -0.0284***
                               (0.0051)            (0.0070)           (0.0101)           (0.0123)           (0.0104)           (0.0103)
Catholic                        -0.0001              0.0017            0.0174             0.0002             0.0307*            0.0006
                               (0.0094)            (0.0126)           (0.0160)           (0.0156)           (0.0156)           (0.0171)
No Religion/                   -0.0150*            -0.0220*          -0.0334**           -0.0254           -0.0413**          -0.0360**
Other Religion                 (0.0080)            (0.0112)           (0.0144)           (0.0170)           (0.0194)           (0.0176)
Education:                    -0.0806***            -0.0127           -0.0233             0.0013            -0.0283            -0.0152
Vocational                     (0.0099)            (0.0121)           (0.0151)           (0.0204)           (0.0178)           (0.0163)
Education:                    -0.1372***          -0.0729***         -0.0496***          -0.0119            -0.0357            -0.0141
Adv. Technical                 (0.0118)            (0.0161)           (0.0182)           (0.0230)           (0.0221)           (0.0233)
Education:                    -0.1782***          -0.1640***         -0.1099***         -0.0897***         -0.1013***         -0.0593***
College                        (0.0132)            (0.0139)           (0.0213)           (0.0242)           (0.0229)           (0.0225)
Currently                      -0.0180**           -0.0212**           0.0144             0.0065            -0.0111             0.0039
Working                        (0.0082)            (0.0096)           (0.0148)           (0.0154)           (0.0177)           (0.0152)
City Size:                      -0.0059              0.0055           -0.0446*          -0.0601**           -0.0497*           -0.0456*
50,000-99,999                  (0.0128)            (0.0154)           (0.0236)           (0.0255)           (0.0257)           (0.0266)
City Size:                     -0.0296**           -0.0273**          -0.0188             0.0208            -0.0313            -0.0255
100,000-499,999                (0.0115)            (0.0126)           (0.0263)           (0.0286)           (0.0286)           (0.0244)
City Size:                     -0.0344**            -0.0137           -0.0259            -0.0098           -0.0464**           -0.0322
500,000+                       (0.0134)            (0.0158)           (0.0252)           (0.0247)           (0.0202)           (0.0232)
Inner City                       0.0015             -0.0101          -0.0440**           -0.0159            -0.0103            -0.0280*
                               (0.0115)            (0.0144)           (0.0217)           (0.0205)           (0.0221)           (0.0142)
Observations                     13,146              13,102             5,905              6,100              6,090              6,096
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights, and also include state dummies and year dummies.


                                                                    41
           Table 3B: The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                               Foreigners regarding Marriage and Family
                                (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)                   (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
                            It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who                     It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                                    is                                                       into the family
                                            Ethnic                                                         Ethnic
                                           German                                                        German
                              Jewish         from          Turkish      Italian              Jewish         from        Turkish       Italian
                                            Eastern                                                      Eastern
                                            Europe                                                        Europe
Good Personal             -0.0339*** -0.0543*** -0.0500*** -0.0170**                        -0.0230* -0.0417*** -0.0254* -0.0281***
Economic Conditions         (0.0088)     (0.0139)        (0.0140)     (0.0077)              (0.0131)     (0.0126)       (0.0142)    (0.0101)
                                    *
Bad Personal                 0.0258       -0.0125         0.0183       -0.0022                0.0183       0.0213        -0.0119     0.0264*
Economic Conditions         (0.0137)     (0.0196)        (0.0234)     (0.0107)              (0.0189)     (0.0188)       (0.0213)    (0.0152)
Age                          0.0010      0.0043**         -0.0020      0.0018               0.0080  ***
                                                                                                        0.0068   ***
                                                                                                                         0.0048 *
                                                                                                                                     0.0021
                            (0.0017)     (0.0019)        (0.0025)     (0.0014)              (0.0023)     (0.0021)       (0.0028)    (0.0017)
Age-squared                  0.0000      -0.0000*        0.0001**      -0.0000              -0.0000*     -0.0000*        0.0000      0.0000
                            (0.0000)     (0.0000)        (0.0000)     (0.0000)              (0.0000)     (0.0000)       (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Married                      0.0057     -0.0248**         0.0170       -0.0085               0.0218*       0.0138       0.0438***   0.0245**
                            (0.0116)     (0.0120)        (0.0157)     (0.0072)              (0.0128)     (0.0151)       (0.0145)    (0.0122)
Female                    -0.0256*** -0.0246**           -0.0218* -0.0176***               -0.0301  ***
                                                                                                          -0.0221      -0.0372 ***
                                                                                                                                   -0.0409***
                            (0.0078)     (0.0106)        (0.0121)     (0.0066)              (0.0105)     (0.0141)       (0.0121)    (0.0092)
                                                                  *                                                             *
Catholic                     0.0038        0.0028         0.0357       0.0113                 0.0296       0.0037        0.0357      0.0172
                            (0.0146)     (0.0151)        (0.0208)     (0.0086)              (0.0243)     (0.0180)       (0.0191)    (0.0145)
No Religion/                 0.0067        0.0082         -0.0106      0.0028                -0.0124      -0.0174      -0.0714***    -0.0162
Other Religion              (0.0121)     (0.0139)        (0.0162)     (0.0083)              (0.0162)     (0.0182)       (0.0190)    (0.0118)
                                    **                            **
Education:                 -0.0281         0.0003       -0.0425      -0.0390***            -0.0686  ***
                                                                                                          -0.0028       -0.0371 *
                                                                                                                                   -0.0615***
Vocational                  (0.0134)     (0.0147)        (0.0206)     (0.0130)              (0.0167)     (0.0196)       (0.0198)    (0.0168)
                                    **                           ***
Education:                 -0.0483        -0.0300      -0.0803       -0.0514***            -0.1202  ***
                                                                                                        -0.0548   **
                                                                                                                       -0.0759 ***
                                                                                                                                   -0.0996***
Adv. Technical              (0.0189)     (0.0184)        (0.0219)     (0.0121)              (0.0236)     (0.0235)       (0.0227)    (0.0182)
Education:                -0.0818***    -0.0496**    -0.1350***    -0.0541***              -0.1701***       -0.1298***        -0.1653***   -0.1429***
College                    (0.0167)      (0.0231)     (0.0272)      (0.0147)                (0.0206)         (0.0236)          (0.0247)     (0.0214)
Currently                  -0.0105       0.0061        -0.0075          -0.0027              0.0058            0.0022           0.0091       -0.0096
Working                    (0.0100)     (0.0158)      (0.0156)         (0.0089)            (0.0155)          (0.0134)          (0.0166)     (0.0092)
City Size:                 -0.0113      -0.0410*       -0.0095          -0.0207             -0.0197           -0.0382           -0.0154      -0.0108
50,000-99,999              (0.0156)     (0.0220)      (0.0244)         (0.0170)            (0.0201)          (0.0316)          (0.0229)     (0.0152)
City Size:                 -0.0087       0.0046       -0.0582**        -0.0225**            -0.0064           0.0027          -0.0427**      -0.0061
100,000-499,999            (0.0143)     (0.0237)       (0.0224)         (0.0101)           (0.0197)          (0.0274)          (0.0189)     (0.0150)
City Size:                 -0.0028      -0.0053       -0.0395*          -0.0104            -0.0396**          -0.0332         -0.0511***    -0.0378**
500,000+                   (0.0147)     (0.0216)      (0.0214)         (0.0111)            (0.0190)          (0.0249)          (0.0183)     (0.0163)
Inner City                 -0.0210       0.0054        0.0088           0.0048             -0.0316*           -0.0038           -0.0080      -0.0072
                           (0.0160)     (0.0190)      (0.0153)         (0.0075)            (0.0180)          (0.0213)          (0.0204)     (0.0122)
Observations                6,024         6,134         6,141            6,141               5,985             6,107             6,111        6,120
                                                                                   *              **               ***
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses,           p < 0.1,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights, and also include state dummies and year dummies.



                                                                  42
           Table 4A. The Impact of Perceived National Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                                    Foreigners regarding their Rights
                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)                   (5)                    (6)
                            Foreigners living in Germany         Jewish people         Ethnic            Turkish people         Italians living
                                      Should…                       living in      Germans from             living in            in Germany
                            …marry only         …not be             Germany            Eastern              Germany               should not
                              people of        allowed to          should not      Europe living           should not           have the same
                                                                 have the same      in Germany           have the same             rights as
                             their own        take part in          rights as        should not             rights as              Germans
                             nationality     any political          Germans        have the same            Germans
                                                 activity                             rights as
                                                                                      Germans
Good National                   -0.0107          -0.0201**           0.0231           -0.0208                0.0137                 0.0081
Economic Conditions            (0.0079)          (0.0095)          (0.0176)          (0.0184)               (0.0211)              (0.0171)
Bad National                   0.0361***         0.0628***         0.0661***         0.0782***              0.0804***             0.0590***
Economic Conditions            (0.0069)          (0.0093)          (0.0113)          (0.0121)               (0.0113)              (0.0126)
Age                            0.0030**          0.0054***           0.0028           0.0054**               0.0024                 0.0013
                               (0.0014)          (0.0014)          (0.0020)          (0.0023)               (0.0023)              (0.0021)
Age-squared                      0.0000           -0.0000           -0.0000          -0.0000**               0.0000                -0.0000
                               (0.0000)          (0.0000)          (0.0000)          (0.0000)               (0.0000)              (0.0000)
Married                         -0.0058           0.0198*           -0.0078           -0.0136                0.0156                -0.0000
                               (0.0079)          (0.0106)           (0.0139)          (0.0159)              (0.0179)               (0.0136)
Female                          -0.0011           -0.0102          -0.0319***         -0.0006              -0.0257**              -0.0302***
                               (0.0053)          (0.0071)           (0.0100)          (0.0124)              (0.0104)               (0.0106)
Catholic                         0.0001            0.0002            0.0158           -0.0008                0.0284*                0.0002
                               (0.0094)          (0.0123)           (0.0165)          (0.0159)              (0.0163)               (0.0171)
No Religion/                   -0.0136*          -0.0225**         -0.0325**          -0.0241              -0.0432**              -0.0371**
Other Religion                 (0.0079)          (0.0112)           (0.0146)          (0.0170)              (0.0205)               (0.0183)
Education:                    -0.0820***          -0.0151          -0.0295**          -0.0040               -0.0334*               -0.0207
Vocational                     (0.0100)          (0.0126)           (0.0148)          (0.0196)              (0.0174)               (0.0163)
Education:                    -0.1406***        -0.0765***         -0.0602***         -0.0190              -0.0481**               -0.0222
Adv. Technical                 (0.0120)          (0.0165)           (0.0179)          (0.0207)              (0.0217)               (0.0236)
Education:                    -0.1817***        -0.1679***         -0.1243***        -0.0935***            -0.1146***             -0.0665***
College                        (0.0132)          (0.0142)           (0.0217)          (0.0225)              (0.0220)               (0.0227)
Currently                     -0.0215***        -0.0265***           0.0081           -0.0004               -0.0173                -0.0020
Working                        (0.0082)          (0.0092)           (0.0150)          (0.0146)              (0.0173)               (0.0149)
City Size:                      -0.0031            0.0017           -0.0429*         -0.0561**              -0.0474*               -0.0409
50,000-99,999                  (0.0126)          (0.0154)           (0.0236)          (0.0254)              (0.0254)               (0.0269)
City Size:                     -0.0277**         -0.0283**          -0.0162            0.0241               -0.0260                -0.0245
100,000-499,999                (0.0114)          (0.0121)           (0.0265)          (0.0284)              (0.0283)               (0.0243)
City Size:                     -0.0345**          -0.0167           -0.0282           -0.0093              -0.0484**               -0.0346
500,000+                       (0.0133)          (0.0156)           (0.0256)          (0.0248)              (0.0202)               (0.0226)
Inner City                       0.0007           -0.0082          -0.0446**          -0.0171               -0.0105                -0.0274*
                               (0.0113)          (0.0141)           (0.0220)          (0.0204)              (0.0219)               (0.0142)
Observations                     13,110            13,071             5,894             6,089                 6,079                  6,084
         Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1,   **
                                                                                                        p < 0.05,   ***
                                                                                                                          p < 0.01. All
         regressions use sampling weights, and also include state dummies and year dummies.


                                                                  43
         Table 4B: The Impact of Perceived National Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                             Foreigners regarding Marriage and Family
                               (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)                 (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                           It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who                   It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                                   is                                                     into the family
                                         Ethnic                                                         Ethnic
                                        German                                                        German
                             Jewish       from          Turkish        Italian             Jewish        from        Turkish      Italian
                                        Eastern                                                        Eastern
                                        Europe                                                         Europe
Good National                0.0054    -0.0247*         -0.0430*      -0.0069              0.0095      -0.0272      -0.0412**    -0.0122
Economic Conditions         (0.0150)   (0.0147)         (0.0221)     (0.0099)            (0.0195)     (0.0176)      (0.0177)    (0.0141)
                                   ***         ***              ***
Bad National               0.0473      0.0565          0.0522         0.0128*            0.0455  ***
                                                                                                     0.0635   ***
                                                                                                                    0.0516 ***
                                                                                                                                0.0264**
Economic Conditions         (0.0097)   (0.0110)         (0.0124)     (0.0069)            (0.0138)     (0.0117)      (0.0142)    (0.0102)
                                               ***                                               ***          ***           *
Age                          0.0016    0.0046            -0.0011       0.0017            0.0085      0.0073          0.0050      0.0026*
                            (0.0018)   (0.0017)         (0.0025)     (0.0014)            (0.0022)     (0.0021)      (0.0028)    (0.0016)
Age-squared                  -0.0000   -0.0000**         0.0000*      -0.0000            -0.0000  **
                                                                                                     -0.0000   **
                                                                                                                     0.0000       0.0000
                            (0.0000)   (0.0000)         (0.0000)     (0.0000)            (0.0000)     (0.0000)      (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Married                      -0.0009   -0.0274**          0.0089      -0.0093              0.0167       0.0092      0.0417***    0.0192*
                            (0.0114)   (0.0120)         (0.0151)     (0.0071)            (0.0121)     (0.0142)      (0.0140)    (0.0115)
Female                    -0.0270*** -0.0270** -0.0240** -0.0176***                     -0.0302  ***
                                                                                                      -0.0252   *
                                                                                                                   -0.0383 ***
                                                                                                                               -0.0413***
                            (0.0080)   (0.0108)         (0.0119)     (0.0067)            (0.0107)     (0.0140)      (0.0121)    (0.0094)
                                                                 *                                                          *
Catholic                     0.0027      0.0039          0.0361        0.0117              0.0272       0.0052       0.0357       0.0171
                            (0.0148)   (0.0154)         (0.0210)     (0.0086)            (0.0239)     (0.0176)      (0.0190)    (0.0143)
No Religion/                 0.0064      0.0093          -0.0105       0.0028             -0.0126      -0.0156     -0.0710***    -0.0163
Other Religion              (0.0123)   (0.0140)         (0.0166)     (0.0082)            (0.0164)     (0.0181)      (0.0190)    (0.0116)
                                    **                           **
Education:                 -0.0304      -0.0014        -0.0457      -0.0403***          -0.0698  ***
                                                                                                       -0.0057      -0.0386  *
                                                                                                                               -0.0649***
Vocational                  (0.0133)   (0.0148)         (0.0207)     (0.0132)            (0.0170)     (0.0202)      (0.0200)    (0.0168)
                                   ***           *              ***
Education:                -0.0535      -0.0346        -0.0905       -0.0539***          -0.1241  ***
                                                                                                     -0.0608   **
                                                                                                                   -0.0818 ***
                                                                                                                               -0.1088***
Adv. Technical              (0.0192)   (0.0181)         (0.0228)     (0.0126)            (0.0242)     (0.0248)      (0.0226)    (0.0188)
Education:                -0.0870***    -0.0513**    -0.1396***    -0.0564***           -0.1716***        -0.1319***        -0.1600***   -0.1504***
College                    (0.0167)     (0.0233)      (0.0275)      (0.0150)             (0.0222)          (0.0245)          (0.0252)     (0.0216)
Currently                   -0.0127      0.0048        -0.0105       -0.0022               0.0041           -0.0020            0.0099      -0.0135
Working                    (0.0099)     (0.0155)      (0.0158)      (0.0088)             (0.0152)          (0.0128)          (0.0176)     (0.0091)
City Size:                  -0.0105     -0.0401*       -0.0093       -0.0208              -0.0175           -0.0364           -0.0137      -0.0091
50,000-99,999              (0.0156)     (0.0222)      (0.0248)      (0.0172)             (0.0201)          (0.0322)          (0.0235)     (0.0156)
City Size:                  -0.0048      0.0101      -0.0535**     -0.0219**              -0.0019           0.0062          -0.0379**      -0.0043
100,000-499,999            (0.0148)     (0.0229)      (0.0218)      (0.0102)             (0.0199)          (0.0261)         (0.0186)      (0.0154)
City Size:                  -0.0033      -0.0042      -0.0398*       -0.0107             -0.0388**          -0.0323         -0.0493***    -0.0392**
500,000+                   (0.0146)     (0.0218)      (0.0208)      (0.0113)             (0.0191)          (0.0245)          (0.0186)      (0.0159)
Inner City                  -0.0219       0.0045       0.0079         0.0048             -0.0333*           -0.0047           -0.0101       -0.0075
                           (0.0161)     (0.0188)      (0.0150)      (0.0075)              (0.0179)         (0.0210)          (0.0201)      (0.0123)
Observations                 6,012         6,123        6,130          6,129               5,973             6,095             6,099         6,106
                                                                                 *              **               ***
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses,         p < 0.1,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights, and also include state dummies and year dummies.



                                                              44
           Table 5A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
           Foreigners regarding their Rights: Models with Contact variables and Nazi States in 1928
                                   (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)
                              Foreigners living in Germany            Jewish            Ethnic            Turkish       Italians living
                                         Should…                  people living     Germans from           people        in Germany
                                …marry           …not be           in Germany       Eastern Europe        living in        should not
                              only people       allowed to          should not         living in          Germany           have the
                              of their own     take part in          have the          Germany           should not       same rights
                               nationality    any political        same rights        should not          have the       as Germans
                                                  activity         as Germans       have the same       same rights
                                                                                       rights as        as Germans
                                                                                       Germans
                                                                           Panel A
                                        ***               ***                ***
Good Personal                 -0.0272            -0.0374           -0.0507        -0.0332***            -0.0680***        -0.0287**
Economic Conditions            (0.0071)           (0.0069)          (0.0129)       (0.0125)              (0.0140)          (0.0135)
Bad Personal                   0.0242**           0.0459***        0.0634 ***
                                                                                   0.0644***             0.0463**          0.0481**
Economic Conditions            (0.0119)           (0.0101)          (0.0194)       (0.0243)              (0.0215)          (0.0238)
Observations                    13,146             13,102              5,905         6,100                 6,090            6,096
                                                                           Panel B
Good Personal                 -0.0241***         -0.0347***        -0.0462***     -0.0312**             -0.0654***         -0.0239*
Economic Conditions            (0.0070)           (0.0071)          (0.0137)       (0.0130)              (0.0150)          (0.0137)
Bad Personal                   0.0274**           0.0467***        0.0645 ***
                                                                                   0.0641**              0.0421**          0.0489**
Economic Conditions            (0.0118)           (0.0111)          (0.0195)       (0.0244)              (0.0207)          (0.0245)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0311***         -0.0565***        -0.0294**         -0.0196            -0.0454***          -0.0185
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0080)           (0.0083)          (0.0116)        (0.0137)             (0.0150)          (0.0146)
Observations                    12,834             12,796            5,764             5,946               5,936             5,942
                                                                            Panel C
Good Personal                 -0.0226***         -0.0375***        -0.0468***       -0.0318**           -0.0648***         -0.0241*
Economic Conditions            (0.0078)           (0.0089)          (0.0136)        (0.0130)             (0.0151)          (0.0136)
Bad Personal                   0.0297**           0.0467***        0.0623 ***
                                                                                    0.0647***            0.0421**           0.0486*
Economic Conditions            (0.0128)           (0.0123)          (0.0194)        (0.0243)             (0.0209)          (0.0245)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0297***         -0.0498***        -0.0250 **
                                                                                     -0.0124             -0.0400**          -0.0148
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0089)           (0.0095)          (0.0122)        (0.0149)             (0.0162)          (0.0150)
Foreign Contact in            -0.0511***         -0.0497***        -0.0472 ***
                                                                                   -0.0894***           -0.0645***        -0.0483***
WorkWork
Family                         (0.0097)           (0.0152)          (0.0165)        (0.0161)             (0.0172)          (0.0140)
                                                                          ***
Nazi State in 1928              -0.0091            -0.0017         0.0673             0.0217              0.0400           0.0497**
                               (0.0113)           (0.0151)          (0.0210)        (0.0268)             (0.0347)          (0.0240)
Observations                    10,375              10,346           5,760             5,942               5,932             5,938
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but it controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population.




                                                                  45
        Table 5B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
       Foreigners Regarding Marriage and Family: Models with Contact variables and Nazi States
                                              in 1928
                               (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)                         (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
                           It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who              It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                                is                                                 into the family
                                         Ethnic
                                                                                             Ethnic
                                        German
                                                                                             German
                              Jewish      from      Turkish    Italian             Jewish                    Turkish         Italian
                                                                                          from Eastern
                                        Eastern
                                                                                             Europe
                                        Europe
                                                                Panel A
                                    ***          ***          ***           **
Good Personal              -0.0339 -0.0543 -0.0500 -0.0170           -0.0230* -0.0417***                      -0.0254* -0.0281***
Econ Conditions             (0.0088) (0.0139) (0.0140) (0.0077)      (0.0131) (0.0126)                        (0.0142) (0.0101)
                                    *
Bad Personal                 0.0258   -0.0125 0.0183 -0.0022          0.0183    0.0213                         -0.0119 0.0264*
Econ Conditions             (0.0137) (0.0196) (0.0234) (0.0107)      (0.0189) (0.0188)                        (0.0213) (0.0152)
Observations                  6,024        6,134       6,141        6,141    5,985                6,107         6,111        6,120
                                                                      Panel B
Good Personal              -0.0349*** -0.0528*** -0.0520*** -0.0162**      -0.0224*             -0.0444***    -0.0280*     -0.0311***
Econ Conditions             (0.0089) (0.0140) (0.0142) (0.0074)            (0.0133)              (0.0127)     (0.0149)      (0.0104)
                                    *
Bad Personal                 0.0256    -0.0148 0.0157 -0.0014               0.0168                0.0187       -0.0154       0.0246
Econ Conditions             (0.0139) (0.0198) (0.0236) (0.0113)            (0.0188)              (0.0193)     (0.0213)      (0.0159)
Foreign Contact at         -0.0280*** -0.0296** -0.0611*** -0.0216***     -0.0561***            -0.0374**    -0.0722***    -0.0274***
Work                        (0.0098) (0.0131) (0.0140) (0.0071)            (0.0126)              (0.0153)     (0.0127)      (0.0103)
Observations                  5,870      5,974     5,981      5,981          5,832                 5,947        5,952         5,960
                                                                      Panel C
Good Personal              -0.0349*** -0.0531*** -0.0539*** -0.0162**       -0.0217             -0.0448***    -0.0289*     -0.0313***
Econ Conditions             (0.0089) (0.0141) (0.0137) (0.0076)            (0.0134)              (0.0129)     (0.0149)      (0.0104)
                                    *
Bad Personal                 0.0251    -0.0141 0.0186 -0.0001               0.0161                 0.0206      -0.0134       0.0261
Econ Conditions             (0.0138) (0.0197) (0.0237) (0.0112)            (0.0187)              (0.0192)     (0.0214)      (0.0159)
                                    **         **       ***         ***
Foreign Contact at         -0.0247 -0.0258 -0.0552 -0.0205                -0.0519***            -0.0296**    -0.0643***    -0.0249**
Work                        (0.0098) (0.0130) (0.0146) (0.0072)            (0.0124)              (0.0149)     (0.0118)      (0.0108)
                                   ***        ***       ***         ***
Foreign Contact in         -0.0345 -0.0567 -0.0925 -0.0162                -0.0368***            -0.1156***   -0.1027***    -0.0394***
Family                      (0.0098) (0.0091) (0.0173) (0.0053)            (0.0139)              (0.0139)     (0.0161)      (0.0121)
                                   **
Nazi State in 1928          0.0299      0.0073 0.0184         0.0065        0.0322                -0.0102      -0.0021       0.0119
                            (0.0135) (0.0214) (0.0229) (0.0106)            (0.0324)              (0.0270)     (0.0351)      (0.0161)
Observations                  5,866      5,970     5,977       5,977         5,828                  5,943       5,948         5,956
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but it controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population




                                                               46
                                                Table 6
                               Intense Dislike of Others as an Outcome

                                                  (1)                       (2)                      (3)
                                            Intense Dislike         Intense Dislike of         Intense Dislike
                                             of Foreigners            Equal Rights            of Intermarriage
                                                                         Panel A
Good Personal                                  -0.0146***               -0.0247***                -0.0109**
Economic Conditions                             (0.0047)                 (0.0066)                 (0.0052)
Bad Personal                                    0.0303***                 0.0312**                 0.0242**
Economic Conditions                             (0.0108)                  (0.0142)                 (0.0095)
Observations                                     13,029                    5,864                     5954
                                                                          Panel B
Good Personal                                  -0.0130***                -0.0228***               -0.0116**
Economic Conditions                             (0.0049)                  (0.0065)                (0.0052)
Bad Personal                                    0.0330***                 0.0339**                 0.0253**
Economic Conditions                             (0.0109)                  (0.0143)                 (0.0101)
Foreign Contact at Work                        -0.0213***                  -0.0069                  -0.0074
                                                (0.0052)                  (0.0073)                 (0.0052)
Observations                                     12,725                     5,727                    5805
                                                                          Panel C
Good Personal                                  -0.0163***                -0.0234***                -0.0120**
Economic Conditions                             (0.0060)                  (0.0064)                 (0.0053)
Bad Personal                                    0.0359***                 0.0338**                 0.0259**
Economic Conditions                             (0.0114)                  (0.0144)                 (0.0102)
Foreign Contact at                             -0.0185***                  -0.0031                  -0.0057
Work                                            (0.0063)                  (0.0077)                 (0.0052)
Foreign Contact in                             -0.0382***                -0.0363***               -0.0212***
Family                                          (0.0077)                  (0.0054)                 (0.0055)
Nazi State in 1928                               -0.0014                   0.0082                   -0.0031
                                                (0.0095)                  (0.0107)                 (0.0124)
Observations                                      10,291                    5,723                    5801
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
All regressions use sampling weights. Intense Dislike of Foreigners is a dummy variable that is equal to one if
the individual thinks that foreigners should choose to marry people of their own nationality and that any kind
of political participation for foreigners should be prohibited. Intense Dislike of Intermarriage is a dummy
variable equal to one if the individual thinks that foreigners should choose to marry people of their own
nationality and that a Jew, Turk, Italian, or Aussiedler marrying into their family would be unpleasant, and
zero otherwise. Intense Dislike of Equal Rights is a dummy variable that is equal to one if the individual
thinks any kind of political participation for foreigners should be prohibited, and that neither Jews, Turks,
Italians, or Aussiedler should have the same rights as Germans, and zero otherwise. Control variables in
Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A and also include state dummies and year dummies. Panel C does not
include state dummies, but it controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per
capita, and percent of foreigners in the state population.



                                                        47
            Table 7A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                         Foreigners regarding their Rights: Excluding Strong Racists
                                   (1)              (2)                  (3)               (4)                 (5)              (6)
                              Foreigners living in Germany             Jewish            Ethnic             Turkish       Italians living
                                         Should…                   people living     Germans from            people        in Germany
                                …marry           …not be            in Germany       Eastern Europe         living in        should not
                              only people       allowed to           should not         living in           Germany           have the
                              of their own     take part in           have the          Germany            should not       same rights
                               nationality    any political         same rights        should not           have the       as Germans
                                                  activity          as Germans       have the same        same rights
                                                                                        rights as         as Germans
                                                                                        Germans
                                                                                Panel A
                                          **                **                  **
Good Personal                  -0.0210            -0.0312            -0.0296               -0.0094        -0.0509***         -0.0097
Economic Conditions             (0.0094)          (0.0136)            (0.0118)            (0.0124)         (0.0138)         (0.0125)
Bad Personal                     0.0011            0.0115             0.0422**             0.0426*          0.0353           0.0355
Economic Conditions             (0.0140)          (0.0160)            (0.0180)            (0.0221)         (0.0243)         (0.0232)
Observations                      5,186             5,186               5,186              5,186             5,186            5,186
                                                                                Panel B
Good Personal                  -0.0194**          -0.0304**          -0.0264**             -0.0072        -0.0494***         -0.0055
Economic Conditions             (0.0096)          (0.0145)            (0.0123)            (0.0122)         (0.0145)         (0.0127)
Bad Personal                     0.0037            0.0067             0.0409**             0.0437*          0.0338           0.0357
Economic Conditions             (0.0141)          (0.0181)            (0.0188)            (0.0223)         (0.0229)         (0.0239)
Foreign Contact at              -0.0228*         -0.0476***          -0.0271**          -0.0217           -0.0448***         -0.0152
WorkWork
Work                            (0.0116)          (0.0119)            (0.0106)         (0.0159)            (0.0154)         (0.0173)
Observations                      5,067             5,067               5,067             5,067              5,067            5,067
                                                                               Panel C
Good Personal                  -0.0210**          -0.0297**          -0.0267**          -0.0082           -0.0484***         -0.0054
Economic Conditions             (0.0095)          (0.0148)            (0.0122)         (0.0123)            (0.0146)         (0.0127)
                                                                              **
Bad Personal                     0.0044             0.0059            0.0393            0.0439*             0.0354           0.0358
Economic Conditions             (0.0141)          (0.0183)            (0.0187)         (0.0223)            (0.0230)         (0.0238)
Foreign Contact at              -0.0222*         -0.0450***          -0.0248  **
                                                                                        -0.0171            -0.0403**         -0.0143
WorkWork
Work                            (0.0115)          (0.0115)            (0.0111)         (0.0169)            (0.0164)         (0.0174)
Foreign Contact in               -0.0151           -0.0256             -0.0186        -0.0590***          -0.0527***         -0.0192
WorkWork
Family                          (0.0123)          (0.0181)            (0.0153)         (0.0155)            (0.0180)         (0.0136)
                                                                             ***
Nazi State in 1928               0.0038             0.0165           0.0663              0.0213             0.0378          0.0477**
                                (0.0169)          (0.0249)            (0.0193)         (0.0249)            (0.0358)         (0.0231)
Observations                      5,063              5,063              5,063             5,063              5,063            5,063
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Regressions exclude individuals for whom Intense Dislike of Intermarriage = 1 or Intense Dislike of Equal Rights =
1. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies. Panel C does not
include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and percent of foreigners
in the state population.




                                                                   48
         Table 7B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                 Foreigners Regarding Marriage and Family: Excluding Strong Racists
                               (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)                          (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
                           It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who               It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                                is                                                  into the family
                                         Ethnic
                                                                                              Ethnic
                                        German
                                                                                              German
                              Jewish      from      Turkish    Italian              Jewish                     Turkish         Italian
                                                                                           from Eastern
                                        Eastern
                                                                                              Europe
                                        Europe
                                                                              Panel A
Good Personal              -0.0345*** -0.0500*** -0.0341***        -0.0134*         -0.0152 -0.0313** -0.0195                 -0.0136
Econ Conditions             (0.0088) (0.0132) (0.0125)             (0.0078)        (0.0124) (0.0134) (0.0153)                (0.0099)
Bad Personal                 0.0202 -0.0202 0.0218                  -0.0138         -0.0071  0.0061   -0.0231                 0.0032
Econ Conditions             (0.0128) (0.0174) (0.0235)             (0.0104)        (0.0169) (0.0182) (0.0217)                (0.0136)
Observations                  5,158        5,173        5,179        5,177          5,186           5,186         5,186        5,186
                                                                             Panel B
Good Personal              -0.0345*** -0.0485*** -0.0354***        -0.0136*        -0.0141        -0.0328**      -0.0199      -0.0155
Econ Conditions             (0.0087) (0.0132) (0.0128)             (0.0077)       (0.0125)         (0.0130)     (0.0155)     (0.0101)
Bad Personal                 0.0209 -0.0220 0.0213                  -0.0137        -0.0099          0.0046       -0.0255      0.0019
Econ Conditions             (0.0131) (0.0178) (0.0235)             (0.0108)       (0.0171)         (0.0184)     (0.0215)     (0.0139)
Foreign Contact at         -0.0252*** -0.0130 -0.0444***            -0.0075      -0.0553***         -0.0262    -0.0736***     -0.0132
Work                        (0.0086) (0.0120) (0.0155)             (0.0060)       (0.0137)         (0.0167)     (0.0141)     (0.0106)
Observations                  5,039     5,055      5,060              5,058         5,067            5,067        5,067        5,067
                                                                             Panel C
Good Personal              -0.0341*** -0.0488*** -0.0379***         -0.0137*       -0.0135       -0.0333**       -0.0213      -0.0155
Econ Conditions             (0.0086) (0.0135) (0.0124)              (0.0078)      (0.0125)        (0.0131)      (0.0154)     (0.0100)
Bad Personal                 0.0197 -0.0218 0.0246                   -0.0131       -0.0106         0.0048        -0.0226      0.0027
Econ Conditions             (0.0129) (0.0178) (0.0234)              (0.0107)      (0.0169)        (0.0182)      (0.0215)     (0.0141)
Foreign Contact at         -0.0230** -0.0103 -0.0390**               -0.0066     -0.0520***        -0.0189     -0.0656***     -0.0120
Work                        (0.0089) (0.0120) (0.0156)              (0.0061)      (0.0135)        (0.0164)      (0.0137)     (0.0113)
Foreign Contact in          -0.0191* -0.0406*** -0.0820***          -0.0103 *
                                                                                   -0.0207       -0.0994***    -0.1016***     -0.0154
Family                      (0.0100) (0.0097) (0.0166)              (0.0056)      (0.0128)        (0.0126)      (0.0167)     (0.0116)
Nazi State in 1928         0.0424*** 0.0146 0.0252                   0.0083        0.0393          -0.0198       -0.0032      0.0125
                            (0.0156) (0.0236) (0.0248)              (0.0094)      (0.0304)        (0.0261)      (0.0372)     (0.0160)
Observations                  5,035     5,051      5,056              5,054         5,063           5,063         5,063        5,063
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Regressions exclude individuals for whom Intense Dislike of Intermarriage = 1 or Intense Dislike of Equal Rights =
1. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies. Panel C does not
include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and percent of foreigners
in the state population.




                                                                49
             Table 8A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                    Foreigners regarding their Rights: Detailed Employment Classifications
                                   (1)               (2)                    (3)               (4)                 (5)                (6)
                              Foreigners living in Germany           Jewish people          Ethnic         Turkish people     Italians living
                                        Should…                         living in       Germans from          living in        in Germany
                              …marry only         …not be               Germany             Eastern           Germany           should not
                               people of         allowed to            should not       Europe living        should not       have the same
                                                                     have the same       in Germany        have the same         rights as
                               their own        take part in            rights as         should not          rights as          Germans
                               nationality     any political            Germans         have the same         Germans
                                                   activity                                rights as
                                                                                           Germans
Good Personal                   -0.0205***         -0.0282***         -0.0443***          -0.0283**         -0.0629***           -0.0214
Economic Conditions              (0.0072)           (0.0070)           (0.0133)            (0.0133)          (0.0149)           (0.0135)
Bad Personal                     0.0287**           0.0460***          0.0626***          0.0636**           0.0429**           0.0488**
Economic Conditions              (0.0120)           (0.0106)           (0.0201)           (0.0246)           (0.0198)           (0.0238)
Self-employed                     0.0148            0.1630**            0.1987*            0.1040            0.2115***           0.1963*
Farmer                           (0.0471)           (0.0785)           (0.1006)           (0.0915)           (0.0702)           (0.1034)
Self-employed                   -0.0426***         -0.0975***           -0.0544            -0.0553            -0.0708            -0.0381
Professional                     (0.0148)           (0.0294)           (0.0434)           (0.0601)           (0.0746)           (0.0685)
Other                             -0.0218            0.0037             0.0139             -0.0056            -0.0155            -0.0015
Self-employed                    (0.0134)           (0.0204)           (0.0224)           (0.0272)           (0.0279)           (0.0328)
Civil Servant                   -0.0448***         -0.0800***           -0.0024            -0.0317            -0.0275            -0.0192
or Military                      (0.0117)           (0.0170)           (0.0323)           (0.0300)           (0.0324)           (0.0280)
Employee                          -0.0041            -0.0155            0.0266             0.0199             0.0100             0.0080
                                 (0.0087)           (0.0094)           (0.0167)           (0.0180)           (0.0181)           (0.0142)
Laborer                         0.0381***           0.0473***           0.0383*            0.0230             0.0362             0.0421*
                                (0.0132)            (0.0152)           (0.0213)           (0.0236)           (0.0224)           (0.0226)
In Training                       -0.0267            0.0267             -0.0711            -0.0736            -0.0414           -0.0871*
                                 (0.0205)           (0.0428)           (0.0461)           (0.0544)           (0.0718)           (0.0452)
Foreign Contact                 -0.0367***         -0.0589***         -0.0314***           -0.0210          -0.0499***           -0.0200
at Work                          (0.0082)           (0.0079)           (0.0108)           (0.0132)           (0.0148)           (0.0155)
Observations                      12,723             12,686                5,711            5,886              5,876              5,883
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All specifications also
include controls for the individual‘s age, gender, marital status, education, city size, and whether the individual lives in the inner city.
All regressions use sampling weights, and also include state fixed effects and year dummies.




                                                                      50
            Table 8B: The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
               Foreigners regarding Marriage and Family: Detailed Employment Classifications
                                (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)
                                                                                            It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                            It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who is
                                                                                                            into the family
                                            Ethnic                                                        Ethnic
                                           German                                                        German
                              Jewish         from          Turkish         Italian           Jewish        from        Turkish    Italian
                                            Eastern                                                       Eastern
                                            Europe                                                        Europe
Good Personal               -0.0327***    -0.0515***     -0.0528***      -0.0162**         -0.0166     -0.0438*** -0.0290* -0.0290***
Economic Conditions          (0.0088)      (0.0140)       (0.0143)       (0.0075)          (0.0131)     (0.0130)      (0.0148)   (0.0105)
Bad Personal                  0.0246*      -0.0125         0.0179          -0.0027          0.0120        0.0181        -0.0167         0.0225
Economic Conditions          (0.0141)      (0.0199)       (0.0230)         (0.0114)        (0.0183)      (0.0191)       (0.0214)       (0.0154)
Self-employed                 0.1021        0.0443         0.0916           0.0673        0.3980***       0.1044        0.1588**       0.2057***
Farmer                       (0.0661)      (0.0805)       (0.0801)         (0.0543)       (0.0792)       (0.0851)       (0.0700)       (0.0768)
Self-employed               -0.0672***      0.0036        -0.0916*          0.0164        -0.0870**       0.0119        -0.0630        -0.0241
Professional                 (0.0120)      (0.0459)       (0.0514)         (0.0322)       (0.0373)       (0.0590)       (0.0789)       (0.0411)
Other                        -0.0270        0.0207        -0.0218          -0.0010          0.0166        0.0034        -0.0313        -0.0215
Self-employed                (0.0185)      (0.0310)       (0.0357)         (0.0166)        (0.0253)      (0.0262)       (0.0298)       (0.0164)
Civil Servant               -0.0442**      -0.0023        -0.0189          -0.0005         -0.0172        0.0233         0.0597        -0.0011
or Military                 (0.0182)       (0.0294)       (0.0368)         (0.0193)        (0.0249)      (0.0338)       (0.0444)       (0.0168)
Employee                      0.0046        0.0300*       0.0446**         -0.0027          0.0052        0.0096         0.0250        -0.0163*
                             (0.0107)      (0.0179)       (0.0214)         (0.0089)        (0.0164)      (0.0150)       (0.0186)       (0.0091)
Laborer                       0.0217       -0.0087         0.0146          -0.0043         0.0529**       0.0176        0.0667***       0.0237
                             (0.0146)      (0.0198)       (0.0254)         (0.0123)        (0.0219)      (0.0194)       (0.0198)       (0.0179)
In Training                   0.0120       -0.0344         0.0326          -0.0194          0.0050        0.0519         0.1022*        0.0076
                             (0.0287)      (0.0507)       (0.0471)         (0.0191)        (0.0380)      (0.0316)       (0.0558)       (0.0439)
Foreign Contact             -0.0310***     -0.0291**     -0.0652***     -0.0202***        -0.0549***     -0.0382**     -0.0752***     -0.0278***
at Work                      (0.0093)      (0.0134)       (0.0137)       (0.0066)          (0.0127)      (0.0152)       (0.0125)       (0.0105)
Observations                  5,811          5,914          5,922           5,921           5,774          5,888          5,892          5,900
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All specifications also include
controls for the individual‘s age, gender, marital status, education, city size, and whether the individual lives in the inner city. All
regressions use sampling weights, and also include state fixed effects and year dummies.




                                                                      51
           Table 9A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                      Foreigners regarding their Rights: Excluding the Self-Employed

                                  (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)
                             Foreigners living in Germany            Jewish            Ethnic           Turkish       Italians living
                                        Should…                  people living     Germans from          people        in Germany
                               …marry           …not be           in Germany       Eastern Europe       living in        should not
                             only people       allowed to          should not         living in         Germany           have the
                             of their own     take part in          have the          Germany          should not       same rights
                              nationality    any political        same rights        should not         have the       as Germans
                                                 activity         as Germans       have the same      same rights
                                                                                      rights as       as Germans
                                                                                      Germans
                                                                          Panel A
Good Personal                 -0.0306***        -0.0371***        -0.0481***     -0.0277**             -0.0690***        -0.0274*
Economic Conditions            (0.0077)          (0.0076)          (0.0131)       (0.0131)              (0.0142)         (0.0144)
Bad Personal                   0.0239**          0.0473***        0.0635 ***
                                                                                  0.0631**              0.0492**          0.0465*
Economic Conditions            (0.0118)          (0.0115)          (0.0218)       (0.0263)              (0.0217)         (0.0236)
Observations                    12,220            12,181              5,485              5,658            5,648            5,656
                                                                              Panel B
                                       ***               ***                ***
Good Personal                 -0.0275           -0.0344           -0.0441               -0.0253*       -0.0672***         -0.0229
Economic Conditions            (0.0075)          (0.0077)          (0.0139)             (0.0136)        (0.0154)         (0.0146)
Bad Personal                   0.0275**          0.0483***        0.0642***             0.0631**        0.0446**          0.0469*
Economic Conditions            (0.0116)          (0.0122)          (0.0219)             (0.0264)        (0.0208)         (0.0244)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0319***        -0.0603***        -0.0319***       -0.0157             -0.0475***         -0.0207
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0092)          (0.0084)          (0.0118)       (0.0143)              (0.0156)         (0.0160)
Observations                    11,910            11,877            5,346            5,506                5,496            5,504
                                                                          Panel C
Good Personal                 -0.0277***        -0.0375***        -0.0455***      -0.0266*             -0.0677***         -0.0236
Economic Conditions            (0.0082)          (0.0095)          (0.0139)       (0.0136)              (0.0155)         (0.0145)
Bad Personal                  0.0329***          0.0504***        0.0628 ***
                                                                                  0.0641**              0.0452**          0.0465*
Economic Conditions            (0.0125)          (0.0138)          (0.0219)       (0.0261)              (0.0211)         (0.0245)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0304***        -0.0535***        -0.0273 **
                                                                                   -0.0085              -0.0417**         -0.0174
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0094)          (0.0093)          (0.0121)       (0.0154)              (0.0168)         (0.0167)
Foreign Contact in            -0.0536***        -0.0486***        -0.0496***     -0.0895***            -0.0669***       -0.0493***
WorkWork
Family                         (0.0103)          (0.0147)          (0.0178)       (0.0176)              (0.0190)         (0.0166)
                                                                         ***
Nazi State in 1928              -0.0089           -0.0030         0.0629            0.0238               0.0408          0.0537**
                               (0.0111)          (0.0171)          (0.0227)       (0.0275)              (0.0351)         (0.0237)
Observations                     9,623             9,598            5,343            5,503                5,493            5,501
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population.




                                                                 52
          Table 9B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes towards
                 Foreigners Regarding Marriage and Family: Excluding the Self-Employed

                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)                        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
                           It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who             It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                                 is                                               into the family
                                         Ethnic
                                                                                            Ethnic
                                         German
                                                                                            German
                              Jewish      from      Turkish     Italian           Jewish                    Turkish        Italian
                                                                                         from Eastern
                                         Eastern
                                                                                            Europe
                                         Europe
                                                               Panel A
                                    ***          ***         ***            *
Good Personal              -0.0376 -0.0476 -0.0510 -0.0144            -0.0223 -0.0392***                    -0.0297** -0.0277***
Econ Conditions             (0.0097) (0.0140) (0.0153) (0.0085)      (0.0135) (0.0145)                       (0.0147) (0.0102)
Bad Personal                 0.0239   -0.0085 0.0218 -0.0039          0.0137    0.0203                        -0.0171   0.0257
Econ Conditions             (0.0155) (0.0200) (0.0238) (0.0116)      (0.0190) (0.0184)                       (0.0219) (0.0158)
Observations                  5,586         5,687      5,695        5,695         5,551          5,665        5,669         5,677
                                                                          Panel B
Good Personal              -0.0395***     -0.0460*** -0.0538*** -0.0142*         -0.0222       -0.0417***   -0.0332**    -0.0312***
Econ Conditions             (0.0099)       (0.0141) (0.0153) (0.0084)           (0.0140)        (0.0146)     (0.0154)     (0.0107)
Bad Personal                 0.0233         -0.0106 0.0191 -0.0035               0.0121          0.0178       -0.0209      0.0236
Econ Conditions             (0.0155)       (0.0202) (0.0237) (0.0119)           (0.0192)        (0.0188)     (0.0219)     (0.0166)
Foreign Contact at         -0.0284***      -0.0252* -0.0625*** -0.0214***      -0.0449***       -0.0322*    -0.0686***    -0.0190*
Work                        (0.0099)       (0.0144) (0.0148) (0.0069)           (0.0119)        (0.0173)     (0.0126)     (0.0101)
Observations                  5,434          5,529     5,537      5,537           5,400           5,507        5,512        5,519
                                                                          Panel C
Good Personal              -0.0399***             ***
                                          -0.0464 -0.0559   ***
                                                                 -0.0144*        -0.0222       -0.0430***   -0.0347**    -0.0319***
Econ Conditions             (0.0098)       (0.0142) (0.0149) (0.0086)           (0.0141)        (0.0147)     (0.0154)     (0.0105)
Bad Personal                 0.0232         -0.0096 0.0231        -0.0022        0.0118          0.0213       -0.0171      0.0258
Econ Conditions             (0.0155)       (0.0202) (0.0240) (0.0119)           (0.0191)        (0.0185)     (0.0222)     (0.0168)
Foreign Contact at         -0.0253**                        ***
                                            -0.0218 -0.0562 -0.0204      ***
                                                                               -0.0416***        -0.0247    -0.0607***     -0.0167
Work                        (0.0099)       (0.0143) (0.0154) (0.0069)           (0.0115)        (0.0167)     (0.0115)     (0.0104)
Foreign Contact in         -0.0343***             ***       ***
                                          -0.0595 -0.0933 -0.0172        ***
                                                                               -0.0332**       -0.1194***   -0.1006***   -0.0396***
Family                      (0.0103)       (0.0106) (0.0180) (0.0055)           (0.0162)        (0.0151)     (0.0165)     (0.0132)
Nazi State in 1928           0.0218         -0.0008 0.0237        0.0057         0.0308          -0.0209      -0.0078      0.0121
                            (0.0153)       (0.0235) (0.0241) (0.0108)           (0.0346)        (0.0285)     (0.0368)     (0.0171)
Observations                   5,431         5,526     5,534       5,534          5,397           5,504        5,509        5,516
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population.




                                                               53
                 Table 10. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Opinions about
                               Women’s Labor Market Attachment (Male-only Sample)
                                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)                     (4)                       (5)
                             More important for a An infant will       Better if husband   It is not good for a     A married woman
                                woman to help     certainly suffer if   works and wife    child if the mother is     should give up
                              husband‘s career,     the mother is     stays home tending   working in market       working if jobs are
                              than have a career   working in the      to household and instead of concentrating scarce and husband can
                                    herself            market               children           on household        provide for family
Good Personal                       -0.0158               -0.0143               0.0077                   0.0366                   -0.0056
Economic Conditions                 (0.0194)             (0.0185)             (0.0186)                 (0.0239)                  (0.0179)
Bad Personal                        -0.0299               -0.0199               0.0388                   0.0062                    0.0598
Economic Conditions                 (0.0321)             (0.0289)             (0.0372)                 (0.0426)                  (0.0483)
Foreign Contact at                  -0.0016              -0.0283*              -0.0241                 -0.0523**                  -0.0171
Work                                (0.0198)             (0.0158)             (0.0227)                 (0.0258)                  (0.0213)
Foreign Contact in                   0.0021              -0.0369*              -0.0158                  -0.0475                   -0.0207
Family                              (0.0252)             (0.0214)             (0.0287)                 (0.0359)                  (0.0227)
Nazi State in 1928                   0.0327                0.0338              -0.0010                   0.0139                   -0.0219
                                    (0.0315)             (0.0372)             (0.0369)                 (0.0338)                  (0.0297)
Age                                 0.0101**               0.0060             0.0107***                  0.0034                   0.0068*
                                    (0.0048)             (0.0039)             (0.0040)                 (0.0044)                  (0.0040)
Age-squared                         -0.0000               -0.0000              -0.0000                  -0.0000                    0.0000
                                    (0.0001)             (0.0000)             (0.0000)                 (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
Married                              0.0101               0.0528**              0.0213                   0.0088                   -0.0226
                                    (0.0190)             (0.0217)             (0.0284)                 (0.0240)                  (0.0209)
Catholic                             0.0002               -0.0006               0.0145                   0.0442                    0.0367
                                    (0.0282)             (0.0293)             (0.0308)                 (0.0285)                  (0.0234)
No Religion/                        -0.0218              -0.0791**           -0.0824***                -0.0663*                   -0.0351
Other Religion                      (0.0297)             (0.0314)             (0.0262)                 (0.0340)                  (0.0218)
Education:                          -0.0378                0.0147               0.0006                  -0.0383                  -0.0693**
Vocational                          (0.0293)             (0.0275)             (0.0336)                 (0.0338)                  (0.0325)
Education:                          -0.0560               -0.0111              -0.0600                  -0.0526                 -0.1155***
Adv. Technical                      (0.0354)             (0.0340)             (0.0391)                 (0.0425)                  (0.0417)
Education:                         -0.1749***            -0.0785**           -0.2121***               -0.1323***                -0.2268***
College                             (0.0431)             (0.0346)             (0.0512)                 (0.0436)                  (0.0438)
Currently                          -0.0718***              0.0014             -0.0446**                  0.0092                   -0.0282
Working                             (0.0261)             (0.0240)             (0.0212)                 (0.0234)                  (0.0263)
City Size:                          -0.0277               -0.0392              -0.0065                  -0.0598                    0.0067
50,000-99,999                       (0.0365)             (0.0474)             (0.0425)                 (0.0402)                  (0.0470)
City Size:                           0.0032                0.0270              -0.0067                  0.0627**                 -0.0526*
100,000-499,999                     (0.0330)             (0.0259)             (0.0291)                 (0.0310)                  (0.0292)
City Size:                         -0.0521**               0.0175              -0.0065                  -0.0166                 -0.0833***
500,000+                            (0.0247)             (0.0252)             (0.0275)                 (0.0338)                  (0.0314)
Inner City                          -0.0504*               0.0154              -0.0448                   0.0089                    0.0048
                                    (0.0258)             (0.0260)             (0.0283)                 (0.0353)                  (0.0297)
Observations                         2,341                 2,401                2,400                   2,332                     2,378
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use sampling
weights, and also include the same control variables as described in Table 5a, Panel C.

                                                                       54
                                         References

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel Kranton, 2005 ―Identity and the Economics of Organizations.‖
       Journal of Economic Perspectives. 19(1): 9-32.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel Kranton, 2000 ―Economics and Identity.‖ Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. 105(3): 715-53.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. 2013. ―On the Origins of Gender Roles:
       Women and the Plough.‖ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2): 469–530.

Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2010. ―The Power of the Family.‖ Journal of Economic
       Growth 15 (2): 93–125.

Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara 2005. ―Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance.‖
       Journal of Economic Literature 43: 762-800.

Antecol, Heather and Deborah A. Cobb-Clark. 2008.‖ Identity and Racial Harassment.‖ Journal
      of Economic Behavior and Organization.66: 529-57.

Bottazzi, Laura, Marco Da Rin, and Thomas F. Hellmann. 2011. ―The Importance of Trust for
       Investment: Evidence from Venture Capital‖. Working Paper 16923. Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Card, David and Christian Dustmann and Ian Preston, 2012. ―Immigration, Wages and
       Compositional Amenities.‖ Journal of the European Economic Association 10(1): 78-
       119.

Card, David and Gordon Dahl, 2011. ―Family Violence and Football: The effect of Unexpected
       Emotional Cues on Violent Behavior.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 103-43.

DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. ―Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.‖ Journal of
      Economic Literature 47: 315-72.

Dustmann, Christian, Francesca Fabbri and Ian Preston. 2011. ―Racial Harassment, Ethnic
       Concentration, and Economic Conditions.‖ Scandinavian Journal of Economics
      113(3): 689-711.

Dustmann, Christian and Ian Preston. 2007. ―Racial and Economic Factors in Attitudes to
      Immigration.‖ The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: Advances. 7(1). Article
      62.

Facchini, Giovanni and Anna Maria Mayda. 2009. ―Does the Welfare State Affects Individual
       Attitudes Towards Immigrants? Evidence Across Countries." The Review of Economics
       and Statistics. 91(2): 291-314


                                             55
Falk, Armin, Andreas Kuhn, and Josef Zweimüller. 2011. ―Unemployment and Right-Wing
       Extremist Crime.‖ Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113 (2): 260–85.

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. ―Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
      Work, and Fertility.‖ American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1): 146–77.

Freeman, Richard and Huang Wei. 2014. ―Collaborating with people Like Me: Ethnic Co-
      authorship within the U.S.‖ NBER Working paper No: 19905.

Frick, Joachim and Gert G. Wagner. 2001. ―Deutsche Sprachfähigkeit und Umgangssprache von
        Zuwanderern.‖ Wochenbericht des DIW Berlin 24/01.

Glaeser, Edward L. 2005. ―The Political Economy of Hatred.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics
       120 (1): 45–86.

Green, Donald, Jack Glaser, and Andrew Rich. 1998. ―From Lynching to Gay Bashing: The
       Elusive Connection between Economic Conditions and Hate Crime.‖ Journal of
       Personality and Social Psychology 75 (1): 82–92.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2006. ―Does Culture Affect Economic
       Outcomes?‖ Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (2): 23–48.

———. 2009. ―Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 124
   (3): 1095–1131.

Helliwell, John F., Shun Wang, and Jinwen Xu. 2014. ―How durable are social Norms?
       Immigrant Trust and Generosity in 132 Countries.‖ NBER Working Paper 19855.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hepworth, Joseph T., and Stephen G. West. 1988. ―Lynchings and the Economy: A Time-Series
     Reanalysis of Hovland and Sears (1940).‖ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
     55 (2): 239–47.

Hong, Lu and Scott E. Page. 2004. ―Groups of Diverse Problem Solvers can Outperform Groups
      of High-Ability problem Solvers.‖ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
      101(46): 16385-89.

Hovland, Carl Iver, and Robert R. Sears. 1940. ―Minor Studies of Aggression: VI. Correlation of
      Lynchings with Economic Indices.‖ The Journal of Psychology 9 (2): 301–10.

Humlum, Maria K., Kristin J. Kleinjans and Helena S. Nielsen. 2012. ―An Economic Analysis of
     Identity and Career Choice.‖ Economic Inquiry 50(1): 39-61




                                              56
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, Martin Tanner, and Alexander F. Wagner. 2008. ―Ordinary Economic
       Voting Behavior in the Extraordinary Election of Adolf Hitler.‖ The Journal of Economic
       History 68 (04): 951.

Krueger, Alan B, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1997. ―A Statistical Analysis of Crime against
      Foreigners in Unified Germany.‖ Journal of Human Resources: 182–209.

Lazear, Edward. 1999. ―Globalisation and the Market for Team-mates.‖ The Economic Journal,
       109. C15-C40.

Loewenstein, George. 2000. ―Emotions in Economic Theory and Economic Behavior.‖
      American Economic Review 90: 426-32.

Luttmer, Erzo F. P, and Monica Singhal. 2011. ―Culture, Context, and the Taste for
      Redistribution.‖ American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (1): 157–79.

Mayda, Anna Maria. 2006. ―Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of
      Individual Attitudes Towards Immigrants‖ Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3):
      510-30.

Mayda, Anna Maria and Dani Rodrik. 2005 ―Why are some People (and Countries) more
      Protectionist than Others?‖ European Economic Review, 49: 1393-1430.

Mocan, Naci. 2013. ―Vengeance.‖ Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (3): 969–82.

Rees, Dan and Kevin Schnepel 2009. ―College Football games and Crime.‖ Journal of Sports
       Economics, 10: 68-86.

Reuters, October 30, 2013. ―‗Nationalism and Xenophobia‘ on Rise Ahead of European
       Elections‖ by Luke Baker and Stephen Adler.
       http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/10/30/us-eu-parliament-elections-
       idUSBRE99T0YZ20131030.

Reuters, November 25, 2013. ―Swiss Government Urges Voters to Reject Immigration Quota
       Plan‖ by Ruben Sprich. http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/11/25/us-swiss-
       immigration-idUSBRE9AO0IN20131125.

Siedler, Thomas. 2011. ―Parental Unemployment and Young People‘s Extreme Right-Wing
        Party Affinity: Evidence from Panel Data.‖ Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
        Series A (Statistics in Society) 174 (3): 737–58.

The Guardian, March 30, 2013. ―EU Warns Cameron over ‗Knee-jerk Xenophobia‘.‖ By Toby
      Helm. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/30/eu-cameron-xenophobia-
      immigration.



                                               57
Vogel, Dita. ―Update Report Germany: Estimate Number of Irregular Foreign Residents in
       Germany (2010)‖. Update report. Database on Irregular Migration. http://irregular-
       migration.net/.

Voigtlaender, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2012a. ―Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval
       Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics
       127 (3): 1339–92.

Voigtlaender, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2012b. ―(Re-)Shaping Hatred: Anti-Semitic
       Attitudes in Germany-1890-2006. Working Paper.




                                              58
           Appendix Table 1A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
                   towards Foreigners regarding their Rights: Models with Age Dummies
                                      (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)               (6)
                              Foreigners living in Germany          Jewish people          Ethnic            Turkish people   Italians living
                                         Should…                       living in       Germans from             living in      in Germany
                                …marry            …not be              Germany             Eastern              Germany         should not
                              only people        allowed to           should not       Europe living           should not     have the same
                                                                    have the same       in Germany           have the same       rights as
                              of their own      take part in           rights as         should not             rights as        Germans
                               nationality     any political           Germans         have the same            Germans
                                                   activity                               rights as
                                                                                          Germans
Good Personal                  -0.0260***         -0.0373***          -0.0511***         -0.0310**            -0.0677***        -0.0264*
Economic Conditions             (0.0071)           (0.0070)            (0.0130)          (0.0125)              (0.0143)         (0.0135)
Bad Personal                     0.0238*           0.0471***          0.0656***          0.0654***             0.0476**         0.0491**
Economic Conditions             (0.0120)           (0.0101)           (0.0196)           (0.0244)              (0.0211)         (0.0237)
Age: 25-34                     0.0711***           0.0485***            0.0112           0.0818**               0.0204          0.0530**
                               (0.0118)            (0.0162)            (0.0195)          (0.0343)              (0.0343)         (0.0231)
Age: 35-44                     0.0926***           0.0705***            0.0348*          0.0847**              0.0660**         0.0767***
                               (0.0137)            (0.0166)            (0.0181)          (0.0350)              (0.0318)         (0.0223)
Age: 45-54                     0.1208***           0.0980***            0.0225           0.0729**               0.0521*          0.0295
                               (0.0134)            (0.0160)            (0.0198)          (0.0319)              (0.0310)         (0.0222)
Age: 55-64                     0.1680***           0.1656***          0.0733***          0.0940***             0.1349***        0.0672***
                               (0.0158)            (0.0167)           (0.0185)           (0.0323)              (0.0325)         (0.0234)
Age: 65-74                     0.2151***           0.1790***          0.0985***          0.0874**              0.1594***        0.0768***
                               (0.0150)            (0.0162)           (0.0238)           (0.0365)              (0.0352)         (0.0243)
Age: 75+                       0.2807***           0.2334***           0.0781**          0.0895**              0.2283***        0.0975***
                               (0.0212)            (0.0233)            (0.0331)          (0.0412)              (0.0487)         (0.0313)
Observations                     13,146             13,102              5,905                 6,100              6,090            6,096
                                                                               *         **            ***
Note: Standard errors clustered at the Agegroup-State level in parentheses, p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01. All specifications also
include controls for the individual‘s age, gender, marital status, education, city size, and whether the individual lives in the inner city.
The omitted age category is 18-24 year olds. All regressions use sampling weights, and also include state fixed effects and year
dummies.




                                                                      59
           Appendix Table 1B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
               towards Foreigners regarding Marriage and Family: Models with Age Dummies
                                (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)      (8)
                                                                                            It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                             It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who is
                                                                                                            into the family
                                             Ethnic                                                       Ethnic
                                            German                                                       German
                              Jewish          from         Turkish           Italian         Jewish        from         Turkish   Italian
                                             Eastern                                                      Eastern
                                             Europe                                                       Europe
Good Personal               -0.0335***     -0.0530***     -0.0507***        -0.0167**      -0.0249 *
                                                                                                       -0.0423*** -0.0306** -0.0269**
Economic Conditions          (0.0088)       (0.0137)       (0.0139)         (0.0078)       (0.0130)     (0.0124)      (0.0147)   (0.0103)
Bad Personal                  0.0258*       -0.0113         0.0184           -0.0017        0.0203       0.0220        -0.0088    0.0251
Economic Conditions          (0.0137)       (0.0196)       (0.0235)         (0.0111)       (0.0187)     (0.0187)      (0.0209)   (0.0152)
Age: 25-34                    0.0186        0.0631**      -0.0091            0.0123         0.0240         0.0498        -0.0459        0.0478*
                             (0.0159)       (0.0315)      (0.0346)          (0.0173)       (0.0228)       (0.0308)       (0.0390)      (0.0244)
Age: 35-44                    0.0245         0.0425        0.0083           0.0444***      0.0564**       0.0621**       -0.0064       0.0697***
                             (0.0150)       (0.0284)      (0.0323)          (0.0153)       (0.0220)       (0.0266)       (0.0299)      (0.0216)
Age: 45-54                    0.0299*        0.0512*       0.0281            0.0286*       0.1000***      0.1189***      0.0758**      0.0890***
                             (0.0175)       (0.0288)      (0.0307)          (0.0150)       (0.0286)       (0.0306)       (0.0319)      (0.0215)
Age: 55-64                  0.0752***      0.0989***      0.0843**          0.0462***      0.1749***      0.1406***     0.1826***      0.1332***
                            (0.0171)       (0.0308)       (0.0333)          (0.0164)       (0.0255)       (0.0268)      (0.0329)       (0.0229)
Age: 65-74                  0.0622***       0.0764**      0.1333***         0.0514***      0.1899***      0.1804***     0.2554***      0.1454***
                            (0.0147)        (0.0309)      (0.0352)          (0.0167)       (0.0288)       (0.0257)      (0.0351)       (0.0253)
Age: 75+                    0.0973***        0.0664*      0.1762***         0.0705***      0.1663***      0.1597***     0.2364***      0.2053***
                            (0.0253)        (0.0360)      (0.0424)          (0.0223)       (0.0336)       (0.0318)      (0.0378)       (0.0252)

Observations                  6,024          6,134          6,141            6,141           5,985          6,107         6,111          6,120
Note: Standard errors clustered at the Agegroup-State level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All specifications also include
controls for the individual‘s age, gender, marital status, education, city size, and whether the individual lives in the inner city. The omitted
age category is 18-24 year olds. All regressions use sampling weights, and also include state fixed effects and year dummies.




                                                                       60
       Appendix Table 2. The Impact of Perceived Personal and National Economic Conditions on
        Attitudes towards Foreigners regarding their Rights and Attitudes towards Foreigners
                                  Regarding Marriage and Family

                             (1)                (2)                 (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)

                        Foreigners living in Germany              Jewish          Ethnic          Turkish     Italians living
                                 Should…                      people living   Germans from         people      in Germany
                                                               in Germany     Eastern Europe      living in      should not
                                                                should not       living in        Germany         have the
                                                                 have the        Germany         should not     same rights
                          …marry             …not be           same rights      should not        have the     as Germans
                        only people         allowed to         as Germans     have the same     same rights
                        of their own       take part in                          rights as      as Germans
Good Personal            -0.0196**
                         nationality       -0.0239
                                          any        ***
                                                political     -0.0439***         -0.0151
                                                                                 Germans        -0.0558***      -0.0287**
Economic Conditions      (0.0076)            (0.0068)
                                              activity         (0.0134)         (0.0124)         (0.0140)        (0.0135)
                                                      ***
Bad Personal              0.0187           0.0322             0.0539***          0.0487*          0.0344          0.0389
Economic Conditions      (0.0118)          (0.0102)            (0.0201)         (0.0252)         (0.0220)        (0.0118)
Good National             -0.0067           -0.0148             0.0336*          -0.0158          0.0256         0.0138
Economic Conditions      (0.0083)          (0.0094)            (0.0169)         (0.0179)         (0.0205)       (0.0169)
Bad National             0.0286***         0.0525***           0.0480***        0.0670***       0.0614***       0.0488***
Economic Conditions      (0.0068)          (0.0093)            (0.0125)         (0.0129)        (0.0113)        (0.0145)
Observations              13,090               13,051              5,886          6,080           6,070             6,075


                        (1)      (2)          (3)          (4)                   (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)
                      It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who is          It would be unpleasant if a … person married into
                                                                                                  the family
                                     Ethnic                                                Ethnic
                        Jewish      German      Turkish   Italian              Jewish German from Turkish            Italian
                                      from                                                Eastern
                                     Eastern                                              Europe
Good Personal         -0.0271***     Europe*** -0.0354** -0.0144*
                                   -0.0400                                      -0.0150     -0.0259** -0.0066 -0.0225**
Econ Conditions        (0.0090)     (0.0138) (0.0147) (0.0076)                 (0.0139)      (0.0130) (0.0156) (0.0108)
Bad Personal            0.0171       -0.0231 0.0078 -0.0044                      0.0100       0.0093   -0.0249   0.0228
Econ Conditions        (0.0151)     (0.0195) (0.0239) (0.0110)                 (0.0196)      (0.0192) (0.0208) (0.0152)
Good National           0.0111       -0.0180 -0.0357 -0.0042                     0.0131       -0.0219 -0.0398** -0.0065
Econ Conditions        (0.0151)     (0.0195) (0.0239) (0.0110)                 (0.0196)      (0.0192) (0.0208) (0.0151)
Bad National          0.0384*** 0.0499*** 0.0429*** 0.0103                     0.0408*** 0.0558*** 0.0542***            0.0186*
Econ Conditions       (0.0111) (0.0110) (0.0136) (0.0071)                      (0.0153) (0.0126) (0.0154)              (0.0106)
Observations            6,004          6,114          6,121        6,120         5,965         6,086        6,090          6,097




                                                              61
           Appendix Table 3A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
                towards Foreigners regarding their Rights, Controlling for Household Income

                             (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)

                         Foreigners living in Germany        Jewish            Ethnic         Turkish     Italians living
                                  Should…                people living     Germans from        people      in Germany
                                                          in Germany       Eastern Europe     living in      should not
                           …marry           …not be        should not         living in       Germany         have the
                         only people       allowed to       have the          Germany        should not     same rights
                         of their own     take part in    same rights        should not       have the     as Germans
                          nationality    any political    as Germans       have the same    same rights
                                             activity                         rights as     as Germans
                                                                              Germans

                                                                 Panel A
                                   ***             ***               ***
Good Personal            -0.0224         -0.0227         -0.0499        -0.0352***          -0.0671***      -0.0288*
Economic Conditions       (0.0080)        (0.0066)        (0.0148)       (0.0124)            (0.0147)       (0.0158)
Bad Personal               0.0221*        0.0344***      0.0644 ***
                                                                         0.0657**            0.0558**       0.0521**
Economic Conditions       (0.0124)        (0.0119)        (0.0203)       (0.0264)            (0.0249)       (0.0238)
Household Income          -0.0104**      -0.0121***        -0.0085            -0.0017         -0.0026        -0.0058
                           (0.0050)       (0.0025)        (0.0061)           (0.0074)        (0.0088)       (0.0078)
Catholic                   -0.0052         -0.0080         0.0133             -0.0022         0.0180         -0.0095
                          (0.0123)        (0.0130)        (0.0206)           (0.0162)        (0.0202)       (0.0196)
Other religion or          -0.0111        -0.0209*        -0.0373**           -0.0219        -0.0376*      -0.0420**
Not religious             (0.0084)        (0.0114)         (0.0153)          (0.0176)        (0.0210)       (0.0190)
Observations               10,573          10,538             4,711        4,846              4,838           4,846
                                                                 Panel B
Good Personal             -0.0200**      -0.0214***      -0.0477***     -0.0327**           -0.0665***       -0.0260
Economic Conditions        (0.0080)       (0.0070)        (0.0155)       (0.0132)            (0.0158)       (0.0166)
Bad Personal                0.0244*       0.0355***      0.0640 ***
                                                                         0.0656**            0.0500**       0.0523**
Economic Conditions        (0.0125)       (0.0132)        (0.0205)       (0.0262)            (0.0243)       (0.0247)
Foreign Contact at       -0.0297***      -0.0527***        -0.0127            -0.0143         -0.0298        -0.0003
Work
WorkWork                  (0.0093)        (0.0093)        (0.0146)           (0.0167)        (0.0186)       (0.0195)
Household Income          -0.0098*       -0.0114***        -0.0082            -0.0018         -0.0032        -0.0066
                          (0.0049)        (0.0026)        (0.0061)           (0.0073)        (0.0086)       (0.0078)
Catholic                   -0.0029         -0.0072         0.0128             0.0019          0.0201         -0.0041
                          (0.0116)        (0.0131)        (0.0200)           (0.0160)        (0.0203)       (0.0193)
Other religion or          -0.0085         -0.0187        -0.0341**           -0.0182      -0.0364*      -0.0410**
Not religious             (0.0085)        (0.0116)         (0.0158)          (0.0181)      (0.0217)       (0.0190)
Observations               10,316           10,282           4,593             4,718         4,710         4,718
                                                                                  Table continued on following page



                                                         62
                                              Appendix Table 3A (concluded)

                                  (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)              (6)

                             Foreigners living in Germany            Jewish           Ethnic            Turkish       Italians living
                                      Should…                    people living    Germans from           people        in Germany
                                                                  in Germany      Eastern Europe        living in        should not
                               …marry             …not be          should not        living in          Germany           have the
                             only people         allowed to         have the         Germany           should not       same rights
                             of their own       take part in      same rights       should not          have the       as Germans
                              nationality      any political      as Germans      have the same       same rights
                                                   activity                          rights as        as Germans
                                                                                     Germans

                                                                           Panel C
                                        **                ***               ***
Good Personal                 -0.0198           -0.0266           -0.0489          -0.0335**          -0.0671***         -0.0261
Economic Conditions            (0.0087)          (0.0094)          (0.0153)        (0.0133)            (0.0159)         (0.0166)
Bad Personal                    0.0249*          0.0353**         0.0614  ***
                                                                                   0.0652**            0.0492**         0.0512**
Economic Conditions            (0.0129)          (0.0150)          (0.0202)        (0.0260)            (0.0241)         (0.0243)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0276***        -0.0457***          -0.0080         -0.0099             -0.0253          0.0013
Work
WorkWork                       (0.0103)          (0.0117)          (0.0146)        (0.0174)            (0.0192)         (0.0197)
Foreign Contact in            -0.0473***        -0.0493***        -0.0466**       -0.0856***          -0.0727***       -0.0463**
Family
WorkWork                       (0.0110)          (0.0133)          (0.0195)        (0.0191)            (0.0208)         (0.0179)
                                                                          ***
Nazi State in 1928              -0.0033           -0.0005         0.0712             0.0173              0.0220          0.0394
                               (0.0141)          (0.0173)          (0.0231)        (0.0293)            (0.0348)         (0.0242)
Household Income               -0.0097*         -0.0103***          -0.0082           -0.0016           -0.0033          -0.0063
                               (0.0057)          (0.0024)          (0.0061)          (0.0070)          (0.0083)         (0.0079)
Catholic                        -0.0015           -0.0014           0.0136            0.0055            0.0200           -0.0027
                               (0.0120)          (0.0124)          (0.0186)          (0.0147)          (0.0197)         (0.0178)
Other religion or               0.0036            -0.0072          -0.0314*           -0.0138           -0.0297         -0.0368*
Not religious                  (0.0102)          (0.0115)          (0.0160)          (0.0173)          (0.0216)         (0.0189)
Observations                     8,253             8,226             4,592             4,717             4,709            4,717
Note: Standard errors clustered at the Agegroup-State level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population. The omitted category of the religion related variables are Protestants.




                                                                 63
           Appendix Table 3B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
            towards Foreigners Regarding Marriage and Family, Controlling for Household Income

                       (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)

                      It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who       It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                           is                                          into the family
                                    Ethnic                                         Ethnic
                         Jewish    German Turkish         Italian      Jewish     German        Turkish      Italian
                                     from                                      from Eastern
                                   Eastern                                        Europe
                                   Europe                         Panel A
Good Personal          -0.0305**    -0.0527*** -0.0443***   -0.0150*    -0.0145     -0.0286*     -0.0103      -0.0137
Econ Conditions         (0.0116)     (0.0160) (0.0158)      (0.0085)   (0.0152)     (0.0151)    (0.0171)     (0.0136)
Bad Personal             0.0168       -0.0079 0.0237         -0.0071    -0.0064      0.0187      -0.0251      0.0151
Econ Conditions         (0.0156)     (0.0232) (0.0267)      (0.0117)   (0.0217)     (0.0204)    (0.0245)     (0.0168)
Household Income        -0.0060 0.0110* 0.0054 0.0008                   -0.0108      0.0009      -0.0098 -0.0147***
                       (0.0051) (0.0063) (0.0075) (0.0029)             (0.0066)     (0.0074)    (0.0074) (0.0048)
Catholic                -0.0006 0.0011 0.0412* -0.0012                  0.0357       0.0198      0.0222       0.0219
                       (0.0154) (0.0169) (0.0213) (0.0089)             (0.0254)     (0.0205)    (0.0214)     (0.0153)
Other religion or       0.0126   0.0159 -0.0022 0.0008                -0.0055        -0.0022 -0.0580*** -0.0063
Not religious          (0.0132) (0.0140) (0.0181) (0.0098)           (0.0167)       (0.0205) (0.0202) (0.0123)
Observations             4,784    4,865    4,872    4,871              4,755          4,850    4,852     4,855
                                                                Panel B
Good Personal         -0.0316*** -0.0505*** -0.0502*** -0.0148*       -0.0156       -0.0327**     -0.0156      -0.0181
Econ Conditions        (0.0120) (0.0164) (0.0157) (0.0082)           (0.0158)        (0.0149)    (0.0172)     (0.0142)
Bad Personal            0.0153 -0.0109 0.0196 -0.0070                 -0.0115         0.0161      -0.0315      0.0111
Econ Conditions        (0.0160) (0.0232) (0.0264) (0.0120)           (0.0218)        (0.0210)    (0.0243)     (0.0177)
                              **                   ***       ***
Foreign Contact at    -0.0272     -0.0269 -0.0507 -0.0275           -0.0614***      -0.0418**   -0.0770***   -0.0270**
Work                   (0.0117) (0.0166) (0.0164) (0.0080)           (0.0151)        (0.0162)    (0.0157)     (0.0112)
Household Income        -0.0062 0.0113* 0.0057 0.0014                   -0.0098      0.0021      -0.0089 -0.0142***
                       (0.0050) (0.0063) (0.0076) (0.0030)             (0.0067)     (0.0073)    (0.0072) (0.0047)
Catholic                0.0001   0.0049 0.0428* 0.0005                  0.0372       0.0253      0.0235       0.0237
                       (0.0158) (0.0177) (0.0222) (0.0087)             (0.0255)     (0.0211)    (0.0208)     (0.0155)
Other religion or       0.0164   0.0185 0.0005 0.0030                   -0.0033      -0.0010 -0.0533*** -0.0044
Not religious          (0.0133) (0.0137) (0.0173) (0.0099)             (0.0171)     (0.0214) (0.0202) (0.0124)
Observations             4,657    4,733    4,739    4,738                4,629        4,717     4,720      4,722
                                                                                  Table continued on following page




                                                             64
                                               Appendix Table 3B (concluded)

                            (1)     (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)
                          It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who       It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                                               is                                           into the family
                                        Ethnic                                         Ethnic
                             Jewish    German Turkish         Italian      Jewish     German         Turkish     Italian
                                         from                                      from Eastern
                                       Eastern                                        Europe
                                        Europe                        Panel C
Good Personal             -0.0322*** -0.0507*** -0.0526***      -0.0147*          -0.0158 -0.0340** -0.0175               -0.0188
Econ Conditions            (0.0118) (0.0163) (0.0153)           (0.0082)         (0.0156) (0.0147) (0.0171)              (0.0141)
Bad Personal                0.0138 -0.0115 0.0206                -0.0062          -0.0134  0.0164   -0.0305               0.0117
Econ Conditions            (0.0159) (0.0229) (0.0260)           (0.0120)         (0.0215) (0.0209) (0.0242)              (0.0176)
Foreign Contact at         -0.0255** -0.0262 -0.0486*** -0.0271***              -0.0580*** -0.0384** -0.0729*** -0.0277**
Work                        (0.0114) (0.0166) (0.0166) (0.0080)                  (0.0151) (0.0165) (0.0154) (0.0114)
Foreign Contact in        -0.0398*** -0.0546*** -0.0971*** -0.0215***           -0.0465*** -0.1165*** -0.0883*** -0.0310**
Family                     (0.0101) (0.0106) (0.0184) (0.0063)                   (0.0141) (0.0139) (0.0183) (0.0132)
Nazi State in 1928         0.0460*** 0.0080 0.0083 -0.0032                        0.0552       0.0020        -0.0037      0.0066
                           (0.0139) (0.0231) (0.0265) (0.0113)                   (0.0372)     (0.0286)      (0.0343)     (0.0139)
Household Income            -0.0060 0.0104* 0.0051 0.0011                         -0.0098      0.0015        -0.0088 -0.0145***
                           (0.0050) (0.0062) (0.0076) (0.0029)                   (0.0068)     (0.0070)      (0.0070) (0.0048)
Catholic                    0.0041   0.0086 0.0339 0.0019                         0.0409       0.0306        0.0227       0.0217
                           (0.0169) (0.0190) (0.0216) (0.0087)                   (0.0267)     (0.0202)      (0.0203)     (0.0145)
Other religion or           0.0183   0.0205 0.0092 0.0045                         0.0006       0.0071 -0.0418** 0.0000
Not religious              (0.0128) (0.0134) (0.0170) (0.0098)                   (0.0174)     (0.0209) (0.0201) (0.0127)
Observations                 4,656        4,732       4,738       4,737            4,628        4,716        4,719         4,721
Note: Standard errors clustered at the Agegroup-State level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population. The omitted category of the religion related variables are Protestants.




                                                                 65
           Appendix Table 4. Descriptive Statistics of Outcome Variables by Gender

                                                  Females                      Males
Variable                                 Mean     Std. Dev.    N      Mean    Std. Dev.    N

Foreigners Should Marry Their Own        0.196     0.397      6,716   0.163    0.369      6,430

No Politics for Foreigners               0.293     0.455      6,670   0.272    0.445      6,432

No equal rights for Jews                 0.218     0.413      3,012   0.231    0.421      2,893

No equal rights for Aussiedler           0.288     0.453      3,122   0.276    0.447      2,978

No equal rights for Turks                0.451     0.498      3,118   0.449    0.497      2,972

No equal rights for Italians             0.254     0.435      3,118   0.268    0.443      2,978

Unpleasant Neighbor – Jewish             0.119     0.323      3,076   0.126    0.331      2,948

Unpleasant Neighbor – Aussiedler         0.220     0.414      3,137   0.235    0.424      2,997

Unpleasant Neighbor – Turkish            0.397     0.489      3,143   0.388    0.487      2,998

Unpleasant Neighbor – Italian            0.071     0.256      3,148   0.077    0.266      2,993

Unpleasant Marriage – Jewish             0.255     0.436      3,061   0.261    0.439      2,924

Unpleasant Marriage – Aussiedler         0.305     0.460      3,132   0.309    0.462      2,975

Unpleasant Marriage – Turkish            0.553     0.497      3,137   0.555    0.497      2,974

Unpleasant Marriage – Italian            0.167     0.373      3,143   0.185    0.388      2,977

Intense Dislike of Foreigners            0.113     0.316      6,631   0.096    0.295      6,398

Intense Dislike of Equal Rights          0.063     0.242      2,986   0.066    0.248      2,878

Intense Dislike of Intermarriage         0.055     0.228      3,046   0.044    0.205      2,908




                                             66
          Appendix Table 5A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
                          towards Foreigners regarding their Rights: Males Only
                                  (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                              Foreigners living in Germany        Jewish people    Ethnic Germans        Turkish       Italians living
                                         Should…                     living in       from Eastern     people living     in Germany
                             …marry only          …not be            Germany       Europe living in    in Germany        should not
                               people of      allowed to take       should not     Germany should       should not     have the same
                              their own          part in any      have the same      not have the        have the         rights as
                              nationality    political activity      rights as      same rights as     same rights        Germans
                                                                     Germans           Germans         as Germans
                                                                          Panel A
Good Personal                 -0.0225**         -0.0276***        -0.0471***      -0.0332*             -0.0673***         -0.0249
Economic Conditions            (0.0093)          (0.0103)          (0.0175)       (0.0171)              (0.0228)         (0.0206)
Bad Personal                   0.0339**          0.0633***        0.0733 ***
                                                                                   0.0502               0.0572**          0.0369
Economic Conditions            (0.0164)          (0.0164)          (0.0256)       (0.0320)              (0.0286)         (0.0341)
Observations                     6,430             6,432               2,893              2,978           2,972            2,978
                                                                               Panel B
Good Personal                 -0.0192**         -0.0275***         -0.0411**             -0.0301*      -0.0660***         -0.0197
Economic Conditions            (0.0091)          (0.0104)           (0.0182)             (0.0176)       (0.0232)         (0.0209)
Bad Personal                   0.0370**          0.0652***         0.0725***              0.0527        0.0563**          0.0408
Economic Conditions            (0.0158)          (0.0173)           (0.0261)             (0.0328)       (0.0282)         (0.0347)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0322***        -0.0367***          -0.0307*         -0.0288             -0.0283          -0.0267
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0105)          (0.0113)           (0.0171)        (0.0175)            (0.0210)         (0.0186)
Observations                    6,294              6,301              2,826            2,905              2,900            2,905
                                                                            Panel C
Good Personal                 -0.0212**          -0.0318**         -0.0450**        -0.0345*           -0.0705***         -0.0219
Economic Conditions            (0.0102)          (0.0135)           (0.0181)        (0.0181)            (0.0228)         (0.0209)
Bad Personal                   0.0445**          0.0682***          0.0686**          0.0515             0.0521*          0.0380
Economic Conditions            (0.0171)          (0.0205)           (0.0266)        (0.0329)            (0.0282)         (0.0355)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0289**          -0.0268**           -0.0228         -0.0213             -0.0197          -0.0214
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0120)          (0.0130)           (0.0175)        (0.0187)            (0.0214)         (0.0183)
Foreign Contact in            -0.0440***        -0.0538***         -0.0437**       -0.0917***          -0.0686***       -0.0456**
WorkWork
Family                         (0.0111)          (0.0163)           (0.0190)        (0.0212)            (0.0257)         (0.0216)
                                                                           **
Nazi State in 1928              0.0039            0.0025            0.0727           -0.0117              0.0531          0.0425
                               (0.0118)          (0.0150)           (0.0301)        (0.0327)            (0.0346)         (0.0284)
Observations                     5,079             5,083              2,824            2,903               2,898           2,903
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population.




                                                                  67
      Appendix Table 5B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
      towards Foreigners Regarding Marriage and Family: Males Only
                               (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)            (7)           (8)
                                                                                    It would be unpleasant if a … person married into the
                           It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who is
                                                                                                           family
                                           Ethnic
                                                                                               Ethnic
                                           German
                                                                                            German from
                             Jewish         from        Turkish        Italian       Jewish                    Turkish        Italian
                                                                                              Eastern
                                           Eastern
                                                                                              Europe
                                           Europe
                                                               Panel A
                                     ***          ***          ***            ***
Good Personal             -0.0451 -0.0617 -0.0734 -0.0344            -0.0113                      -0.0388* -0.0429** -0.0360**
Econ Conditions            (0.0140) (0.0211) (0.0176) (0.0112)      (0.0173)                      (0.0200) (0.0185) (0.0148)
Bad Personal                0.0351* -0.0051 0.0116 -0.0019           0.0351                        0.0261   -0.0134   0.0323
Econ Conditions            (0.0207) (0.0293) (0.0281) (0.0158)      (0.0278)                      (0.0309) (0.0327) (0.0207)
Observations                 2,948         2,997        2,998          2,993 2,924                  2,975        2,974         2,977
                                                                     Panel B
Good Personal             -0.0439*** -0.0593*** -0.0747*** -0.0319***       -0.0099                -0.0401*    -0.0432**    -0.0355**
Econ Conditions            (0.0140) (0.0215) (0.0176) (0.0101)             (0.0170)                (0.0204)     (0.0183)     (0.0151)
                                   *
Bad Personal                0.0373    -0.0078 0.0070 -0.0014                0.0305                  0.0250       -0.0134      0.0341
Econ Conditions            (0.0215) (0.0299) (0.0282) (0.0167)             (0.0272)                (0.0303)     (0.0324)     (0.0207)
Foreign Contact at        -0.0308** -0.0277 -0.0546** -0.0289**          -0.0679***               -0.0462**    -0.0400**    -0.0399***
Work                       (0.0135) (0.0219) (0.0209) (0.0113)             (0.0173)                (0.0215)     (0.0188)     (0.0128)
Observations                 2,878     2,921      2,923      2,918           2,855                   2,900        2,899        2,902
                                                                     Panel C
Good Personal             -0.0448*** -0.0623*** -0.0800*** -0.0315***       -0.0113              -0.0429**     -0.0476***   -0.0386**
Econ Conditions            (0.0138) (0.0207) (0.0169) (0.0101)             (0.0166)               (0.0206)      (0.0181)     (0.0149)
Bad Personal                0.0355 -0.0093 0.0076            0.0010         0.0259                  0.0243       -0.0144       0.0338
Econ Conditions            (0.0215) (0.0298) (0.0284) (0.0166)             (0.0271)               (0.0306)      (0.0320)     (0.0208)
Foreign Contact at          -0.0227 -0.0231 -0.0502** -0.0272**          -0.0614***                -0.0362      -0.0328*    -0.0370***
Work                       (0.0142) (0.0226) (0.0215) (0.0113)             (0.0172)               (0.0222)      (0.0185)     (0.0131)
                                  ***       ***        ***          **
Foreign Contact in        -0.0598 -0.0612 -0.0886 -0.0170                 -0.0426**              -0.1273***    -0.1022***   -0.0523***
Family                     (0.0135) (0.0198) (0.0241) (0.0085)             (0.0173)               (0.0236)      (0.0231)     (0.0163)
                                  **
Nazi State in 1928         0.0501     -0.0138 -0.0062 0.0070                0.0520                 -0.0429       0.0072       -0.0048
                           (0.0198) (0.0329) (0.0246) (0.0165)            (0.0371)                (0.0341)      (0.0408)     (0.0202)
Observations                  2,876    2,919      2,921       2,916          2,853                   2,898        2,897         2,900
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-State level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population




                                                                  68
          Appendix Table 6A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
                        towards Foreigners regarding their Rights: Females Only
                                  (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                              Foreigners living in Germany        Jewish people    Ethnic Germans        Turkish       Italians living
                                         Should…                     living in       from Eastern     people living     in Germany
                             …marry only          …not be            Germany       Europe living in    in Germany        should not
                               people of      allowed to take       should not     Germany should       should not     have the same
                              their own          part in any      have the same      not have the        have the         rights as
                              nationality    political activity      rights as      same rights as     same rights        Germans
                                                                     Germans           Germans         as Germans
                                                                               Panel A
                                       ***               ***                ***
Good Personal                 -0.0314           -0.0478           -0.0497             -0.0305          -0.0661***         -0.0277
Economic Conditions            (0.0096)          (0.0104)          (0.0173)          (0.0196)           (0.0176)         (0.0179)
Bad Personal                    0.0149           0.0326**          0.0571**          0.0804***           0.0393          0.0614**
Economic Conditions            (0.0174)          (0.0145)          (0.0249)          (0.0291)           (0.0263)         (0.0251)
Observations                     6,716             6,670               3,012             3,122            3,118            3,118
                                                                            Panel B
Good Personal                 -0.0285***        -0.0429***         -0.0467**         -0.0291           -0.0620***         -0.0228
Economic Conditions            (0.0096)          (0.0107)           (0.0182)        (0.0201)            (0.0188)         (0.0177)
Bad Personal                    0.0176           0.0327**           0.0594 **
                                                                                   0.0771***             0.0319          0.0589**
Economic Conditions            (0.0184)          (0.0151)           (0.0252)        (0.0290)            (0.0252)         (0.0256)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0322***        -0.0773***           -0.0276         -0.0075           -0.0652**          -0.0132
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0103)          (0.0132)           (0.0202)        (0.0203)           (0.0284)          (0.0216)
Observations                    6,540              6,495              2,938            3,041             3,036             3,037
                                                                            Panel C
Good Personal                 -0.0228**         -0.0437***         -0.0451**         -0.0284           -0.0588***         -0.0226
Economic Conditions            (0.0101)          (0.0121)           (0.0186)        (0.0203)            (0.0193)         (0.0177)
Bad Personal                    0.0159            0.0304*           0.0597**        0.0765***            0.0339          0.0585**
Economic Conditions            (0.0211)          (0.0177)           (0.0248)        (0.0290)            (0.0256)         (0.0260)
Foreign Contact at            -0.0339***        -0.0741***           -0.0289         -0.0026            -0.0645**         -0.0116
WorkWork
Work                           (0.0117)          (0.0153)           (0.0209)        (0.0208)            (0.0300)         (0.0229)
Foreign Contact in            -0.0589***         -0.0441**         -0.0521**       -0.0868***           -0.0643**       -0.0530***
WorkWork
Family                         (0.0117)          (0.0205)           (0.0221)        (0.0206)            (0.0247)         (0.0185)
                                                                           ***
Nazi State in 1928              -0.0235           -0.0082          0.0614             0.0518             0.0268           0.0532*
                               (0.0167)          (0.0237)           (0.0222)        (0.0366)            (0.0446)         (0.0283)
Observations                     5,296             5,263              2,936            3,039              3,034            3,035
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population.




                                                                  69
       Appendix Table 6B. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions on Attitudes
                towards Foreigners Regarding Marriage and Family: Females Only
                            (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)        (6)            (7)           (8)
                                                                                       It would be unpleasant if a … person married into the
                            It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who is
                                                                                                              family
                                                 Ethnic
                                                                                                  Ethnic
                                                 German
                                                                                               German from
                             Jewish               from        Turkish        Italian    Jewish                    Turkish        Italian
                                                                                                 Eastern
                                                 Eastern
                                                                                                 Europe
                                                 Europe
                                                                Panel A
                                      **               ***
Good Personal              -0.0211 -0.0435     -0.0267 0.0007        -0.0323* -0.0444** -0.0091                                  -0.0174
Econ Conditions             (0.0097) (0.0140) (0.0184) (0.0093)      (0.0172) (0.0184) (0.0201)                                 (0.0165)
Bad Personal                 0.0182 -0.0155 0.0239 -0.0058            0.0044   0.0227   -0.0073                                  0.0235
Econ Conditions             (0.0189) (0.0230) (0.0309) (0.0111)      (0.0255) (0.0232) (0.0306)                                 (0.0222)
Observations                 3,076               3,137         3,143         3,148         3,061       3,132        3,137         3,143
                                                                                   Panel B
Good Personal              -0.0239**        -0.0426*** -0.0295             0.0004        -0.0323*   -0.0487***      -0.0143      -0.0235
Econ Conditions             (0.0099)         (0.0142) (0.0185)           (0.0095)        (0.0176)    (0.0175)      (0.0206)     (0.0167)
Bad Personal                 0.0154           -0.0180 0.0227              -0.0060         0.0047      0.0181        -0.0132      0.0179
Econ Conditions             (0.0193)         (0.0231) (0.0316)           (0.0115)        (0.0253)    (0.0249)      (0.0318)     (0.0236)
Foreign Contact at          -0.0276*          -0.0304 -0.0701***          -0.0138       -0.0475**     -0.0289     -0.1052***     -0.0159
Work                        (0.0152)         (0.0230) (0.0167)           (0.0090)        (0.0235)    (0.0242)      (0.0203)     (0.0134)
Observations                  2,992            3,053    3,058               3,063          2,977       3,047         3,053        3,058
                                                                                   Panel C
Good Personal              -0.0234**        -0.0427*** -0.0276             0.0006        -0.0308*   -0.0471***      -0.0119      -0.0227
Econ Conditions             (0.0100)         (0.0146) (0.0183)            (0.0097)       (0.0178)    (0.0169)      (0.0207)     (0.0167)
Bad Personal                 0.0159           -0.0193 0.0263               -0.0042        0.0085      0.0201        -0.0101      0.0199
Econ Conditions             (0.0191)         (0.0230) (0.0321)            (0.0114)       (0.0251)    (0.0256)      (0.0327)     (0.0240)
Foreign Contact at          -0.0284*          -0.0293 -0.0637***           -0.0134      -0.0464**     -0.0227     -0.0978***     -0.0131
Work                        (0.0149)         (0.0233) (0.0170)            (0.0092)       (0.0232)    (0.0227)      (0.0193)     (0.0135)
Foreign Contact in           -0.0097        -0.0529*** -0.0979***         -0.0162 *
                                                                                          -0.0264   -0.1020***    -0.1050***     -0.0263
Family                      (0.0149)         (0.0169) (0.0236)            (0.0092)       (0.0191)    (0.0188)      (0.0266)     (0.0169)
Nazi State in 1928           0.0106           0.0304 0.0402                0.0061         0.0076      0.0207        -0.0155      0.0253
                           (0.0177)          (0.0264) (0.0357)           (0.0118)       (0.0353)     (0.0319)      (0.0400)     (0.0259)
Observations                   2,990           3,051     3,056              3,061          2,975       3,045         3,051        3,056
Note: Standard errors clustered at the age group-state level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights. Control variables in Panels A and B are identical to Table 3A, and also include state dummies and year dummies.
Panel C does not include state dummies, but controls for state-level age structure of the population, state-level GDP per capita, and
percent of foreigners in the state population




                                                                        70
          Appendix Table 7A. The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions: Controlling
                   for the Sentiment about Sending off Foreigners when Jobs are Scarce
                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
                             Foreigners living in Germany          Jewish people         Ethnic         Turkish people     Italians living
                                        Should…                       living in      Germans from          living in        in Germany
                               …marry            …not be              Germany            Eastern           Germany           should not
                             only people        allowed to           should not      Europe living        should not       have the same
                                                                   have the same      in Germany        have the same         rights as
                             of their own      take part in           rights as        should not          rights as          Germans
                              nationality     any political           Germans        have the same         Germans
                                                  activity                              rights as
                                                                                        Germans
Good Personal                  -0.0111            -0.0185**         -0.0368***          -0.0209*          -0.0494***         -0.0144
Economic Conditions            (0.0075)           (0.0089)           (0.0131)           (0.0122)           (0.0143)          (0.0126)
Bad Personal                    0.0165             0.0243**          0.0539***          0.0545**            0.0318            0.0419*
Economic Conditions            (0.0122)           (0.0122)           (0.0194)           (0.0237)           (0.0204)          (0.0242)
Kick Out Foreigners            0.2345***          0.3391***          0.1604***          0.1775***          0.2517***         0.1649***
when Jobs are Scarce           (0.0121)           (0.0108)           (0.0144)           (0.0184)           (0.0148)          (0.0135)
Foreign Contact at             -0.0142*          -0.0263***           -0.0182            -0.0041           -0.0291*           -0.0086
Work                           (0.0076)           (0.0085)           (0.0119)           (0.0146)           (0.0151)          (0.0145)
Foreign Contact in            -0.0316***           -0.0222           -0.0366**         -0.0769***         -0.0477***        -0.0384***
Family                         (0.0092)           (0.0150)           (0.0163)           (0.0162)           (0.0168)          (0.0140)
Nazi State in 1928              -0.0102            -0.0024           0.0604***            0.0168            0.0285            0.0410*
                               (0.0106)           (0.0139)           (0.0200)           (0.0261)           (0.0320)          (0.0230)
Observations                    10,320             10,295               5,739             5,918             5,908              5,914
Note: Standard errors clustered at the Agegroup-State level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights, and also include the same control variables as described in Table 5a, Panel C.




                                                                   71
         Appendix Table 7B: The Impact of Perceived Personal Economic Conditions: Controlling
         for the Sentiment about Sending off Foreigners when Jobs are Scarce

                             (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)
                                                                                   It would be unpleasant if a … person married
                          It would be unpleasant to have neighbor who is
                                                                                                    into the family
                                          Ethnic                                                 Ethnic
                                        German                                                  German
                           Jewish          from      Turkish          Italian       Jewish        from         Turkish       Italian
                                         Eastern                                                Eastern
                                         Europe                                                  Europe
Good Personal             -0.0276***   -0.0468***   -0.0403***      -0.0118         -0.0109    -0.0360***       -0.0194    -0.0249**
Economic Conditions         (0.0088)    (0.0137)     (0.0132)      (0.0074)        (0.0132)     (0.0121)       (0.0150)     (0.0100)
Bad Personal                 0.0208      -0.0183      0.0079        -0.0021          0.0103      0.0138         -0.0227      0.0219
Economic Conditions         (0.0132)    (0.0197)     (0.0225)      (0.0110)        (0.0188)     (0.0192)       (0.0214)     (0.0158)
Kick out Foreigners        0.1131***    0.1056***    0.2295***    0.0630***        0.1679*** 0.1498*** 0.1847*** 0.1071***
when Jobs are Scarce        (0.0126)    (0.0123)     (0.0176)      (0.0088)        (0.0176)     (0.0174)       (0.0186)     (0.0142)
Foreign Contact at        (0.0126)
                           -0.0208**   (0.0123)
                                         -0.0216    (0.0176)
                                                    -0.0474***    (0.0088)
                                                                  -0.0171**       (0.0176)
                                                                                  -0.0433  ***
                                                                                               (0.0174)
                                                                                                -0.0238      (0.0186)
                                                                                                              -0.0574 ***
                                                                                                                          (0.0142)
                                                                                                                            -0.0205*
Work                        (0.0097)    (0.0130)     (0.0145)      (0.0067)        (0.0120)     (0.0147)       (0.0123)     (0.0105)
Foreign Contact in        -0.0273***   -0.0485***   -0.0743***    -0.0122**        -0.0254  *
                                                                                               -0.1047  ***
                                                                                                              -0.0883 ***
                                                                                                                           -0.0326**
Family                      (0.0098)    (0.0090)     (0.0164)      (0.0053)        (0.0141)     (0.0143)       (0.0148)     (0.0131)
Nazi State in 1928           0.0246*      0.0033      0.0073        0.0027           0.0236     -0.0157         -0.0090      0.0061
                            (0.0127)    (0.0208)     (0.0207)      (0.0100)        (0.0309)     (0.0253)       (0.0335)     (0.0151)
Observations                  5,840        5,943       5,950         5,950            5,803       5,919          5,924        5,931
Note: Standard errors clustered at the Agegroup-State level in parentheses, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,   ***
                                                                                                            p < 0.01. All regressions use
sampling weights, and also include the same control variables as described in Table 5a, Panel C.




                                                                 72
