                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PROMISE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAMS AS PLACE-MAKING POLICY:
          EVIDENCE FROM SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND HOUSING PRICES

                                         Michael LeGower
                                          Randall Walsh

                                       Working Paper 20056
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20056


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Michael LeGower and Randall Walsh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Promise Scholarship Programs as Place-Making Policy: Evidence from School Enrollment
and Housing Prices
Michael LeGower and Randall Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 20056
April 2014
JEL No. I22,I24,R21,R31

                                               ABSTRACT

Following the example of the Kalamazoo Promise initiated in 2005, place-based "Promise'' scholarship
programs have proliferated over the past 8 years. These programs guarantee money towards the costs
of attendance at selected colleges and universities provided that a student has resided and attended
school within a particular public school district continuously for at least the four years prior to graduation.
While some early programs have been studied in isolation, the impact of such programs in general
is not well understood. In addition, although there is substantial and controversial variation from the
original program's design, there is no direct evidence on how outcomes vary along with these design
choices. We use a difference-in-difference approach to compare the evolution of both school enrollments
and residential real estate prices around the announcement of these programs within the affected Promise
zone and in the surrounding area. Taken together, our estimates suggest that these scholarships have
important distributional effects that bear further examination. In particular, while estimates indicate
that public school enrollments increase in Promise zones relative to their surrounding areas following
Promise announcements, schools associated with merit-based programs experience increases in white
enrollment and decreases in non-white enrollment. Furthermore, housing price effects are larger in
neighborhoods with high quality schools and in the upper half of the housing price distribution, suggesting
higher valuation by high-income households. These patterns lead us to conclude that such scholarships
are primarily affecting the behavior of households living above the median income for whom they
present the greatest value and that merit-based versions disproportionately impact white households.


Michael LeGower
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
mjl88@pitt.edu

Randall Walsh
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4901 WW Posvar Hall
230 S. Bouquet St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
walshr@pitt.edu
1. Introduction

    In late 2005, the Kalamazoo Public School District announced a novel scholarship
program. Generously funded by anonymous donors, the Kalamazoo Promise offers up to
four years of tuition and mandatory fees to all high school graduates from the Kalamazoo
Public Schools, provided that they both resided within the school district boundaries and
attended public school continuously since at least 9th grade. The Kalamazoo Promise is
intended to be a catalyst for development in a flagging region, encouraging human capital
investment and offering incentives for households to remain in or relocate to the area.
In the first eight years of the Kalamazoo Promise, research has documented a number
of encouraging results, including increased public school enrollment, increased academic
achievement, reductions in behavioral issues, and increased rates of post-secondary at-
tendance.1
    Encouraged by these early returns, many organizations have implemented similar
programs modeled after the Kalamazoo Promise in urban school districts across the U.S.
Still, most programs do not adhere exactly to the Kalamazoo archetype. Each iteration
of the place-based “Promise” model varies in its features, including the restrictiveness of
eligibility requirements, the list of eligible colleges and universities, and the generosity
of the scholarship award itself. While research has been conducted on the Kalamazoo
program and its impact on various outcomes of interest, this extant work only describes
one particular intervention. As a result, we still know very little about the impact that
such programs have on their communities. With hundreds of millions of dollars being
invested in these human capital development initiatives, understanding their true impact
is an important task for policy research.
    This paper broadens the scope of our understanding of Promise programs by evaluat-
ing the impact of a broad cross-section of Promise programs on two targeted development
outcomes: K-12 public school enrollment and home prices. In addition to providing the
first estimates of the impacts over a set of multiple Promise programs, we document the

   1
     See Bartik et al. (2010); Bartik and Lachowska (2012); Miller-Adams and Timmeney (2013); Miron
et al. (2011); Miller (2010); Andrews et al. (2010); Miller-Adams (2009, 2006); Miron and Evergreen
(2008a,b); Miron et al. (2008); Miron and Cullen (2008); Jones et al. (2008); Miron et al. (2009); Tornquist
et al. (2010) for some evaluations of the impact of the Kalamazoo Promise.



                                                     2
significant heterogeneity of these effects across different constellations of program fea-
tures. While the effect of regional policy on both public school populations and housing
markets is of interest itself, including housing markets in the analysis allows us to speak
to the valuation of this program across different groups by examining the variation in
the capitalization effects across different neighborhoods and across the housing price dis-
tribution. Such patterns have important implications for the distribution of economic
benefits from Promise programs.
      First, we find that, on average, the announcement of a Promise program in a school
district increases total public school enrollment. When analyzed by grade level, announce-
ment leads to immediate increases in enrollment in primary schools (K-4) in particular.
Since it is common in Promise programs to offer escalating benefits for students begin-
ning their continuous enrollment at earlier grade levels, this pattern lends credence to
a causal interpretation of our results. Dividing programs along prominent differences in
design, we find that programs which offer scholarships usable at a wide range of schools
provide the largest immediate boosts in total enrollment. In addition, some features of
Promise programs have significant effects on the composition of affected schools. We
find that merit requirements have differential effects across white and non-white enroll-
ment decisions, leading to large increases in white enrollment and decreases in non-white
enrollment, potentially exacerbating existing racial inequality in educational attainment.
      In addition, within 3 years of the announcement of a Promise program residential
properties within selected Promise zones experiences a 7% to 12% increase on average in
housing prices relative to the region immediately surrounding the Promise zone, reflecting
capitalization of the scholarship into housing prices.2 This increase in real estate prices
is primarily due to increases in the upper half of the distribution. These results sug-
gest that the value of Promise scholarship programs is greater for higher-income families
while simultaneously suggesting that the welfare effects across the distribution are am-
biguous. While higher-income households seem to place a higher value on access to these
scholarships, they also appear to be paying a higher premium for housing as a result.
      Finally, for two Promise programs located in major metropolitan areas— Pittsburgh

  2
    Housing market data were not available for all Promise program locations. A sample of 8 Promise
programs were utilized in this analysis.


                                                3
and Denver— we observe sufficient housing market transactions over the relevant time
period to analyze the heterogeneity of housing market effects across schools within the
Promise-eligible school districts. After linking housing transactions data to school at-
tendance boundaries, we compare capitalization effects across the distribution of school
quality within each city. Appreciation in housing prices is concentrated in Pittsburgh and
Denver neighborhoods that feed into high quality schools (as measured by state standard-
ized test scores). Since the previous evidence suggests that the increased demand is driven
by high-income households, it is natural that it should be focused on areas with already
high-achieving schools. However, this could have the effect of contributing to further
inequality in educational outcomes if the high-income households attracted by Promise
programs are exclusively attending already high-quality schools.
    These results should guide those looking to establish new Promise programs or to
tailor existing Promise programs. While place-based scholarships certainly can impact
regional development, the basic features of the scholarship matter. Allowing students to
use scholarships at a wide range of schools seems to be of first-order importance for total
enrollment, with more flexible scholarships generating larger increases in total enrollment.
The decision to impose merit requirements has important compositional effects on affected
schools, leading to larger relative increases of white students in schools with merit-based
programs. When combined with the distribution of capitalization effects, the evidence
clearly suggests that Promise scholarships are having the largest impact on households in
the middle- and upper-class. It is possible, however, that the change in peer composition
and the increased tax base that result from increased demand amongst high-income, white
households may have significant spillover effects on low-income and minority students in
Promise districts. More research is needed to pin down the relative importance of these
effects.
    The following section will describe the relevant literature as well as the general struc-
ture of the Promise programs being analyzed, including the dimensions along which they
vary. Section 3 will describe the data and the empirical methodology that will be used
to estimate the impact of the program on public school enrollment and housing prices.
Section 4 will be divided in to three subsections, the first of which will present the results
of the enrollment analysis on the entire sample of Promise programs. The remainder

                                              4
of section 4 will be devoted to housing market analysis, first using a pooled sample of
local housing markets in the second subsection and subsequently focusing on two of the
larger urban areas in the final subsection. Finally, section 5 will discuss the results and
conclude.

2. Background

      In addition to their policy ramifications, our findings contribute to two different
strands of literature. First is the already substantial body of work regarding the pro-
vision of financial aid. There is a large literature addressing the impact of financial
aid on postsecondary educational attainment.3 Surveying contributions too numerous
to cite individually, Dynarski (2002) reviews the recent quasi-experimental literature on
the topic and concludes that financial aid significantly increases the likelihood that an
individual attends college. Her estimates indicate that lowering the costs of college at-
tendance by $1,000 increases attendance by roughly 4 percentage points. She further
concludes that the distributional implications of aid are ambiguous. Estimates of the
relationship between the impact of aid and income are evenly divided, with half indicat-
ing that the impact of aid rises with income. The studies she surveys focus exclusively
on how financial aid affects the college attendance decision and choice of college. While
our contribution will not address this question directly, we nevertheless provide impor-
tant results on a recent development in the financial aid landscape. In particular, the
implementation of Promise programs may either contribute to or mitigate inequality in
educational attainment across racial groups, depending on the program design. We pro-
vide preliminary and indirect evidence that merit-based Promise scholarships in particular
may favor white students in the distribution of benefits. In addition, our capitalization
results suggest that high-income households are willing to pay more for access to Promise
scholarships, although the true incidence of the subsidy remains unclear due to the effects
of housing price capitalization.
      The second strand of literature to which we contribute concerns research into place-
based policies. Recently reviewed by Gottlieb and Glaeser (2008), these studies focus on

  3
      See Leslie and Brinkman (1988) for a review of early studies.



                                                    5
outcomes such as regional employment, wages, population, and housing markets. The
authors demonstrate significant agglomeration effects on these outcomes, suggesting the
potential for policies aimed at redistributing population across space to have aggregate
welfare implications. The caveat is that if agglomeration elasticity is constant across
locations, redistribution can not have any overall effect. Any place-based policy aiming
to capitalize on agglomeration externalities must rely on nonlinearities in the externality,
otherwise the gains from population increases in one place will simply be offset by the
loss of population in another. Indeed, the research on specific place-based interventions
such as the Appalachian Regional Commission, Enterprise and Empowerment Zones, the
Model Cities program, and urban renewal spending yield primarily negative results. The
authors withhold comment on whether these projects were simply underfunded or such
policies are ineffective in general, but the picture painted is not optimistic for the efficacy
of such programs. Contributing further to this pessimism are Kline and Moretti (2011),
who examine one of the more ambitious place-based policies in U.S. history: the Tennesee
Valley Authority (TVA). The authors show that the TVA led to large, persistent gains in
manufacturing employment which led to welfare gains through long term improvements
manufacturing productivity. However, the productivity gains were exclusively the result
of huge infrastructure investments; the indirect agglomeration effects of the policy were
negligible. The central message is that, while large place-based interventions can bolster
one locality at the expense of another, any gains will evaporate with the termination of
the policy and persistent net welfare gains are rare. We find that place-based Promise
scholarship programs do in fact increase public school populations and housing prices,
which is plausibly explained by the scholarship increasing the willingness to pay for hous-
ing in these areas. The existing literature suggests that these effects would evaporate
upon the withdrawal of the scholarship program from the area, unless the Promise in-
tervention is to human capital what a program like the TVA is to physical capital. In
that case, the direct productivity effects of Promise scholarships may have lasting effects,
although the indirect agglomeration effects on productivity are likely to be minimal.
   The overlap of financial aid and place-based policy did not begin with the Kalamazoo
Promise, but until recently place-based financial aid had been the domain of state edu-
cation agencies. The Georgia HOPE scholarship has been in place since 1993, awarding

                                              6
scholarships to Georgia high school graduates who satisfy GPA requirements and enroll at
a Georgia college or university. Like the Kalamazoo Promise, many states used the HOPE
scholarship as a model when introducing statewide merit-based scholarships of their own.
Several studies have thoroughly examined the impact of the HOPE scholarship program
on outcomes such as student performance in high school (Henry and Rubenstein, 2002),
college enrollment (Dynarski, 2000; Cornwell et al., 2006), college persistence (Henry et
al., 2004), and degree completion (Dynarski, 2008). To summarize the findings, the HOPE
scholarship has led to overall improvements in K-12 education in Georgia as well as reduc-
tions in racial disparities. In addition, college enrollments increased among middle- and
high-income students, but income inequality in college enrollments widened and college
persistence was not necessarily increased. While evaluating place-based policies, it is no-
table that most of the research on these programs has focused on the outcomes typically
associated with the financial aid literature— i.e. impact on college attendance, degree
completion, and the impact of merit scholarships on educational inequality. Because of
the statewide nature of these programs, outcomes on a smaller spatial scale that would
interest place-based policy researchers— i.e. impact on regional development outcomes,
population, public school enrollments, and housing markets— have been largely ignored.
   The unexpected introduction of place-based Promise scholarship programs in school
districts across the U.S. provides a series of natural experiments similar to those provided
by statewide scholarships. However, the smaller geographic scale allows us to study
local outcomes for the first time, using the immediate geographic vicinity of a Promise
school district as a plausible counterfactual. With an ever-expanding sample of Promise
programs implemented at different times in different regions, we can now assess the
impact of providing place-based scholarships on a number of relevant but hitherto ignored
outcomes, as well as how these impacts vary with the design of the program.

2.1. Promise Scholarship Programs

   According to the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, a Promise-type
scholarship program is a “universal or near-universal, place-based scholarship program.”
Upjohn has identified a list of 23 such programs (plus the Kalamazoo Promise itself).
These programs are listed in Table 1 along with some other details of the programs



                                             7
themselves.4,5
       [Table 1 about here]
       In practice, the place-based nature of these scholarships is dictated by the require-
ment that a student maintain continuous enrollment in a particular school district (or
other small collection of schools) for several years prior to graduation to receive any ben-
efit.6 Although the continuous enrollment requirement alone constitutes a restriction on
residential location for most U.S. households, many programs pair this with an explicit
requirement for continuous residence in the district itself.
       Although the Kalamazoo Promise was universal within its Promise zone as can be seen
in Table 1, many Promise programs have other eligibility requirements. Minimum GPA
requirements, minimum attendance requirements, and community service requirements
are common. Previous work has called attention to the variation in eligibility require-
ments as an important element in program design, but to date no research has empirically
investigated the impact of universal vs. merit-based eligibility on program effectiveness
in the context of Promise programs. Miller-Adams (2011) documents the successes of the
Kalamazoo Program and attributes some results to its universal eligibility. In particular,
the Kalamazoo Pubilc Schools experienced increases in enrollment without significant
changes in the ethnic, racial, or socioeconomic composition of its schools. This pattern
is attributed to the universality of the Kalamazoo Promise. Without an accompanying
analysis of near-universal programs, however, it is unclear whether similar results could
be obtained from very different interventions. In addition, some districts’ goals may in-
clude modifying the demographic composition of area schools. For example, Schwartz
(2010) indicates that relocating disadvantaged children to low-poverty schools has large
and lasting effects on their educational achievement. The analysis to date provides dis-

   4
     The majority of the list of Promise-type scholarship programs was obtained from http://www.
upjohninst.org/Research/SpecialTopics/KalamazooPromise. Further research revealed an addi-
tional Promise program in Buffalo, NY, which has been added to the list. All other information is
based on a review of each program’s website.
   5
     Of the programs detailed in Table 1, a number are excluded for data availability or other reasons.
Of particular interest is the intervention located in Detroit, MI which is excluded from the analysis
because the preciptous decline of Detroit in the years surrounding the Promise is likely to overshadow
the relatively insignificant intervention, as discussed in detail in the following section.
   6
     While not always defined in terms of school districts, we will use the terms “Promise district”,
“Promise area”, and “Promise zone” interchangeably to refer to the geographical boundaries of a Promise
program.


                                                  8
tricts looking to capitalize on such effects with no guidance regarding what program
design choices best suit their goals.
   Bangs et al. (2011) review existing research on the effects of merit and universal place-
based scholarship programs on K-12 enrollment, student achievement, college attainment,
and inequality. Relative to merit aid, the universal scholarships they study are more effec-
tive at increasing school district enrollment and reducing poverty and racial disparities in
educational attainment. However, the authors include only the Kalamazoo Promise and
the Pittsburgh Promise from the class of Promise programs. In addition, direct evidence
of the impact of the Pittsburgh Promise is scant; most comparisons are made between
Kalamazoo and statewide programs such as the Georgia HOPE scholarship. Using data
from over 20 Promise-type programs announced to date, many of which include a merit
eligibility requirement, we present direct evidence on the contrast between merit-based
and universal programs, specifically in the context of place-based Promise scholarship
programs.
   Eligibility requirements are scarcely the only source of heterogeneity in program de-
sign; the scholarship award itself varies across programs. By way of example, the max-
imum award for the Jackson Legacy scholarship is $600 per year for two years, whereas
the Pittsburgh Promise recently increased their maximum scholarship award from $5,000
to $10,000 per year for up to four years. The maximum scholarship duration varies
as well from one year (Ventura College Promise) to five years (El Dorado Promise and
Denver Scholarship Foundation). However, the exact degree of variation in benefits is
obfuscated by two common features of Promise scholarships. First, scholarships are often
stated in percentage terms of tuition, which makes the value dependent on the choice of
postsecondary institution. Second, many Promise programs award benefits on a sliding
scale based on the grade at which the student first enrolled in a Promise zone school. As
an example of both, the Kalamazoo Promise benefit ranges from 65% (enrolled grades
9-12) to 100% (enrolled grades K-12) of tuition and mandatory fees at a Michigan public
college or university. As a result, the expected benefit of a Promise scholarship varies
across locations in a way that is difficult to quantify, but is nevertheless significant.
   The last major feature we will address the list of colleges and universities towards
which the scholarship applies. Most programs require enrollment at an accredited post-

                                              9
secondary institution located within the same state as the Promise zone. Some limit that
further to public institutions, while many scholarships are only usable at a short list of
local colleges. This aspect of the program has a substantial impact on both the value
of the scholarship in absolute terms and the distribution of its benefits across groups.
For instance, some programs have flexible scholarships that allow use at a large list of
institutions including trade schools as well as nationally-ranked four-year universities.
Naturally, scholarships that allow use at more expensive schools are potentially more
valuable to their recipients. In addition, the variation in price points and selectivity
within the list of eligible schools makes the scholarship valuable to both low-income and
high-income households alike. Programs with inflexible scholarships typically allow use
only at local junior and community colleges. This restriction not only caps the benefit
of the scholarship to full tuition at one particular school, but also presents less value to
high-income graduates focused on four-year programs.
       As the oldest program in its class, a considerable amount of research has evaluated
the impact of the Kalamazoo Promise on the outcomes of students in the Kalamazoo
Public School District.7 A series of working papers from Western Michigan University’s
Department of Education outline the mechanism for community development in principle,
with the Promise generating increased attendance in secondary school leading to better
classroom performance and graduation rates and ultimately increased college attendance
in the region. Their research to date culminated in Miron et al. (2011) which presents
quantitative and qualitative evidence documenting a significant improvement in school
climate following the announcement of the Promise.8 In addition, the W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research has taken a leading role in research surrounding the
Kalamazoo Promise. Researchers there have determined that the Kalamazoo Promise has
successfully increased enrollment (Hershbein, 2013; Bartik et al., 2010), improved aca-
demic achievement (Bartik and Lachowska, 2012), and increased college attendance in

   7
     We have found sources that indicate Pinal County’s “Promise for the Future” program started as
early as 2001. It is perhaps more accurate to say that the Kalamazoo Promise is the oldest widely-
recognized program in this class.
   8
     See Miron and Evergreen (2008a), Miron and Evergreen (2008b), Miron et al. (2008), Miron and
Cullen (2008), Jones et al. (2008), Miron et al. (2009), and Tornquist et al. (2010) for more evidence
from their evaluation of the Kalamazoo Promise program.



                                                 10
certain groups (Miller-Adams and Timmeney, 2013). Finally, Miller (2010) confirms the
documented positive effects on public school enrollment, achievement, and behavioral is-
sues. She also adds a preliminary analysis of home values, finding that the announcement
of the Promise had no impact on home prices in Kalamazoo relative to the surrounding
area.
   Apart from these studies of the Kalamazoo Promise, however, little research has
been conducted on Promise programs in order to generalize the findings. Gonzalez et al.
(2011) study the early progress of Pittsburgh’s Promise program and find that it stabilized
the previously declining public school enrollment in the Pittsburgh public schools. The
study also presents survey-based and qualitative evidence that the Pittsburgh Promise’s
merit-based eligibility requirements motivate students to achieve and that the Promise
was influential in the decisions of many parents to move their children to city public
schools. Additionally, some programs’ websites present internal research intended to
promote the program’s progress. Importantly, all studies to date have been limited in
scope to an individual Promise location. Also, with the exception of some work regarding
Kalamazoo, the research has been primarily qualitative or descriptive in nature. In the
remainder of the paper, we will present the first research which utilizes data from a
broad array of Promise-type programs. We present direct evidence on the effectiveness of
Promise scholarships in increasing public school enrollments, as well as document patterns
in enrollment across different programs which are clearly related to program details such
as eligibility requirements and award amounts. In addition, we present the first analysis
confirming the influence of Promise scholarship programs on property values, the results
of which also have interesting implications for future program design.

3. Data and Methodology

   Our estimation strategy for measuring the impact of the Promise hinges on treating
the announcement of a Promise program in a region as a natural experiment, relying
on the assumption that the announcement in each area was unexpected. To justify this
assumption, we conducted substantial research into the timing of program announcements
in each area that we study. The date of the announcement that we use in our analysis
corresponds to the earliest mention we could find of the program’s existence. Typically,


                                            11
this corresponds to the date of a press release announcing the program. In cases where
press releases were unavailable, we used the Internet Archive at http://www.archive.
org to find the earliest iteration of the program’s own home page, using the archival
date as the announcement date. We were able to determine the approximate date of
announcement for 22 of the 25 known programs in Table 1; the remaining 3 were excluded
from the analysis.9 It is likely that some of our announcement dates will be subject to
measurement error. This problem is mitigated somewhat in the public school analysis,
as enrollment data evaluated on an annual basis. In addition, any bias resulting from
measurement error should serve to attenuate our estimates of the true effect of these
programs.
       In addition to those programs mentioned above, the Detroit College Promise was
also excluded from the analysis. The reasons for this exclusion are two-fold. First, the
intervention in Detroit was very small. The maximum scholarship attainable under the
Detroit Promise is $500 per year, and that only for the initial two cohorts of graduates
from a particular high school; most other students are entitled to a maximum award of
$500 total.10 This small award is due to the lack of sponsorship for the Detroit Promise;
as of June 13, 2013, there was only one donor to the Detroit Promise that contributed
over $50,000. Contrasted with the 35 such donors to the Pittsburgh Promise, it is obvious
why the Detroit Promise is not capable of offering larger scholarships to its graduates.
Second, we believe the precipitous decline of a city on the verge of bankruptcy is likely to
overshadow any small positive impact on house prices that may have been generated by
the Detroit Promise. In the year following the announcement of the Detroit Promise, two
of the so-called “Big 3” automakers based in and around Detroit filed for bankruptcy,
followed by the city itself filing for bankruptcy in 2013. From 2000 to 2010, Detroit
experienced a 25% decline in population— the largest percentage decrease in population
for a U.S. city aside from the exodus out of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina in 2005.
Because of these non-Promise related factors, we believe Detroit to be non-representative

   9
     The excluded programs were the Educate and Grow Scholarship (Blountville, TN), the Muskegon
Opportunity Scholarship (Muskegon, MI), and School Counts! (Hopkins County, KY).
  10
     The exception to this is the graduating class of 2013, who it was recently announced will receive
$600 scholarships from the Detroit Promise.




                                                 12
of the typical Promise program and we exclude it from all results below.
       There are two main outcomes that we will be interested in studying in relation to
Promise Scholarship programs: K-12 public school enrollments and housing prices. Nat-
urally, identifying and estimating the impact of the Promise presents a unique set of
empirical challenges for each outcome of interest. We will first present a description of
the data and empirical strategy used to analyze the impact of Promise programs on K-12
enrollment, followed by a similar section devoted to the data and methodological concerns
related to our housing market analysis.

3.1. Public School Enrollment

       Our data source for public school enrollments is the National Center for Education
Statistics’ Common Core of Data (CCD). The CCD surveys the universe of public schools
in the United States every year. Among the data collected in the survey are the names and
locations of all schools, the operational status code as of the survey year, the instructional
level of the school (primary, middle, high), student enrollment counts by grade and by
race/ethnicity, and staff counts. As all Promise programs were announced after the year
2000, we retrieved CCD records dating from the 1999-2000 survey year up to the most
recently available 2010-2011 survey year.11 This yielded a total of 1.2 million school-year
observations. This data was then combined with information on which schools’ students
were eligible for Promise scholarships and the year the programs were announced.
       Ultimately, the goal is to estimate the change in enrollments resulting from the an-
nouncement of the 21 Promise programs observed. For causal inference, however, it is not
sufficient to compare student counts in Promise districts prior to the announcement with
student counts after the announcement. We require an appropriate counterfactual to
account for the possibility that similar (or proximate) schools unaffected by the Promise
may have also experienced increases or decreases in enrollment as a result of some un-
observed common shock. The interpretation of an increase in Promise school enrollment

  11
    Five programs— Say Yes Buffalo (Buffalo, NY), the Sparkman Promise (Sparkman, AR), the
Arkadelphia Promise (Arkadelphia, AR), the New Haven Promise (New Haven, CT), and the Great
River Promise (Phillips and Arkansas Counties, AR)— were announced recently enough that no post-
announcement data is yet available. However, the pre-announcement data for these Promise Zones and
their surrounding areas is included in our analysis to help estimate nuisance parameters more precisely.
Importantly, the exclusion of these observations does not qualitatively change our estimates.



                                                  13
counts changes substantially if similar but unaffected schools experienced increases just
as large, for example. As such, we use a difference-in-differences approach to identify the
causal impact of Promise program announcement. We estimate variations of the following
fixed-effects regression

                  Yit = α + βP ostit · P romisei + X0it · γ + ηit + δi + εit ,                   (1)

where Yit is the natural log of enrollment in school i in year t, P ostit is an indicator for
surveys occurring after the announcement of the Promise program relevant to school i,
P romisei is an indicator for schools located in Promise zones, Xit is a vector of charac-
teristics school i in year t, ηit is a vector of region-by-year and urbanicity-by-year fixed
effects, and δi are school fixed effects. Standard errors in all specifications are clustered
at the school level to allow for correlation in εit within schools over time.
   In addition, some results will be presented that modify equation 1 as follows
                        X         X
         Yit = α +                           βJK P ostit · Ji · Ki + X0it · γ + ηit + δi + εit   (2)
                     J∈{M,N M } K∈{W,N W }


yielding four coefficients— βM W , βN M W , βM N W , and βN M N W — where Mi indicates a
Promise program with a merit-based eligibility requirement, N Mi indicates a univer-
sal Promise program, Wi indicates a Promise program with a broad (more than three)
list of eligible postsecondary institutions, and N Wi indicates a Promise program with a
narrow (no more than three) list of eligible postsecondary institutions. This specification
allows us to answer questions regarding how the impact of Promise programs varies along
prominent design dimensions.
   The coefficients of interest in the above equation estimate the impact of Promise
announcement on school outcomes— or average treatment effect— provided that the
chosen control schools act as an appropriate counterfactual for the evolution of K-12
enrollment in the absence of treatment. Our estimation strategy will use geographically
proximate schools as our control group for schools located in Promise zones. As a result,
we limit our attention to schools that were located in the county or counties surrounding
the treated schools. The intuition for this control group is that schools in the same county
or neighboring counties will be affected by the same regional shocks to K-12 enrollment


                                                  14
as their treated counterparts, such as broad regional migration or demographic patterns.
In addition, we only include surveys conducted within 4 years of the announcement date
of the Promise program relevant to the school in question. Finally, we only include
observations from schools which reported total student counts and student counts by
race/ethnicity in every available survey within the estimation window.12 This restriction
results in our baseline estimation sample of 47,600 school-year observations across 74 U.S.
counties and 947 school districts. Table 2 presents the summary statistics for the sample
of treated and untreated schools across all years in the sample.
      [Table 2 about here]
      The schools initiating Promise scholarship programs are statistically different from
those in the geographically proximate control group. Schools in Promise zones have fewer
students overall and fewer white students as a fraction of the total students (although
this difference, while statistically significant, is very small). In addition, the Promise
schools are much more likely to be located in urban areas, naturally making the nearby
schools in the control group much more likely to be in suburban areas. Differences in the
distribution of schools across levels are very similar, although the more urban Promise
districts tend to have fewer schools designated as middle schools in the CCD.
      Bear in mind, our empirical strategy does not explicitly rely on Promise schools being
similar to comparison schools. Provided that Promise schools and non-Promise schools
are not becoming more or less dissimilar over the period prior to the Promise announce-
ment, our estimates should identify the causal impact of the Promise announcement.
Specifically, identification of the causal effect of the Promise announcement requires that
the outcomes of interest would follow parallel trends (conditional on observable covari-
ates) in the absence of any intervention, such that any difference in the period following
announcement can be attributed to the treatment itself. Importantly, this assumption
can not be explicitly tested as we do not observe the true counterfactual. In the next
section, however, we will present graphical evidence in support of this assumption. Specif-
ically, we will demonstrate that the evolution of enrollment in the periods immediately
prior to Promise announcement was similar between Promise zone schools and control

 12
      Relaxing this restriction only slightly changes the estimated coefficients.



                                                      15
schools. This requirement also implicitly assumes that no other major changes are oc-
curring in one group and not the other at approximately the same time as the treatment
is occurring. While we can not rule this out, due to the time variation in the announce-
ments of the geographically diverse set of programs it is unlikely that any shock other
than the Promise program announcement would have occurred in all Promise zones at
the time of announcements, especially a shock that would differentially impact Promise
zones relative to their immediate surroundings.

3.2. Housing Prices

       Our housing price data comes primarily from DataQuick Information Systems, un-
der a license agreement with the vendor. These data contain transactions histories and
characteristics for properties in a large number of U.S. counties. Included in the data
collected are sales of newly constructed homes, re-sales, mortgage refinances and other
equity transactions, timeshare sales, and subdivision sales. The transaction related data
includes the date of the transfer, nominal price of the sale, and whether or not the trans-
action was arms-length. In addition, every building in the data has characteristics as
recorded from the property’s most recent tax assessment. These variables include floor
area, year built, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, and lot size.13 Finally, the
latitude and longitude of each property is also included.
       The location of the property is crucial to the analysis. Locating the property within
a Census tract allows us to combine property characteristics with neighborhood demo-
graphic data from the U.S. Census and also allows us to control for unobserved neigh-
borhood characteristics through the use of fixed effects. We require a fixed geographical
definition of a neighborhood for the latter, but Census tract definitions change over time.
Fortunately, the Longitudinal Tract Database (LTDB) has developed tools to estimate
any tract-level data from the 1970 onward for 2010 Census tract definitions. So, properties
were allocated to 2010 Census tracts and historical neighborhood demographic data was

  13
    Note that not all variables are reliably recorded across all jurisdictions. Most jurisdictions reliably
record floor area and year built, but other details are often unreliably encoded (i.e. missing values,
unrealistic quantities, no variation in codes, etc.). As a result, any analysis that pools data from all
markets only includes floor area (in square feet) and a quartic in building age in specifications where
structural characteristics are included. These characteristics were the only variables that were reliably
recorded across all jurisdictions studied.



                                                    16
estimated based on these tools, interpolating between years when necessary. These de-
mographic data include median income, racial composition, age distribution, educational
attainment, unemployment rates, fraction in poverty, fraction of family households, and
private school attendance. Also, geographical data allows us to match properties to
school districts, counties, or Census places using U.S. Census TIGER files. As Promise
eligibility is ultimately determined by location within these boundaries, this is crucial for
determining which properties are eligible to receive Promise scholarships.
       Unfortunately, not all counties that are home to Promise programs are covered by
DataQuick. As a result, the housing market analysis necessarily focuses on a subset of
eight Promise zones due to data limitations.14
       As with demand for public schools, there is reason to believe that the announcement of
a Promise program will increase demand for housing within the Promise zone. However,
unlike with K-12 enrollment data, housing market data gives us an indication of the value
of the announcement of the Promise to households. Since we observe the transaction price
associated with the residential location decision, we can draw inference on the household’s
willingness to pay for access to the program. Assuming that housing supply is fixed in the
short-run, any increase in the average household’s willingness to pay must be capitalized
into prices. As a result, by identifying the change in housing prices attributable to
the announcement of a Promise program, we will recover the capitalization of program
announcement into housing prices, providing a signal of the average household’s marginal
willingness to pay for access to the program.15

  14
     For only six of these does the data originate from DataQuick. For two Promise programs— Say
Yes Syracuse (Onondaga County, NY) and the Kalamazoo Promise (Kalamazoo County, MI)— real
estate transaction and assessment data was pulled from public records on the internet. For Onondaga
County, parcel information and transaction histories were obtained from the Office of Real Property
Services (ORPS) websites at http://ocfintax.ongov.net/Imate/search.aspx (for Onondaga County)
and http://ocfintax.ongov.net/ImateSyr/search.aspx (for City of Syracuse). For Kalamazoo and
neighboring Van Buren county, parcel information and transaction histories for each property were
gathered from the BS&A Software portal for Kalamazoo and Van Buren Counties at https://is.
bsasoftware.com/bsa.is/. In terms of the scope of content, the data acquired in this way is comparable
to those supplied by DataQuick.
  15
     Kuminoff and Pope (2009) demonstrate that capitalization is equivalent to marginal willingness to
pay only if the hedonic price function is constant over time and with respect to the shock being analyzed
or if the shock is uncorrelated with remaining housing attributes. Neither condition is likely to be
satisfied here and consequently our estimates are not directly interpretable as marginal willingness to
pay. However, we present results that identify capitalization from repeat sales data which has been
shown in Monte Carlo experiments to drastically reduce so-called “capitalization bias” over pooled OLS


                                                   17
    In practice, however, identifying the causal impact of a change in a local amenity like
access to a Promise scholarship is not trivial. In this paper, we use the hedonic method to
model a property’s price.16 In general, the hedonic method expresses the transaction price
of a property as a function of the characteristics of that property. The implicit price of
a characteristic is then recovered by estimating the hedonic price function via regression.
In addition, Parmeter and Pope (2009) demonstrate how combining this technique with
quasi-experimental methods allows the researcher to exploit temporal as well as cross-
sectional variation in amenity levels. Recent studies have used quasi-experimental hedonic
methods to recover the value of school quality (Black, 1999; Barrow and Rouse, 2004;
Figlio and Lucas, 2004), air quality (Chay and Greenstone, 2005), airport noise (Pope,
2008a), toxic releases (Bui and Mayer, 2003; Gayer et al., 2000), flood risk reduction
(Hallstrom and Smith, 2005; Pope, 2008b), crime reduction (Linden and Rockoff, 2008;
Pope, 2008c), and mortgage foreclosures (Cui and Walsh, 2013). We adopt this technique
as well in our estimation of the causal impact of Promise programs on housing prices.
    As above, our estimation strategy will employ a difference-in-differences approach to
identify the causal impact of Promise program announcement, which is fairly standard
in the quasi-experimental hedonic valuation literature. Our baseline estimating equation
is written as follows:

             P riceimdt = α + βP ostmt · P romised + X0it · γ + ηmt + δd + εimdt ,                 (3)

where P riceimdt is the natural log of the transaction price for property i in market m
and school district d at time t, P ostmt is an indicator for transactions occurring after
the announcement of the Promise program relevant to housing market d, P romised is
an indicator for properties located in Promise zones, Xit is a vector of building and
neighborhood characteristics of property i at time t, ηmt are market-by-year-by-quarter
fixed effects, and δd are school district fixed effects. Market-by-year-by-quarter fixed
effects account for regional shocks in housing prices in a given period, while district
fixed effects control for static differences between neighborhoods over time. We also

(Kuminoff et al., 2010).
  16
     For a thorough review of the hedonic method, Bartik and Smith (1987), Taylor (2003), and Palmquist
(2005).


                                                  18
estimate variations on the above equation, where school district fixed effects are replaced
by 2010 Census tract fixed effects and, finally, property fixed effects. The property fixed
effects specifications yield our preferred estimates of the treatment effect, identifying the
impact of treatment from repeat sales only and thus controlling for any time-invariant
unobservables associated with an individual property. Standard errors in property fixed
effects regressions are clustered at the property level to allow for correlation in εimdt for
the same property over time; all other specifications cluster standard errors at the 2010
census tract level. Again, β identifies the impact of Promise announcement on housing
prices provided that the prices of control properties would have evolved similarly over
time in the absence of treatment.
   For several reasons, we expect that the value of most Promise programs may increase
with household income. Light and Strayer (2000) find that family income and mother’s
education level increase both the likelihood of college attendance as well as the selectivity
of the chosen school, thus making the Promise scholarship more valuable to higher-income,
higher-educated households. In addition, many Promise scholarships are “middle-dollar”
or “last-dollar” aid, ultimately applied towards unmet need at your institution of choice
after the application of federal, state, and institutional aid. Importantly, while Promise
aid is typically not need-based, these other sources of aid are typically dependent on the
expected family contribution (EFC) as calculated by the household’s Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) form, with lower income families expected to contribute
less than higher income families. As a result, for an identical institution, higher income
families are likely to receive less aid than lower income families from these other sources,
leaving a larger amount of unmet need. For these reasons, the value of the Promise
should be greatest for families with higher incomes. As it is reasonable to expect these
higher income families to occupy higher priced domiciles, we would like to test this
hypothesis by allowing the treatment effect to vary across the housing price distribution.
As such, we perform a two-step procedure that first defines where properties lie on the
pre-Promise distribution of housing prices— even for properties sold after the Promise—
and subsequently estimates treatment effects both above and below the median of said
distribution via OLS.
   The first step is accomplished by restricting attention to the pre-Promise period in

                                             19
each housing market and estimating a standard hedonic price function which includes
all observable property-specific characteristics, i.e. structural and neighborhood features,
and controls flexibly for time through quarterly fixed effects. The coefficient estimates
from this regression are then used to predict the sale price of each property observed
in the sample— including those sold after Promise announcement— as if it had been
sold in the first quarter of the year prior to the announcement. The resulting number
provides a measure of the component of housing value that is unaffected by the treatment
by construction. All transactions are then sorted on this statistic and grouped into
observations above and below the median. This exercise tells us where a property would
have fallen in the housing price distribution for that particular housing market if the
transaction had taken place prior to the announcement of the Promise.17
       The second step simply repeats the DD analysis specified in equation 3, but separately
for properties above and below the median of the distribution generated by the first step.
Each β then estimates the treatment effect of the Promise announcement within each
half of the housing price distribution.
       It is worthwhile to briefly discuss the functional form assumption implicit in equation
3. The semi-log functional form, with the natural log of price as the dependent variable, is
fairly standard in the hedonic literature and has been justified by Monte Carlo simulations
performed initially by Cropper et al. (1988) and more recently by Kuminoff et al. (2010).
However, we will also present estimates using a fully linear functional form with deflated
transactions prices as the dependent variable. As all Promise scholarships are per-student
subsidies and not a per-housing-unit subsidies, there is reason to suspect that the causal
effect of the program is better interpreted in levels and not logs. For example, consider
two identical families each with one child, one moving into a 2 bedroom house and one
moving into a 10 bedroom house in the same neighborhood in a Promise zone. Both
families will be willing to pay more for the house after the announcement of the Promise
as their child will receive the scholarship with some positive probability. Yet, the expected

  17
     As discussed below, in some specifications the estimation sample will be restricted either geograph-
ically or as a function of observable characteristics. A property’s rank in this distribution is based on
the widest definition of the housing market and will not depend on the estimation sample. As a result,
the above and below median sample will not necessarily contain an equal number of observations when
estimation samples are restricted in this way.


                                                   20
value of the benefit is the same even though the 10 bedroom house is undoubtedly priced
higher than the 2 bedroom house. As such, we would not expect both families to be
willing to pay the same percentage premium after the announcement of the Promise,
which is what would be captured by a DD estimate in logs.
   Another important consideration in any hedonic model is the spatial definition of the
relevant housing market. The trade-off between using a large geographic housing market
and a small geographic housing market is one between internal validity of the estimates
and the precision with which they are estimated (Parmeter and Pope, 2009). As such,
we take a flexible approach by estimating our equation on a number of different samples,
each representing a different housing market definition.
   After determining the geographic extent of each of the eight Promise programs, two
estimation samples were constructed: one representing a relatively large housing market
definition and one representing a small housing market definition. The large housing
market is constructed by including all transactions within Promise zones as well as all
transactions occurring within 10 miles of the geographic boundary of the Promise zone.
The small sample is constructed by only using transactions within a 1 mile bandwidth
along both sides of the Promise zone boundary. Figure 1 depicts an example, using the
housing markets constructed around the Pittsburgh Promise treatment area.
   [Figure 1 about here]
   The large sample affords us many observations of market transactions and thus pro-
vides precise estimates. However, the concern in a large sample is that the estimate of the
treatment effect will be biased if either the scholarship is not relevant to households in
the periphery of the sample or they are simply unaware of the program. The small hous-
ing sample mitigates this bias by constructing a sample over which we can be relatively
sure that all households will be informed of the scholarship and consider it relevant. The
variance of the estimate, however, increases due to the smaller number of observations
from which to draw inference. The goal in estimating our hedonic model on both samples
is to evaluate the sensitivity of the measured treatment effect to the choice of housing
market definition.
   In addition to the two geographically defined markets, we also construct a housing
market that, while bounded geographically, is defined in statistical terms. Even in the

                                            21
small housing markets defined above, it is possible that properties on either side of the
treatment boundary can vary significantly and discontinuously in terms of observable
characteristics, calling into question their use as a counterfactual for houses within the
treatment area. By means of example, figure 2 depicts the Promise zone in New Haven,
CT (outlined in red) along with its corresponding large housing market (outlined in
black). The area is subdivided into census tracts and color coded by racial composition
according to the 2000 U.S. Census. As can plainly be seen, neighborhoods vary consid-
erably across the border defining the Promise zone. While this difference in observables
can be controlled for econometrically, it raises the question of variation in unobservables
and, more importantly, the validity of the parallel trends assumption required for causal
interpretation of DD estimates.
       [Figure 2 about here]
       In econometric terms, our concern is with limited overlap in observables between
treatment and control groups which can cause “substantial bias, large variances, as well
as considerable sensitivity to the exact specification of the treatment effect regression
functions.” (Crump et al., 2009). As such, we would like to define a sample that re-
duces these concerns by trimming some observations in the non-overlapping region of the
support, while simultaneously minimizing the variance inflation that accompanies the
reduction in observations.
       After pooling all large housing markets defined above, we follow Crump et al. (2009) to
define what the authors refer to as the optimal subpopulation. We estimate the following
logit model to predict the probability that a transaction occurs within a Promise zone
based on pre-Promise property characteristics:

                                                               1
                               Prob(P romised |Xi ) =             0    ,                           (4)
                                                          1 + eα+Xi ·γ

where Xi is a vector of time-invariant characteristics of property i including floor area
(in sq. feet), a quadratic in building age, and available 2000 U.S. Census demographic
information at the tract level.18 Recovering the associated parameters, we go on calculate

  18
     As all Promise programs were announced after the year 2000, there is no endogeneity concern in-
troduced by using Census demographics. Building age is similarly unaffected by endogeneity concerns
as it is constructed as the difference between year built and year of transaction. Unfortunately, we do


                                                  22
the predicted value of P romised , obtaining propensity scores for all properties in the large
housing market sample. We then trim the sample to observations with intermediate
propensity scores.19 Equation 3 is then estimated on this sample, producing the Optimal
Subpopulation Average Treatment Effect (OSATE).
   Finally, we wanted to document any heterogeneity in capitalization effects across the
distribution of school quality. It is well-known that the residential location decisions of
households with children are heavily influenced by school quality. If the intention of these
programs is in part to encourage the migration of households into Promise districts from
nearby areas with higher quality schools, it stands to reason that increases in demand
for housing should be concentrated in Promise area neighborhoods with access to rela-
tively high quality schools. For two major metropolitan Promise zones— Pittsburgh and
Denver— we were also able to obtain school attendance boundaries from the Minnesota
Population Center’s School Attendance Boundary Information System (SABINS). After
matching properties to schools and obtaining standardized test scores at the school level
from each state’s education agency, we were able generate standardized pre-Promise mea-
sures of primary school and high school quality for each property in the Pittsburgh and
Denver samples. First, we divide the universe of schools on the basis of the highest tested
grade level, with schools testing only 8th graders and lower being labeled primary schools
and schools testing any students higher than 8th grade being labeled high schools. Then,
we calculate the percentage of tested students scoring proficient or better on standardized
tests (math and reading) in the universe of public schools in Colorado and Pennsylva-
nia for the year 2005. Finally, within each state by school level cell we standardize this
measure such that the resulting variable is a Z-score distributed with mean zero and unit
standard deviation.
   Pooling these two markets, we directly estimate how Promise capitalization varies
with school quality by estimating variations of the following equation in each market

not observe variation in other building characteristics, so for each property we do not know whether
we observe post-Promise floor area (which could potentially be endogenous to Promise announcement)
or pre-Promise floor area (which would necessarily be exogenous to Promise announcement) of each
property. However, over our short estimation window, is seems unlikely that floor area would respond
to Promise announcement in any systematic or meaningful way.
  19
     The optimal bounds of the propensity score distribution were calculated according to Crump et al.
(2009). We thank Oscar Mitnik for sharing the code for the procedure on his website.


                                                 23
definition:

        P riceimdt = α + βQualityi · P romised · P ostdt + X0it · γ + ηt + δd + εimdt ,   (5)

where Qualityit is one of four standardized pre-Promise measures school quality for prop-
erty i— primary school math Z-score, primary school reading Z-score, high school math
Z-score, or high school reading Z-score. The resulting estimate of β tells us how the
capitalization effect of the Promise varies across neighborhoods with access to different
quality schools.
   For each selected housing market definition, we restrict our attention to transactions
occurring within three calendar years of the program announcement date, yielding seven
calendar years of transactions for each housing market. We limit transactions to arms
length sales or resales of owner-occupied, single-family units. Houses with missing trans-
action prices, transaction dates, and spatial coordinates are dropped, as were houses with
a building age of less than -1. Then, as the coverage and reliability of data varies sig-
nificantly across jurisdictions, we eliminate outlying observations on a market by market
basis. This process typically removed observations with unreasonable (i.e. floor area of 0
square feet) or extreme covariate values (i.e. floor area more than 5,000 square feet, more
than 11 bedrooms, more than 10 bathrooms, etc.), taking care that the observations re-
moved constituted a small percentage of observations (1% or less). Finally, we eliminate
transactions occurring at prices less than $1,000 or greater than $5,000,000
   Table 3 presents the summary statistics for the sample of treated and untreated prop-
erties for each housing market definition.
   [Table 3 about here]
   As with public school data, our housing market data reveals that the neighborhoods
receiving Promise programs are different from those outside of Promise zones along sev-
eral dimensions. Using a large housing market definition, the housing stock in Promise
zones covered by our housing data smaller in size and typically older than that in the
outlying areas. The Promise zones represented in the housing sample— Denver, CO;
Kalamazoo, MI; New Haven, CT; Pittsburgh, PA; Peoria, IL; Syracuse, NY; Hammond,
IN; and Pinal County, AZ— are mostly urban areas. The exceptions are Hammond and
Pinal County, both of which lie very close to urban areas (Chicago and Phoenix, respec-

                                              24
tively). As such, this could be an artifact of the availability of data through DataQuick,
with rural areas being lower priority. This urban differential also reveals itself in the de-
mographic characteristics; Promise neighborhoods typically contain more black residents,
fewer children, and fewer college educated individuals. In addition, unemployment and
poverty are more prevalent, leading to lower median incomes. Finally, Promise residents
are more likely to enroll K-12 children in private schools. Many of these gaps are reduced
or even reversed when considering our smaller geographic housing market or our propen-
sity score screened optimal subpopulation, although differences remain significant. It is
important to note that neither of the more selective samples dominates the other in terms
of matching observables across groups. For example, the floor area of Promise properties
matches more closely to the control properties in the small geographic market than in
the optimal subpopulation, while the reverse is true for the percentage of black residents
in the neighborhood. Due to the way the optimal subpopulation is constructed, the two
groups in that sample should be matched closely on the covariates that are important
for residential location decisions. In addition, the small geographic market definition
yields fewer observations and estimates will be less precise as a result. We present results
from both samples in what follows, but we believe the optimal subpopulation represents
the best trade off between reducing bias from unbalanced observables and increasing the
variance of the resulting estimates.

4. Results

   We first address the results from the K-12 enrollment data, which apply to a broad
sample of Promise scholarship programs. We follow that with evidence of the impact
of selected Promise scholarship programs on local housing markets. Finally, we present
a more detailed housing market analysis for two large metropolitan Promise zones—
Pittsburgh and Denver.

4.1. Public School Enrollment Estimates

   Figure 3 provides graphical evidence, both towards the validity of the parallel trends
assumption and of the effect of the Promise on K-12 enrollment. We divide the base-
line sample into geographic areas, each composed of one or two Promise zones and the
surrounding counties. Within a geographic area, years were normalized such that the

                                             25
year that the relevant Promise was announced was set equal to zero.20 We then regress
log-transformed student counts on a full set of area-by-year fixed effects and plotted the
yearly average residuals for treated schools and untreated schools along with a linear fit.
       [Figure 3 about here]
       The graph depicts the variation in total student enrollment that is orthogonal to
region-wide shocks in the years leading up to and immediately following the announce-
ment of a Promise program. While there are substantial differences in levels between the
groups, the trends in enrollment were not substantially different between groups prior to
treatment. After the announcement of a Promise program, however, the control group
continues on its pre-existing trend, while the Promise schools display a jump in enrollment
as well as a sharp upturn in their enrollment trend. We attribute this convergence to
increased demand for public schools following the announcement of a Promise program.
       Table 4 displays the results of our fixed-effects estimates of school-level outcomes from
equation 1 in Panel A and equation 2 in Panel B.
       [Table 4 about here]
       As predicted, when enrollment in a particular set of schools gains a student access
to a potentially meaningful scholarship award, more students will enroll in those schools.
The announcement of a Promise program leads to an increase in overall enrollment of
roughly 4%. On average, increases in total enrollment are similar across racial groups,
although the effects are not significant when decomposed in this way.
       It is typical for Promise programs to scale up scholarship awards with the length of
continuous enrollment at graduation. This feature makes the scholarship more valuable
to students who begin their enrollment at early grade levels. Also, students who begin
their enrollment spell past grade 9 or 10 are excluded from most Promise scholarships.
As a result, we would expect much of the enrollment increases over the initial years of
a Promise program to occur in the earlier grade levels especially in those programs that
feature this sliding scale. Figure 4 depicts the treatment effect as estimated for each
grade level separately.
       [Figure 4 about here]

  20
    If two Promise programs were announced in the same year and were located close enough that there
was significant overlap in the adjacent counties, they were pooled into one area.


                                                26
   The estimated increases in enrollment in Promise districts match this pattern almost
precisely, with significant increases in enrollment at the lower grade levels (1-4), followed
by no detectable changes through most of the higher grades (5-11), and finally decreases
in enrollment in grade 12. Furthermore, this pattern is much more pronounced amongst
those programs featuring a sliding scale relative to those which lack this feature. This
match between the enrollment incentives provided by Promise scholarships and the esti-
mated treatment effects gives us confidence that the identified overall effect is causal.
   Turning our attention to the heterogeneity across program features, in panel B of
Table 4 the effects of Promise programs are decomposed into those generated by pro-
grams of different classes. This exercise reveals that estimated overall effect is masking
heterogeneity across programs. In addition, the variation is consistent with the expected
effect of program features on the scholarship’s prospective value. We would expect uni-
versal programs that allow use at a wide range of schools should present the most value
to the widest range of households. Either imposing a merit requirement or restricting
the list of schools should decrease the attractiveness of the program, although which re-
striction matters more is ambiguous. Finally, offering a merit-based scholarship usable
only at a small list of schools should present the least value for the fewest households.
Our estimates follow that profile exactly, with universal, wide-list programs generating
the largest enrollment increases (8%) followed by merit-based, wide-list programs and
universal, narrow-list progams (4%). Programs offering merit-based scholarships usable
at a small list of schools seem to have no effect on overall enrollment.
   There are also racial disparities in the response to these programs that vary by pro-
gram feature as indicated by columns 2 and 3 in Panel B. In particular, programs featuring
merit requirements prompt increases in white enrollment while leading to significant de-
creases in non-white enrollment. The racial pattern is likely explained by the existing
racial achievement gap in U.S. public schools (Murnane, 2013). As award receipt in these
programs is conditioned explicitly on success in high school, the value for the average
non-white student is diminished. Universal programs with large lists of eligible schools
seem to have no effect on relative enrollment across racial groups, consistent with the
analysis of the Kalamazoo Promise which belongs to this class. Finally, the small de-
crease in total enrollment in schools offering merit-based scholarships usable at a small

                                             27
list of schools is driven by a significant decrease in the enrollment of non-white students.
Again, this conforms to our expectations regarding the incentives implied by different
scholarship features and how they interact with racial groups.
   Overall, offering a Promise scholarship tied to enrollment in a particular public school
district is effective in drawing students into that school district, especially if graduates
are able to use the scholarship at a wide range of institutions or there are no merit re-
quirements for eligibility. However, Promise programs also have an important impact
on the demographic composition of schools. Program administrators should note that
scholarships with merit requirements will primarily attract white students and may lead
to decreases in non-white enrollment, potentially contributing to racial inequality in ed-
ucational attainment.

4.2. Pooled Housing Market Estimates

   Our enrollment estimates suggest that demand for public schools increases in areas
where it is a pre-requisite for Promise scholarship receipt. As public school enrollment is
tied to residential location, this would imply an increase in housing demand as well. If
we assume that housing supply is fixed in the short run, any increase in housing demand
must be capitalized into housing prices. In figure 5, we repeat the graphical exercise
conducted on the K-12 enrollment data, but using instead the housing market data and
plotting separately for each market definition. Log housing prices for our eight Promise-
related housing markets were regressed on a full set of market-by-year-by-quarter fixed
effects and the monthly average residuals for treated properties and untreated properties
are plotted along with a local linear fit on either side of the announcement date.
   [Figure 5 about here]
   Clearly in the context of the large housing market definition, any impact of program
announcement on housing prices in Promise areas is hard to detect. While the difference
between groups narrows after the program announcement, the series diverge again to
pre-Promise levels within about 2 years. As mentioned previously, however, this estimate
is subject to significant bias due to the composition of the sample. The large market
definition includes properties in the periphery who may not be affected by the Promise
as well as properties in the center of the Promise zone that may not be considered by the



                                            28
marginal household when making their residential location decision. Inclusion of both
groups biases the estimate of the effect towards zero.
   When restricting attention to the smaller geographic housing market definition, the
impact of the Promise is more noticeable, but qualitatively similar. There is a conver-
gence between the series immediately after the program announcement, followed by slight
divergence after about two years. It is hard to discern from the graph if there was or was
not a lasting impact of the Promise announcement on housing prices in the sample. Using
the optimal subpopulation yields a different story, however. After the announcement of
the Promise, there is a noticeable and discrete increase in prices occurring in Promise
zones which persists through the 2.5 years following the announcement.
   Table 5 presents the results from our estimation of equation 3. Each panel corresponds
to a different definition of a housing market. The specification in Column 1 includes only
school district and market-specific time fixed effects. Of the difference in difference esti-
mators, this specification is the most similar to the graphical analysis and is also subject
to the most omitted variables bias, as it identifies the effect through temporal variation
of prices at the school district level. Column 2 adds controls for various building and
neighborhood characteristics of the property and exchanges school district fixed effects
for the more spatially explicit Census tract fixed effects. Finally, column 3 includes prop-
erty fixed effects, identifying the impact of the program from repeat sales of identical
properties in Promise zones vs. outside. These same estimates are repeated in Table 6
using price in constant 1990 dollars as the dependent variable
   [Tables 5 and 6 about here]
   The simplest DD specification yields inconsistent and imprecise capitalization esti-
mates. This may indicate why previous studies using such a specification, but lacking
access to rich real estate data across several programs have been unable to uncover a
significant treatment effect. After controlling for property covariates and neighborhood
fixed effects, the magnitude of estimates increases and the variance decreases across all
samples, suggesting capitalization effects on the order of 4% to 6% of home values, or
between $5,500 and $8,000. Our preferred specifications use either the small geographic
housing market or propensity score screened optimal subpopulation and include property
level fixed effects, identifying the effect from repeat sales. These specifications provide

                                             29
very precise treatment effects of between 6% and 12% of home values or $14,000 and
$20,500.
   Our analysis of public school enrollment suggested that Promise programs have dif-
ferent impacts on different populations, particularly on different racial groups. As such,
we would like to document any such heterogeneity in the housing market as well. Our
housing market data provides no information on the characteristics of the individuals
participating in the transactions. However, we do observe the transaction price of the
house, which should be correlated with income and, as a result, race.
   To investigate the heterogeneity of the capitalization of Promise scholarships with
respect to income, we divide each housing market in half according to the distribution
of housing values implied by the pre-announcement hedonic price function. As described
in the previous section, we estimate the hedonic price function over the pre-Promise
period in each housing market, recover the coefficient estimates, and then use them to
predict the sale price of all transactions observed in the sample as if each had occurred
in the first quarter of the year prior to the relevant Promise announcement. We then
repeat the DD analysis above, but separately for the samples of properties above the
median and below the median of the distribution generated by the first step. We report
the estimates from the tract-level fixed effects specification (equivalent to column 2 in
Table 5) only. The results are depicted in Figure 6. Across estimation samples, the
capitalization of Promise programs into housing prices increases across the housing price
distribution. Capitalization effects in the 1st quintile range from 2.8% to 5.5% compared
to capitalization in the top quintile of between 6.8% and 8.9%.
   [Figure 6 about here]
   There are several reasons why higher income households may be willing to pay more
to gain access to Promise scholarship programs. As mentioned in the previous section,
students from higher income households are more likely to attend college and the value
of access to Promise scholarships is ultimately conditional on college attendance. Even
conditional on college attendance and the quality of the institution, most Promise schol-
arships only apply to unmet need, which should be greater for high income households
due to a larger expected family contribution. As it is reasonable to expect these higher
income families to occupy higher priced domiciles, the results from our regressions pro-

                                           30
vide more evidence in support of the claim that higher income households are willing to
pay more for access to Promise scholarship programs.

4.3. Large Urban Promise Zone Estimates

   The pattern of capitalization across the housing distribution suggests that higher-
income households place more value on access to Promise scholarships. As a result, one
might also expect there to be a similar pattern of capitalization across the distribution
of school quality. In order to verify such a pattern, we must link properties to school-
level data on performance, such as state standardized test scores. Unfortunately, neither
school attendance boundaries nor standardized test performance data is readily available
for all of the Promise zones included in our housing market analysis.
   For the two Promise programs in our housing market data based in large metropolitan
areas— the Pittsburgh Promise and the Denver Scholarship Foundation— we obtained
school attendance boundary maps through SABINS. In addition, we acquired school-level
data on standardized test scores from the Pennsylvania and Colorado state education
agencies. This data allows us to link properties in our housing market data to objective
measures of pre-Promise school quality. Before presenting those results, however, we
verify that the results from the pooled housing market sample also hold in both Pitts-
burgh and Denver. Table 7 reports estimates of the treatment effect within each market,
identifying from repeat-sales as in column 3 of Table 5.
   [Table 7 about here]
   Both programs display large treatment effects across all samples, ranging from 15%
to 22% in the Pittsburgh market and 5% to 11% in the Denver market. Estimates from
specifications using price in constant dollars as the dependent variable are provided for
comparison purposes; the implied capitalization amounts are roughly in line with the
magnitude of award amounts.
   Our final set of results attempts to correlate the capitalization effects of these Promise
programs with the quality of schools. Our hypothesis is that capitalization will be concen-
trated in neighborhoods with higher quality schools. This is because the higher income
households on the margin will likely be choosing between higher quality suburban neigh-
borhoods (and no access to Promise aid) and lower quality urban schools (with access



                                            31
to Promise aid). As such, the households that relocate will aim first to minimize the
associated loss in school quality.
   In order to quantify school quality, we first calculated the percentage of students in
each Pennsylvania or Colorado public school that scored “proficient” or better in math
and reading standardized tests in 2005, prior to the announcement of either program.
Then, we standardize this measure of quality such that within each state by school level
cell the distribution has a zero mean and unit standard deviation. Table 8 contains the
results from estimating equation 5.
   [Table 8 about here]
   With the exception of the measure of high school quality in the large housing market
definition, all of our school quality metrics are associated with larger capitalization ef-
fects of Promise program announcement. Across Pittsburgh and Denver, a one standard
deviation increase in the quality of the neighborhood high school leads to an increase in
the capitalization effect of the Promise of between 1% and 5% (or $2,500 and $6,000).
Estimates using primary school quality are uniformly larger; a one standard deviation
increase in the quality of the neighborhood primary school leads to an increase in the
capitalization effect of the Promise of between 5% and 10% (or $8,800 and $16,000). We
expect that the magnitude of the primary school quality effect relative to the high school
quality effect is due to a combination of factors. First, the incentives provided by many
Promise programs (including the Pittsburgh Promise) are strongest for primary school
students as the scholarship amount scales with years of continuous enrollment. As a re-
sult, primary school quality should be focal for the households most likely to be influenced
by the program. Also, due to the presence of school choice programs in Pittsburgh and
Denver, residential location is not always the sole determinant of school quality and the
strength of this link varies across grade levels. In Pittsburgh in 2010, 62% of the public
elementary school students attended their neighborhood school compared to only 52%
of public high school students. The situation in Denver is similar; in 2013, 57% of K-5
public school students attended their neighborhood school compared to 39% of public
high school students (9-12). As a result, the quality of the neighborhood high school may
be less relevant to the residential location decision than the quality of the neighborhood
primary school for which fewer feasible alternatives exist.

                                            32
       Furthermore, in results not presented here we estimated the capitalization effects by
individual high school neighborhoods and found that after the announcement of Promise
programs in Pittsburgh and Denver, housing prices increased in the neighborhoods as-
sociated with top performing high schools in the district (top 3 in Pittsburgh, top 4 in
Denver). In addition to these high-performing schools, large capitalization effects are also
estimated for the neighborhood associated with the school that ranked at the bottom of
each city’s high schools— Peabody High School in Pittsburgh and North High School in
Denver. Neighborhood level data, however, shows that school attendance rates of resi-
dent public school students are among the lowest in each district for these lower-quality
schools. On this measure, Peabody ranked 45 out of 48 traditional schools in Pitts-
burgh in 2010 and North ranked 97 out of 103 traditional schools in Denver in 2013. As a
result, some high-income households seem to have located in these Promise-eligible neigh-
borhoods associated with poor quality schools, while utilizing the school choice systems
in Pittsburgh and Denver to send children to high quality public secondary schools.21

5. Conclusion

       Place-based “Promise” scholarship programs have proliferated in recent years. Typ-
ically implemented at the school district level and financed privately, they guarantee
financial aid to eligible high school graduates from a particular school district, provided
they have continuously resided in the district for a number of years. In this study, we
measure the impact of a cross-section of Promise scholarships on a range of policy-relevant
outcomes, including public school enrollment and housing prices. In addition, we provide
the first direct evidence of how enrollment effects vary with features, such as eligibility
requirements and scholarship flexibility.
       Using a difference-in-differences approach, we conclude that the initiation of a Promise
program leads to an increase in public school enrollment in affected schools and an in-
crease in housing prices of between 6% and 12%, with capitalization effects most dramatic
amongst Promise zone properties in the upper half of the house price distribution. Even
so, there is substantial variation in these effects according to the features of the programs.

  21
   All data on neighborhood school attendance rates was provided by Pittsburgh Public Schools and
Denver Public Schools.


                                                33
Scholarships that are usable at a wide range of institutions are effective at increasing
total public school enrollment, although this is mitigated by the imposition of merit re-
quirements. However, the effects on school composition vary, with merit requirements
providing strong incentives for white enrollment at the expense of non-white enrollment.
Furthermore, focusing on Pittsburgh and Denver specifically, the capitalization effect
of scholarship programs into housing prices increases with the quality of the neighbor-
hood public school. Taken together, this evidence suggests that these scholarships have
important distributional effects that bear further examination.
   These results provide strong guidance to future program designers. First and fore-
most, place-based scholarship programs are capable of having an impact on important
regional development outcomes, such as population, school enrollment, and property val-
ues. Making the scholarship usable at a wide range of schools is essential in attracting
households to the scholarship area. Unfortunately, since minority students are less likely
to satisfy them, adding merit requirements could increase educational inequality. Fur-
ther contributing to inequality, we find that the increase in housing demand resulting
from the announcement of the Promise is most pronounced in high-priced neighborhoods
with high-quality schools. As a result, the potential for peer effects to play a role in the
mitigation of inequality is greatly reduced as the high-quality students attracted by the
Promise seem to be settling into already high quality schools.
   Still, these same capitalization effects are evidence that high-income households are
paying a premium for housing in the wake of a Promise scholarship program, while low-
income households do not face the same increase in housing costs to the extent that
they own instead of rent. As such, while low-income students will likely utilize these
scholarships less often than high-income students, they may benefit more net of this
house price effect, although a complementary analysis of rental rates would be necessary
to confirm this intuition. In addition, the increase in the tax base that may result from
the increase in home values leaves open the potential for more disadvantaged students to
benefit. If high-income households are contributing more to Promise school districts in
the form of property taxes, low-income students stand to benefit through that channel
as well. As a result, the impact of Promise scholarships on educational equity remains
somewhat ambiguous and is an area for future research.

                                            34
   There are many other avenues for future research into Promise scholarship programs.
Broader real estate transactions data would allow for an extension of the housing market
analysis conducted here to the remaining Promise programs. Such research would be
important in generalizing the house price effects of Promise programs beyond our sample
of eight programs, which offer little variation in program features. We also hope to
increase the scope of our evaluation to a wider range of outcomes. Any impact of Promise
scholarships on school quality and test scores is important in answering questions related
to the effect on educational inequality. Retaining high-income families has the potential
to substantially change the composition and performance of urban schools, leading to
spillover effects for low-income students.
   Extending the analysis to the postsecondary education market would also be fruitful.
Some individual Promise programs have studied their effects on college choice and atten-
dance with success. However, typically such studies are conducted through arrangements
with school districts, which often have student level records of college applications and
enrollments. As a result, data availability is a concern. The same is true for the impact of
Promise scholarships on cost of attendance. Recent studies have shown that if students
are likely to receive aid from other sources and their chosen college or university can easily
quantify the amount of aid, the institution will increase its effective price by reducing
the amount of institutional aid provided (Turner, 2011, 2012). Knowing that a student
comes from a Promise district is a fairly strong signal to a post-secondary institution that
the student may be receiving Promise aid. As a result, some of the value of the schol-
arship may well be captured in the market for post-secondary education. In addition, if
the signal is stronger for high-income students than low-income students, perhaps due to
uncertainty surrounding additional merit requirements, or demand is more elastic among
low-income students, documenting such an effect would have distributional implications
as well.

Acknowledgements

   The authors thank Allison Shertzer, Werner Troesken, and Lise Vesterlund for their
helpful comments throughout the completion of this paper. In addition, the authors are
grateful to participants at the 2013 Midwest Economics Association Meeting and the


                                             35
University of Pittsburgh Applied Micro Brown Bag seminar series. Any remaining errors
are their own.

Andrews, R.J., S. DesJardins, and V. Ranchhod, “The effects of the Kalamazoo Promise
  on college choice,” Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29 (5), 722–737.

Bangs, Ralph, Larry E. Davis, Erik Ness, William Elliott III, and Candice Henry, “Place-
  based College Scholarships: An Analysis of Merit and Universal Programs,” 2011.

Barrow, L. and C.E. Rouse, “Using market valuation to assess public school spending,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (9), 1747–1769.

Bartik, T.J. and M. Lachowska, “The Short-Term Effects of the Kalamazoo Promise
  Scholarship on Student Outcomes,” 2012.

Bartik, TJ and VK Smith, “Urban amenities and public policy,” in E.S. Mills, ed.,
  Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. II, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1987.

Bartik, T.J., R.W. Eberts, and W.J. Huang, “The Kalamazoo Promise, and Enrollment
  and Achievement Trends in Kalamazoo Public Schools,” 2010.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, “How much should we trust differences-in-
  differences estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.

Black, S.E., “Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary education,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (2), 577–599.

Bui, Linda TM and Christopher J Mayer, “Regulation and capitalization of environmental
  amenities: Evidence from the toxic release inventory in Massachusetts,” Review of
  Economics and statistics, 2003, 85 (3), 693–708.

Chay, Kenneth Y and Michael Greenstone, “Does air quality matter? Evidence from the
  housing market,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113, 376–424.

Cornwell, Christopher, David B Mustard, and Deepa J Sridhar, “The Enrollment Effects
  of Merit-Based Financial Aid: Evidence from Georgia?s HOPE Program,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 2006, 24 (4), 761–786.

                                            36
Cropper, Maureen L, Leland B Deck, and Kenenth E McConnell, “On the choice of
  funtional form for hedonic price functions,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  1988, pp. 668–675.

Crump, R.K., V.J. Hotz, G.W. Imbens, and O.A. Mitnik, “Dealing with limited overlap
  in estimation of average treatment effects,” Biometrika, 2009, 96 (1), 187–199.

Cui, Lin and Randall Walsh, “Foreclosure, vacancy and crime,” 2013.

Dynarski, S., “Hope for whom? Financial aid for the middle class and its impact on
  college attendance.,” National Tax Journal, 2000, 53 (3), 629–662.

  , “The behavioral and distributional implications of aid for college.,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2002, 92 (2), 279–285.

Dynarski, Susan, “Building the stock of college-educated labor,” Journal of human re-
  sources, 2008, 43 (3), 576–610.

Figlio, David N and Maurice E Lucas, “What’s in a grade? School report cards and the
  housing market,” American Economic Review, 2004, pp. 591–604.

Gayer, Ted, James T Hamilton, and W Kip Viscusi, “Private values of risk tradeoffs at
  superfund sites: housing market evidence on learning about risk,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2000, 82 (3), 439–451.

Gonzalez, G.C., R. Bozick, , S. Tharp-Taylor, and A. Phillips, “Fulfilling the Pittsburgh
  Promise: Early Progress of Pittsburgh’s Postsecondary Scholarship Program,” 2011.

Gottlieb, Joshua D and Edward L Glaeser, “The economics of place-making policies,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, 2008 (1), 155–239.

Hallstrom, Daniel G and V Kerry Smith, “Market responses to hurricanes,” Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 2005, 50 (3), 541–561.

Henry, Gary T and Ross Rubenstein, “Paying for grades: Impact of merit-based financial
  aid on educational quality,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2002, 21 (1),
  93–109.

                                           37
  ,   , and Daniel T Bugler, “Is HOPE enough? Impacts of receiving and losing merit-
  based financial aid,” Educational Policy, 2004, 18 (5), 686–709.

Hershbein, Brad J, “A Second Look at Enrollment Changes after the Kalamazoo
  Promise,” 2013.

Jones, J.N., G. Miron, and A.J.K. Young, “The Impact of the Kalamazoo Promise on
  Teachers’ Expectations for Students,” 2008.

Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti, “Local economic development, agglomeration
  economies and the big push: 100 years of evidence from the tennessee valley authority,”
  Mimeograph UC Berkeley, 2011.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V and Jaren C Pope, “Capitalization and welfare measurement in the
  hedonic model,” 2009.

  , Christopher F Parmeter, and Jaren C Pope, “Which hedonic models can we trust
  to recover the marginal willingness to pay for environmental amenities?,” Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 2010, 60 (3), 145–160.

Leslie, L.L. and P.T. Brinkman, The Economic Value of Higher Education, New York:
  MacMillan, 1988.

Light, Audrey and Wayne Strayer, “Determinants of college completion: School quality
  or student ability?,” Journal of Human Resources, 2000, pp. 299–332.

Linden, L. and J.E. Rockoff, “Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property values
  from Megan’s Laws,” The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 1103–1127.

Logan, John R, Zengwang Xu, and Brian Stults, “Interpolating US decennial census
  tract data from as early as 1970 to 2010: A longitudinal tract database,” Professional
  Geographer, forthcoming, 2012.

Miller, A., “College Scholarships As A Tool for Community Development? Evidence
  From The Kalamazoo Promise,” 2010.




                                           38
Miller-Adams, M., “A simple gift? The impact of the Kalamazoo Promise on economic
  revitalization,” Employment Research Newsletter, 2006, 13 (3), 1.

  , The power of a promise: Education and economic renewal in Kalamazoo, WE Upjohn
  Institute, 2009.

Miller-Adams, Michelle, “The Value of Universal Eligibility in Promise Scholarship Pro-
  grams,” Employment Research Newsletter, 2011, 18 (4), 1.

   and Bridget Timmeney, “The Impact of the Kalamazoo Promise on College Choice:
  An Analysis of Kalamazoo Area Math and Science Center Graduates,” 2013.

Miron, G. and A. Cullen, “Trends and Patterns in Student Enrollment for Kalamazoo
  Public Schools,” 2008.

   and S. Evergreen, “The Kalamazoo Promise as a Catalyst for Change in an Urban
  School District,” 2008.

   and   , “Response from Community Groups,” 2008.

  , J.N. Jones, and A.J.K. Young, “The Impact of the Kalamazoo Promise on Student
  Attitudes, Goals, and Aspirations,” 2009.

  , S. Evergreen, and J. Spybrook, “Key Findings from the 2007 Survey of High School
  Students,” 2008.

Miron, Gary, Jeffrey N Jones, and Allison J Kelaher-Young, “The Kalamazoo Promise
  and Perceived Changes in School Climate.,” Education Policy Analysis Archives, 2011,
  19 (17), n17.

Murnane, Richard J., “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, September 2013, 51 (2), 370–422.

Palmquist, Raymond B, “Property value models,” Handbook of environmental economics,
  2005, 2, 763–819.




                                          39
Parmeter, Christopher and Jaren Pope, “Quasi-experiments and hedonic property value
  methods,” in J. A. List and M. K. Price, eds., Handbook on Experimental Economics
  and the Environment, Edward Elgar, 2009.

Pope, Jaren C, “Buyer information and the hedonic model: the impact of a seller dis-
  closure on the implicit price for airport noise,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 63
  (2), 498–516.

  , “Do seller disclosures affect property values? Buyer information and the hedonic
  model.,” Land Economics, 2008, 84 (4), 551–572.

  , “Fear of crime and housing prices: Household reactions to sex offender registries,”
  Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 64 (3), 601–614.

Schwartz, H., “Housing policy is school policy: Economically integrative housing pro-
  motes academic success in Montgomery County, Maryland,” in “A Century Foundation
  Report,” The Century Foundation, 2010.

Taylor, Laura O, “The hedonic method,” in “A primer on nonmarket valuation,” Springer,
  2003, pp. 331–393.

Tornquist, E., K. Gallegos, and G. Miron, “Latinos and the Kalamazoo Promise: An Ex-
  ploratory Study of Factors Related to Utilization of Kalamazoo’s Universal Scholarship
  Program,” 2010.

Turner, L., “The Incidence of Student Financial Aid: Evidence from the Pell Grant
  Program,” 2012.

Turner, N., “Who Benefits from Student Aid: The Economic Incidence of Tax-Based
  Student Aid.,” 2011.




                                          40
Figure 1: Large (10 mile) and Small (1 mile) Housing Markets in Pittsburgh, PA




                                     41
Figure 2: Percent Non-Hispanic Black (2000) by Census Tract




                            42
Figure 3: Total Enrollment Residual by Year




                    43
Figure 4: Treatment Effect by Grade Level




                   44
Figure 5: Sale Price Residuals by Date



                 45
Figure 6: Treatment Effect by Above/Below Median




                      46
                                           Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of       Location       Announced Requirements                       Award                    Eligible Schools
     Program
     Arkadelphia   Arkadelphia,     2010                                       Sliding scale; 65% to    Any accredited PSI in
     Promise       AR                           • Graduate from                100% of unmet need       the U.S.
                                                  Arkadelphia HS               per year; Max:
                                                • Continuous enrollment        highest tuition at
                                                  since 9th grade              Arkansas public PSI.
                                                • 2.5 GPA or 19 ACT
                                                • Receive AR Lottery
                                                  scholarship
                                                • Apply for 2 other
                                                  scholarships
47




     Baldwin       Baldwin, MI      2010                                       Sliding scale; $500 to   Any accredited PSI in
     Promise                                    • Reside within Baldwin        $5,000 per year          the Michigan
                                                  Community SD
                                                • Graduate from any HS
                                                  within zone
                                                • Continuous residency since
                                                  9th grade.
                                       Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of       Location   Announced Requirements                       Award                   Eligible Schools
     Program
     Bay           Bay, MI      2006                                       $2,000 per year         Delta College or
     Commitment                             • Graduate from Bay County                             Saginaw Valley State
                                              HS                                                   University
                                            • Continuous enrollment
                                              since 9th grade
                                            • Continuous residency for 6
                                              years
                                            • First-generation college
                                              student

     College       Hammond,     2006                                       Sliding scale; 60% to   Any accredited PSI in
48




     Bound         IN                       • Continuous residency         100% of unmet need      Indiana
     Scholarship                              within Hammond City for      per year; Max:
     Program                                  3 years                      tuition at Indiana
                                            • Graduate from any HS in      Univ. Bloomington.
                                              Hammond City
                                            • 3.0 GPA OR
                                            • 2.5 GPA with 1000 SAT
                                              (math and verbal) OR
                                            • 2.5 GPA with 1400 SAT
                                            Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of       Location       Announced Requirements                          Award                  Eligible Schools
     Program
     Denver        Denver, CO       2006                                          $250 to $3,400 per     39 PSIs in Colorado
     Scholarship                                 • Graduate from Denver           year depending on
     Foundation                                    Public HS                      PSI and EFC
                                                 • Continuous enrollment
                                                   since 9th grade
                                                 • 2.0 GPA
                                                 • Demonstrate financial need
                                                   (EFC < 2x Pell limit)

     Detroit       Detroit, MI      2008                                          $150 to $600 for one   43 public PSIs in
     College                                     • Graduate from traditional      semester               Michigan
49




     Promise                                       Detroit Public HS
                                                 • Continuous enrollment
                                                   since 9th grade
                                                 • Continuous residency since
                                                   9th grade

     Educate and   Blountville,   Unknown                                         Full tuition (4        Northeast State
     Grow          TN                            • Continuous residency           semesters)             Community College
     Scholarship                                   within selected counties for
                                                   12 mos. prior to
                                                   graduation
                                                 • Graduate from any HS
                                             Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of        Location        Announced Requirements                       Award                   Eligible Schools
     Program
     El Dorado      El Dorado,        2007                                       Sliding scale; 65% to   Any accredited PSI in
     Promise        AR                            • Graduate from El Dorado      100% of unmet need      the U.S.
                                                    Public Schools               per year; Max:
                                                  • Continuous enrollment        highest tuition at
                                                    since 9th grade              Arkansas public PSI.
                                                  • Continuous residency since
                                                    9th grade.

     Great River    Phillips          2010                                       Full tuition (4         Phillips Community
     Promise        County, AR                    • Graduate from Arkansas or    semesters)              College of the
                                                    Phillips County HS                                   University of
50




                                                  • Continuous enrollment                                Arkansas
                                                    since 9th grade
                                                  • Achieve high school
                                                    attendance requirements.

     Hopkinsville   Hopkinsville,     2005                                       Full tuition (4         Hopkinsville
     Rotary         KY                            • Graduate from selected       semesters)              Community College
     Scholars                                       high schools
                                                  • 2.5 GPA
                                                  • 95% attendance
                                          Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of     Location        Announced Requirements                       Award                     Eligible Schools
     Program
     Jackson     Jackson           2006                                       Sliding scale; $150 to    Jackson Community
     Legacy      County, MI                    • Graduate from Jackson        $600 per year for two     College, Spring Arbor
                                                 County HS                    years                     University, Baker
                                               • Continuous enrollment                                  College of Jackson
                                                 since 10th grade
                                               • Community service

     Kalamazoo   Kalamazoo,        2005                                       Sliding scale; 65% to     Any public PSI in
     Promise     MI                            • Graduate from Kalamazoo      100% of tuition per       Michigan
                                                 Public Schools               year
                                               • Continuous enrollment
51




                                                 since 9th grade
                                               • Continuous residency since
                                                 9th grade.

     Legacy      Battle Creek,     2005                                       Sliding scale; 31 to 62   Kellogg Community
     Scholars    MI                            • Graduate from Battle         credit hours              College
                                                 Creek or Lakeview SD
                                               • Continuous enrollment
                                                 since 10th grade
                                            Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of       Location       Announced Requirements                        Award                    Eligible Schools
     Program
     Leopard       Norphlet, AR     2007                                        Sliding scale; $2,600    Any accredited PSI in
     Challenge                                   • Graduate from Norphlet       to $4,000 per year       the U.S.
                                                   HS
                                                 • Continuous enrollment
                                                   since 9th grade
                                                 • Continuous residency since
                                                   9th grade
                                                 • 2.25 GPA

     Muskegon      Muskegon,        2009a     TBD                               TBD                      TBD
     Opportunity   MI
52




     New Haven     New Haven,       2010                                        Sliding scale; 65% to    Any accredited PSI in
     Promise       CT                            • Graduate from New Haven      100% of unmet need       Connecticut
                                                   Public Schools               per year at public; Up
                                                 • Reside in New Haven          to $2,500 at private
                                                 • 3.0 GPA
                                                 • 90% attendance
                                                 • Community service
                                         Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of      Location      Announced Requirements                       Award                   Eligible Schools
     Program
     Northport    Northport,      2007                                       Sliding scale; Amount   Any public PSI in
     Promise      MI                          • Graduate from Northport      determined each year    Michigan
                                                HS
                                              • Continuous enrollment
                                                since 9th grade
                                              • Participate in fundraising
                                                activities

     Peoria       Peoria, IL      2008                                       Sliding scale; 50% to  Illinois Central
     Promise                                  • Graduate from public         100% of tuition for up College
                                                school in Peoria             to 64 credit hours
53




                                              • Continuous enrollment
                                                since 10th grade
                                              • Continuous residency since
                                                10th grade.

     Pittsburgh   Pittsburgh,     2006                                       Sliding scale; $1,000   Any accredited PSI in
     Promise      PA                          • Graduate from Pittsburgh     to $10,000 per year     Pennsylvania
                                                Public Schools
                                              • Continuous enrollment
                                                since 9th grade
                                              • Continuous residency since
                                                9th grade
                                              • 2.5 GPA
                                              • 90% attendance
                                             Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of       Location        Announced Requirements                        Award                   Eligible Schools
     Program
     Promise for   Pinal County,     2001b                                       Full tuition (4         Central Arizona
     the Future    AZ                             • Graduate from Pinal          semesters)              College
                                                    County HS
                                                  • Continuous enrollment
                                                    since 8th grade
                                                  • 2.75 GPA

     Say Yes       Buffalo, NY       2012                                        Sliding scale; 65% to   Any State University
     Buffalo                                      • Graduate from Buffalo        100% unmet need         of New York or City
                                                    Public Schools                                       University of New
                                                  • Continuous enrollment                                York campus.c
54




                                                    since 9th grade
                                                  • Continuous residency since
                                                    9th grade

     Say Yes       Syracuse, NY      2009                                        100% unmet need         Any State University
     Syracuse                                     • Graduate from Syracuse                               of New York or City
                                                    Public Schools                                       University of New
                                                  • Continuous enrollment                                York campus.c
                                                    since 10th grade
                                                  • Continuous residency since
                                                    10th grade.
                                       Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of    Location     Announced Requirements                        Award                   Eligible Schools
     Program
     School     Hopkins      Unknown                                       $1,000 per semester     Madisonville
     Counts     County, KY                  • Graduate from Hopkins        for 4 semesters         Community College
     Program                                  County HS in 8
                                              consecutive semesters
                                            • Continuous enrollment
                                              since 9th grade
                                            • Continuous residency since
                                              9th grade
                                            • 2.5 GPA yearly
                                            • 95% attendance
                                            • Exceed graduation credit
55




                                              requirements.

     Sparkman   Sparkman,      2011                                        Sliding scale; 65% to   Any accredited PSI in
     Promise    AR                          • Graduate from Sparkman       100% of unmet need      the U.S.
                                              Public Schools               per year; Max:
                                            • Continuous enrollment        highest tuition at
                                              since 9th grade              Arkansas public PSI.
                                            • 2.5 GPA or 19 ACT
                                            • Receive AR Lottery
                                              scholarship
                                            • Apply for 2 other
                                              scholarships
                                                  Table 1: List of Promise Type Programs

     Name of         Location         Announced Requirements                             Award                    Eligible Schools
     Program
     Ventura         Ventura              2006                                           Enrollment costs for 1   Ventura College
     College         County, CA                         • Graduate from Ventura          year
     Promise                                              County HS
                                                        • Continuous enrollment
                                                          since 9th grade
                                                        • 2.5 GPA or 19 ACT
                                                        • Receive AR Lottery
                                                          scholarship
                                                        • Apply for 2 other
                                                          scholarships
56




      Source: http://www.upjohn.org/Research/SpecialTopics/KalamazooPromise/PromiseTypeScholarshipPrograms, Gonza-
     lez et al. (2011), and authors’ research. Program details have changed over time; for brevity, all details reported represent current
     program configurations.
     a
       Announced in 2009, but no details of eligibility or amount have been provided to date. Due to the high degree of uncertainty,
     was not included in analysis.
     b
       While the Kalamazoo Promise is often referred to as the first in this class, we have found a source dating the start of the
     Promise for the Future back to 2001 (“Deadline to enroll in Promise for the Future Scholarship approaching” The Superior Sun.
     April 15, 2009.). Historical program details were not found during our research.
     c
       There are other “Say Yes” partner schools, but additional restrictions apply.
                  Table 2: K-12 Public School Summary Statistics

                                       Promise       Control        t-stat
                                       Schools       Schools
        Total Enrollment      mean      599.70        745.36        24.71
                              (s.d.)   (431.00)      (615.82)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        % White               mean        0.44         0.44         1.84
                              (s.d.)     (0.31)       (0.35)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        Primary               mean        0.67         0.68         0.92
                              (s.d.)     (0.47)       (0.47)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        Middle                mean        0.17         0.16         1.81
                              (s.d.)     (0.38)       (0.37)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        High                  mean        0.14         0.14         1.57
                              (s.d.)     (0.35)       (0.35)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        City                  mean        0.57         0.39         -28.92
                              (s.d.)     (0.50)       (0.49)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        Suburb                mean        0.25         0.45         38.82
                              (s.d.)     (0.43)       (0.50)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        Town                  mean        0.05         0.04         0.80
                              (s.d.)     (0.21)       (0.20)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313
        Rural                 mean        0.14         0.12         -4.06
                              (s.d.)     (0.35)       (0.32)
                              Obs.       5,287        42,313


Notes: T-statistic from a two-sided t-test with unequal variance.




                                         57
                                                  Table 3: Housing Market Summary Statistics

                                           Large (10 mile)                         Small (1 mile)                      Optimal Subpop.
                                Promise       Control        t-stat    Promise        Control       t-stat   Promise       Control       t-stat
     Transaction       mean 220,026           219,754         -0.42     214,049       189,897       -21.55    216,271      189,513       -35.08
     price             (s.d.) (190,684)      (143,416)                 (190,952)     (161,839)               (191,359)    (136,338)
                       Obs.     95,954        418,440                    55,279        43,933                  77,059      174,262
     Price (1990       mean 131,961           134,164         5.68      126,971      114,554        -18.63    130,026     114,016        -35.46
     dollars)          (s.d.) (112,909)       (85,987)                 (113,360)     (96,472)                (113,213)    (80,906)
                       Obs.     95,954        418,440                    55,279       43,933                   77,059     174,262
     Building age      mean      48.38         26.12         -175.48     45.00         38.72        -31.16     51.65        37.95        -94.43
                       (s.d.)   (36.85)       (26.81)                   (32.80)       (30.11)                 (35.27)      (29.24)
                       Obs.     94,955        401,715                   54,867        43,088                  77,059       174,262
     Floor area (sq.   mean     1,595.62      1,820.44       87.41     1,573.41      1,598.54       5.56     1,540.07     1,578.04       13.00
58




     feet)             (s.d.)   (710.96)      (750.93)                 (723.14)      (693.64)                (689.00)     (642.62)
                       Obs.      95,954       418,440                   55,279        43,933                  77,059      174,262
     % Black           mean      0.14           0.11         -49.37      0.16          0.09         -65.87     0.12          0.15        33.34
                       (s.d.)   (0.17)         (0.22)                   (0.17)        (0.14)                  (0.17)        (0.25)
                       Obs.     94,751        413,571                   54,088        42,424                  77,059       174,262
     % under 15        mean      0.20           0.24         128.24      0.21          0.20         -24.57     0.20          0.21        46.59
                       (s.d.)   (0.07)         (0.06)                   (0.07)        (0.07)                  (0.06)        (0.05)
                       Obs.     94,751        413,571                   54,088        42,424                  77,059       174,262
     % over 60         mean      0.17           0.16         -29.86      0.16          0.21         65.77      0.19          0.19        3.50
                       (s.d.)   (0.11)         (0.11)                   (0.09)        (0.15)                  (0.10)        (0.10)
                       Obs.     94,751        413,571                   54,088        42,424                  77,059       174,262
                                                 Table 3: Housing Market Summary Statistics

                                          Large (10 mile)                        Small (1 mile)                     Optimal Subpop.
                               Promise       Control        t-stat    Promise       Control       t-stat   Promise      Control       t-stat
     % Households     mean      0.32           0.40         172.03     0.34          0.32         -22.03    0.31          0.34        75.77
     with children    (s.d.)   (0.13)         (0.11)                  (0.13)        (0.12)                 (0.11)        (0.10)
                      Obs.     94,751        413,571                  54,088        42,424                 77,059       174,262
     % HS diploma     mean      0.40           0.34         -86.73     0.42          0.41         -3.33     0.40          0.43        29.88
                      (s.d.)   (0.19)         (0.16)                  (0.18)        (0.16)                 (0.20)        (0.16)
                      Obs.     95,056        414,961                  54,386        42,424                 77,053       174,262
     % College        mean      0.34           0.34          4.47      0.32          0.29         -25.87    0.34          0.28        -71.54
                      (s.d.)   (0.21)         (0.17)                  (0.20)        (0.16)                 (0.21)        (0.16)
                      Obs.     95,056        414,961                  54,386        42,424                 77,053       174,262
     % unemployed     mean      0.08           0.06         -87.68     0.08          0.07         -23.53    0.08          0.08        6.73
59




                      (s.d.)   (0.04)         (0.05)                  (0.04)        (0.04)                 (0.05)        (0.05)
                      Obs.     94,154        414,961                  53,484        42,424                 77,053       174,262
     % in poverty     mean      0.16           0.08         -215.38    0.15          0.11         -65.11    0.16          0.12        -89.99
                      (s.d.)   (0.11)         (0.08)                  (0.10)        (0.09)                 (0.10)        (0.09)
                      Obs.     94,154        414,961                  53,484        42,424                 77,053       174,262
     % K-12 private   mean      0.18           0.13         -99.90     0.18          0.14         -51.44    0.18          0.14        -59.60
                      (s.d.)   (0.17)         (0.09)                  (0.16)        (0.11)                 (0.16)        (0.12)
                      Obs.     94,513        413,695                  54,381        41,751                 76,515       173,715
     Median income    mean      51,491        68,328        207.35     52,493        54,967       16.01     50,615      53,512        34.07
                      (s.d.)   (21,829)      (25,221)                 (22,956)      (24,406)               (20,398)    (17,851)
                      Obs.      94,152       414,961                   53,482        42,424                 77,052     174,262

      Notes: Prices were deflated to January 1990 dollars using the “All Urban Consumers-Owner’s Equivalent Rent of Primary Res-
     idence CPI” from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. T-statistic from a two-sided t-test with unequal variance.
        Table 4: K-12 Public School Enrollment Effects of Promise Programs

  Dependent Variable:             log(Total)      log(White)        log(Non-white)
  Panel A: Overall effects
  PromiseXPost                    0.037***           0.023               0.021
                                   (0.007)          (0.016)             (0.012)
  Panel B: Effects by type
  No Merit & Wide                 0.080***           -0.010              0.001
  (117 schools)                    (0.023)          (0.042)             (0.038)

  Merit & Wide                     0.040**         0.110***            -0.039**
  (203 schools)                    (0.017)          (0.038)             (0.020)

  No Merit & No Wide              0.039***           -0.020            0.076***
  (327 schools)                    (0.009)          (0.019)             (0.017)

  Merit & No Wide                   -0.031           0.054             -0.129***
  (66 schools)                     (0.026)          (0.033)             (0.033)

  Observations                     47,600            47,600             47,600
  Clusters (Schools)                6,337             6,337              6,337
  R-squared                         0.97              0.98                0.98

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. Sample includes
open, regular schools located in Promise zones and neighboring counties that reported
student counts by race in all available surveys conducted within 4 years of the region-
relevant Promise announcement. Fixed effects at the region-by-year, locale-by-year,
and school level are included in all specifications. Controls include school level (pri-
mary, middle, high, other) and locale (city, suburb, town, rural).
*
  Significant at the 10% level
**
   Significant at the 5% level
***
    Significant at the 1% level




                                            60
                 Table 5: Capitalization Effects of Promise Programs

   Dependent Variable: log(Price)                (1)            (2)             (3)
   Panel A: Large (10 mile)
   PromiseXPost                               -0.003         0.039***        0.083***
                                             (0.017)          (0.012)         (0.007)
   Observations                              514,394         487,930          505,604
   Clusters                                   2,055           2,008           393,570
   R-squared                                  0.38            0.69              0.92
   Panel B: Small (1 mile)
   PromiseXPost                               -0.006         0.045***        0.066***
                                             (0.022)          (0.017)         (0.013)
   Observations                               99,212          93,711           94,925
   Clusters                                    607             595             72,656
   R-squared                                   0.41            0.72             0.93
   Panel C: Optimal subpopulation
   PromiseXPost                              0.032*          0.061***        0.123***
                                             (0.018)          (0.013)         (0.009)
   Observations                              251,321         250,229          250,229
   Clusters                                   1,465           1,461           196,877
   R-squared                                  0.38            0.67              0.92
   Building Controls                           NO             YES               NO
   Census Controls                             NO             YES              YES
   Market-Year-Qtr FE                         YES             YES              YES
   School District FE                         YES              NO               NO
   Neighborhood (Tract) FE                     NO             YES               NO
   Property FE                                 NO              NO              YES

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the school level (in columns 1 and 2) or the property
level (column 3) in parentheses. Sample includes arms-length transactions of owner-occupied
single family homes. All controls are interacted with housing market indicators. Building
controls in column 2 include square footage and a quadratic in building age. Census controls
include the following tract-level statistics interpolated from the 1990, 2000, and 2010 Cen-
sus full-count data as well as the 2006-2010 American Community Survey: % of pop. black,
% of pop. under 15/over 60, % of households with children under 18, % of pop. with high
school diploma or less, % of pop. with some college, % unemployed, % of pop. in poverty,
% of K-12 children enrolled in private schools, and median income. Optimal subpopulation
includes sales with propensity scores in the interval [.075,.925].
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                            61
                 Table 6: Capitalization Effects of Promise Programs

  Dependent Variable: Price ($1990)               (1)           (2)              (3)
  Panel A: Large (10 mile)
  PromiseXPost                                  445.5        7,335***        17,966***
                                               (2,244)        (1,678)         (1,029)
  Observations                                514,394         487,930         505,604
  Clusters                                     2,055           2,008          393,570
  R-squared                                    0.25             0.72           0.94
  Panel B: Small (1 mile)
  PromiseXPost                                  -2,451       5,504***        14,244***
                                               (2,904)        (1,732)         (1,748)
  Observations                                   99,212       93,711           94,925
  Clusters                                        607          595             72,656
  R-squared                                       0.24         0.75             0.94
  Panel C: Optimal subpopulation
  PromiseXPost                                  3,018        8,214***        20,440***
                                               (2,308)        (1,595)         (1,110)
  Observations                                251,321         250,229         250,229
  Clusters                                     1,465           1,461          196,877
  R-squared                                    0.27             0.71           0.95
  Building Controls                              NO            YES              NO
  Census Controls                                NO            YES              YES
  Market-Year-Qtr FE                             YES           YES              YES
  School District FE                             YES           NO               NO
  Neighborhood (Tract) FE                        NO            YES              NO
  Property FE                                    NO            NO               YES

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the school level (in columns 1 and 2) or the property
level (column 3) in parentheses. Sample includes arms-length transactions of owner-occupied
single family homes. All controls are interacted with housing market indicators. Building
controls in column 2 include square footage and a quadratic in building age. Census controls
include the following tract-level statistics interpolated from the 1990, 2000, and 2010 Cen-
sus full-count data as well as the 2006-2010 American Community Survey: % of pop. black,
% of pop. under 15/over 60, % of households with children under 18, % of pop. with high
school diploma or less, % of pop. with some college, % unemployed, % of pop. in poverty,
% of K-12 children enrolled in private schools, and median income. Optimal subpopulation
includes sales with propensity scores in the interval [.075,.925].
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                            62
                      Table 7: Large Metropolitan Promise Programs

                                              Pittsburgh                        Denver
                                     log(Price)     Price ($1990)   log(Price)    Price ($1990)
Panel A: Large (10 mile)
PromiseXPost                          0.218***       13,508***       0.105***       24,784***
                                       (0.046)        (2,619)         (0.006)        (1,326)
Observations                           52,716         52,716          221,198        221,198
Clusters                               46,573          46,573        160,455         160,455
R-squared                               0.91            0.95            0.89           0.94
Panel B: Small (1 mile)
PromiseXPost                           0.147**        8,701***       0.069***       17,841***
                                       (0.075)         (2,763)        (0.013)        (2,363)
Observations                            14,474         14,474         49,445         49,445
Clusters                               12,762          12,762         34,241          34,241
R-squared                                0.90           0.96            0.9            0.93
Panel C: Optimal subpopulation
PromiseXPost                           0.155**        8,096***       0.046***       4,783***
                                       (0.077)         (2,424)        (0.012)        (1,273)
Observations                            13,517         13,517         36,104         36,104
Clusters                               11,903          11,903         24,748         24,748
R-squared                                0.91           0.97           0.87           0.94
Census Controls                          YES            YES            YES            YES
Market-Year-Qtr FE                       YES            YES            YES            YES
Property FE                              YES            YES            YES            YES

  Notes: Standard errors clustered at the property level in parentheses. Sample includes arms-
 length transactions of owner-occupied single family homes. Census controls include the fol-
 lowing tract-level statistics interpolated from the 1990, 2000 and 2010 Census full-count data:
 % of pop. black, % of pop. under 15/over 60, % of households with children under 18. In
 addition, the following block tract-level statistics are interpolated between the 1990 and 2000
 Census sample files and the 2006-2010 American Community Survey: % of pop. with high
 school diploma or less, % of pop. with some college, % unemployed, % of pop. in poverty,
 % of K-12 children enrolled in private schools, and median income. Full count statistics in-
 terpolated between 1990-2010 with years after 2010 held constant at 2010 values. Sample
 statistics interpolated between 1990-2006 with years after 2006 held constant at 2006 values.
 Optimal subpopulation includes sales with propensity scores in the interval [.091,.909] for
 Pittsburgh and [.076,.924] for Denver.
 ** Significant at the 5% level
 *** Significant at the 1% level




                                               63
                                       Table 8: Large Metropolitan Promise Programs by School Quality

                                              High School Quality                                  Primary School Quality
                                       Math                      Reading                        Math                      Reading
                             log(Price)       $1990       log(Price)    $1990         log(Price)       $1990       log(Price)    $1990
        Panel A: Large (10 mile)
        Promise x Post     -0.011*         -5,397***        0.004      -3,081***      0.084***     14,083***       0.068***     10,798***
        x Quality          (0.006)          (716.8)        (0.004)      (514.1)        (0.005)      (978.6)         (0.005)       -812.6

        N (Clusters)                           195,412 (144,002)                                        179,567 (131,872)
        R-squared               0.91          0.95           0.91        0.95            0.91          0.95           0.91        0.95
        Panel B: Small (1 mile)
        Promise x Post     0.027**         4,535***       0.046***     5,859***       0.092***     15,867***       0.080***     14,172***
        x Quality          (0.011)          (1,420)        (0.008)      (1,002)        (0.008)      (1,696)         (0.007)      (1,528)
64




        N (Clusters)                            52,925 (37,750)                                          49,749 (35,495)
        R-squared               0.93          0.94           0.93        0.94            0.93          0.94           0.93        0.94
        Panel C: Optimal subpopulation
        Promise x Post     0.014*     2,579***            0.023***     2,967***       0.060***     9,960***        0.052***     8,885***
        x Quality          (0.008)     (919.6)             (0.006)      (642.6)        (0.007)      (1,306)         (0.006)      (1,110)

        N (Clusters)                            67,663 (47,838)                                          61,787 (43,451)
        R-squared              0.92           0.94           0.92        0.94            0.91          0.95           0.91        0.95
        Census Controls        YES            YES            YES         YES             YES           YES            YES         YES
        City-Year-Qtr          YES            YES            YES         YES             YES           YES            YES         YES
        Property FE            YES            YES            YES         YES             YES           YES            YES         YES

      Notes: Standard errors clustered at the property level in parentheses. Sample includes arms-length transactions of owner-occupied single
     family homes. Raw school quality in 2005 is measured as the percentage of students that score proficient or advanced on state standard-
     ized tests. This raw measure is then standardized within state-school level cells such that the resulting standardized measure has mean
     zero and standard deviation 1 within each cell. All controls are interacted with housing market indicators. Census controls include the
     following tract-level statistics interpolated from the 1990, 2000 and 2010 Census full-count data: % of pop. black, % of pop. under 15/over
     60, % of households with children under 18. In addition, the following block tract-level statistics are interpolated between the 1990 and
     2000 Census sample files and the 2006-2010 American Community Survey: % of pop. with high school diploma or less, % of pop. with
     some college, % unemployed, % of pop. in poverty, % of K-12 children enrolled in private schools, and median income. Full count statis-
     tics interpolated between 1990-2010 with years after 2010 held constant at 2010 values. Sample statistics interpolated between 1990-2006
     with years after 2006 held constant at 2006 values. Optimal subpopulation includes sales with propensity scores in the interval [.078,.922].
     ** Significant at the 5% level
     *** Significant at the 1% level
65
