NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGGREGATE FERTILITY AND HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS:
A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS USING MICRO DATA
Abhijit Banerjee
Xin Meng
Tommaso Porzio
Nancy Qian
Working Paper 20050
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20050

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

We thank Mark Aguiar, Paco Buera, Nicolas Ceourdacier, Oded Galor, Mikhail Golosov, Hui He,
Jonathan Heathcote, Nobu Kiyotaki, Samuel Kortum, David Lagakos, Costas Meghir, Benjamin Moll,
Michael Peters, B. Ravikumar, Mark Rosenzweig, Ananth Seshadri, Todd Schoelman, Yongs Shin,
Michael (Zheng) Song, Kjetil Storesletten, Gustavo Ventura, Shangjin Wei, David Weil and Fabrizio
Zilibotti for their insights; the participants at the Yale Development Lunch, Yale Macro Lunch, EIEF
Lunch Seminar, the conference on Human Capital and Development at the Washington University
of St. Louis, the NBER Summer Institute Income Distribution and Macroeconomics, Conference of
“China and the West 1950-2050: Economic Growth, Demographic Transition and Pensions” in Zurich,
the Symposium on China's Financial Markets, and the NBER China Workshop for comments; and
Yu Liu, Jeff Weaver and Xiaoxue Zhao for excellent research assistance. We acknowledge ARC Linkage
Grant LP0669728 for funding the RUMiC survey. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Abhijit Banerjee, Xin Meng, Tommaso Porzio, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Aggregate Fertility and Household Savings: A General Equilibrium Analysis using Micro
Data
Abhijit Banerjee, Xin Meng, Tommaso Porzio, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 20050
April 2014
JEL No. J11,J13,O11,O12,O4,O53
ABSTRACT
This study uses micro data and an overlapping generations (OLG) model to show that general equilibrium
(GE) forces are critical for understanding the relationship between aggregate fertility and household
savings. First, we document that parents perceive children as an important source of old-age support
and that, in partial equilibrium (PE), increased fertility lowers household savings. Then, we construct
an OLG model that parametrically matches the PE empirical evidence. Finally, we extend the model
to conduct a GE analysis and show that under standard assumptions and with the parameters implied
by the data, GE forces can substantially offset the PE effects. Thus, focusing only on the PE can substantially
overstate the effect of aggregate fertility on household savings.

Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E17-201B
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu
Xin Meng
Australian National University
xin.meng@anu.edu.au

Tommaso Porzio
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06520
tommaso.porzio@yale.edu
Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu

1

Introduction

The linkage between aggregate fertility change and economic performance is central to models
of economic growth. A large literature has provided important evidence relating aggregate
fertility change to growth (e.g., Romer, 1986; Kremer, 1993; Jones, 1999; Galor and Weil,
2000), growth and inequality (e.g., De La Croix and Doepke, 2003), culture (e.g., Fernandez
and Fogli, 2006; Fernandez and Fogli, 2009), social security (e.g., Boldrin and Jones, 2002;
Boldrin, De Nardi, and Jones, 2005; Song, Storesletten, Wang, and Zilibotti, 2012) and
savings (e.g., Becker and Barro, 1988; Barro and Becker, 1989; Manuelli and Seshadri, 2009).
In particular, Modigliani and Cao (2004) argue that changes in aggregate fertility can also
lead to signicant changes in household savings through their eect on the dependency ratio
and wage growth.

The authors support their claim with descriptive time series data from

China, where a substantial reduction in fertility during the 1970s and 1980s resulting from
family planning policies was accompanied by a rapid rise in the savings rate.
Such time series correlations are dicult to interpret since aggregate fertility change is
likely to coincide with other macroeconomic changes, such as changes in the returns to human
capital or in the relative female wage.

In the case of China, an additional concern is the

possibility that the increase in savings and the reduction in fertility are both consequences of
the massive economic reforms that took place. Moreover, fertility is likely to aect savings
through mechanisms other than the pure aggregation channel proposed by Modigliani and
Cao (2004). The recent literature has therefore taken advantage of more specic demographic
shocks (e.g., the introduction of China's family planning policies, the implementation of family
policies in Bangladesh under the leadership of the International Centre for Diarrhea Disease
Research, or the birth of twins) to empirically estimate the causal eect of fertility on savings.
These studies nd a large negative eect of fertility on savings (e.g., Ruthbah, 2007; Banerjee,
Meng, and Qian, 2011; Ge, Yang, and Zhang, 2012; Choukhmane, Coeurdacier, and Jin,

1 Studies such as Curtis, Lugauer, and Mark (2011) and Choukhmane, Coeurdacier,

2013).

and Jin (2013) then use the evidence from micro data to calibrate partial equilibrium (PE)

1

This paper supersedes Banerjee, Meng, and Qian (2011).

1

overlapping generations (OLG) models to understand the quantitative eect of an aggregate
fertility change on savings.
While these studies provide compelling evidence that fertility aects savings decisions,
they are unlikely to identify the correct quantitative eect of a change in aggregate fertility
on savings. This is because an aggregate change in fertility may alter other economic factors
that aect savings, such as the interest rate and the rate of wage growth, through their eect
on the capital-labor ratio (e.g., Barro and Becker, 1989; Galor and Weil, 1996).

2 The quasi-

experimental micro evidence, which relies on comparisons of households with dierent levels
of fertility within the same economy, nets out such general equilibrium (GE) eects, without
which we cannot obtain the correct full equilibrium eect of a change in fertility. In particular,
the fact that higher fertility leads to higher future interest rates and to slower wage growth,
both of which may lead to higher savings, has the potential to partly undo the negative PE
eect of fertility on savings that is estimated in the micro empirical analyses.
The goal of this paper is to use a combination of parameter estimates from a natural
experiment and other micro data and careful modeling to understand whether studies of
the relationship between aggregate fertility and savings need to take GE eects seriously in
drawing macro policy conclusions from micro empirical estimates. While the principle that
GE eects matter is widely accepted (e.g., Heckman, Lochner, and Taber, 1998 and Acemoglu,
2010), concrete examples of their potential quantitative importance are scarce. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the rst study of the relationship between aggregate fertility and
savings to provide such an example.
Our study proceeds in several steps. First, to motivate the study and obtain parameter
values for calibrating the model later in the paper, we use nationally representative survey
data to document that contemporary Chinese parents perceive children and especially sons
as an important source of old-age support.

2

At the time of this study, there were no data

The seminal study of Barro and Becker (1988, 1989) models children as consumption and introduces

endogenous fertility and intergenerational transfers to optimal growth models. Becker and Barro (1988) uses
an open economy framework, where interest rates are exogenous.

Barro and Becker (1989) uses a closed

economy framework where fertility increases the capital-labor ratio and interest rates. Note that the main
dierence between our framework and theirs is that we view children as an investment good. This is discussed
in detail later in the introduction.

2

that contained both total fertility history and data on income and expenditures. Thus, we
conducted a survey that provides this data and use it to establish that for individuals age 50
65, the shift in Chinese family planning policies from pro-natal to anti-natal reduced fertility
and increased household savings, particularly for those who had only one daughter. Because
in these cohorts there was no sex-selection we argue that this can be interpreted as the
causal eect of the family being restricted to one daughter. Moreover both the data and our
estimated parameter values suggest that child-related expenditures are similar for daughters
and sons. Therefore the nding that a reduction in fertility increases savings more for those
with only-child-daughters is evidence for models where parents take savings decisions based
on how much nancial or psychological old-age support they can expect to get from their

3

children (e.g., Caldwell, 1978; Weil, 1997; Boldrin and Jones, 2002; Tertilt, 2005).

Next, we characterize the savings decision in a parsimonious Diamond-style OLG model
with the additional feature that parents anticipate have to spend resources on bringing up
children but the expect transfers from children in old age and both of these inuence their
savings decisions. We calibrate the PE version of this model to match the empirical ndings.
Then, we introduce GE eects to our model by endogenizing wages and interest rates (e.g.,

4

Barro and Becker, 1989; Galor and Weil, 1996).

We nd that depending on parameter values, GE eects can either dampen or exacerbate
the PE eects of an increase in fertility (or leave them unchanged). On the one hand, GE
eects may be more muted because the rise in the interest rate and the fall in wage growth
generated by an increase in fertility reduce the present value of future transfers from children
and thus induces parents to save more.

On the other hand, GE eects may be stronger

because of the income eect from the rise in the interest rate. Using the parameter estimates

3

Caldwell (1978) argues that children provide old-age security.

Weil (1997) nds that intergenerational

transfers occur in both directions  from parents to children and from children to parents. Boldrin and Jones
(2002) uses a growth model to formalize the ideas of Caldwell (1978) and shows that it can account for
demographic patterns in the data. Boldrin, De Nardi, and Jones (2005) goes further to argue that if children
provide old-age security, then the observed cross-country dierences in fertility rates can be explained by
cross-countries dierences in social security.

Tertilt (2005) also considers children as a form of savings for

parents and nds that banning polygyny is likely to decrease fertility and increase savings.

4

That savings rates are associated with interest rates in practice is consistent with Horioka and Wan's

(2007) nding that, in China, average household savings rates at the province level is positively associated
with real interest rates.

3

we obtain from the micro-empirical analysis, we nd that the GE eect of increased fertility is
only 30% of the PE eect estimated from micro data. This is true as long as the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution is not too far below one, which is consistent with the data.
Since our estimates of the parameters are not always very precise and the match between
our model and reality is, as always, inexact, we check the robustness of our GE estimates by
varying the parameters over a wide range, and for the most part the results remain the same.
We then consider a number of extensions of our model that bring in endogenous fertility,
endogenous transfer rate and endogenous human capital investment. Our results are robust
to these extensions as well.
The key contribution of our paper is to provide a concrete example of the importance of
GE eects for understanding how a shift in aggregate fertility aects savings. Applying PE
estimates to macro policy without interpreting the results with the appropriate model can
therefore be very misleading.

In a methodological sense this is similar to Weil (1994) who

notes that aggregate savings is negatively associated with the size of the elderly population
despite the lack of micro evidence that the elderly dis-save. To reconcile these patterns, he
develops a model to demonstrate that in the absence of full annuitization, if the elderly saves
for bequests, then the anticipation of income from bequests will cause children to save less.
At the same time, our study illustrates the importance of obtaining reliable micro evidence
since the quantitative eects are sensitive to parameter values.

In this sense we address

the general methodological concern that there is often a discordance between the macro
models used in policy evaluation and the microeconomic models used to generate the empirical
evidence (Browning, Hansen, and Heckman, 1999) and provide an example of a growth
models that are built up from well-identied parameters estimated using experimental and
quasi-experimental data as proposed by Banerjee and Duo (2005)(for parallel exercise on the
macro impact of microcredit see Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2012)).
More generally this work is related to studies that explore the eects of aggregate fertility change going back to the classic work of Becker, Murphy, and Tamura (1994) and the
important subsequent work by De La Croix and Doepke (2003), Galor and Weil (2000) and

4

Manuelli and Seshadri (2014). In emphasizing the macro eects of demographic changes in
the contemporary Chinese context, our study is closely related to Song, Storesletten, Wang,
and Zilibotti (2013), which shows that the demographic transition in China implies that
pay-as-you-go pension systems have redistributive eects across generations.
Finally, our study adds to the previously discussed studies that explain Chinese savings
rates with demographic factors. For example, Song and Yang (2010) elaborates the argument
originally made by Modigliani and Cao's (2004) and provides evidence that links the spike
in aggregate savings, the growth rate and the attening of experience proles over time.
Rosenzweig and Zhang (2014) explains the savings of the young with family size and transfers

.

of housing from parents to children

Finally, in their innovative work, Wei and Zhang (2011)

shows that savings rates for middle-aged parents today are partly driven by the anticipation
of paying bride prices for sons in a future where there will be many more men than women

5

in the marriage market.

For policy makers in China, our results suggest that abandoning family planning policies
and allowing fertility to rise, if our model is to be believed, will have little eect on household
savings.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents parents' beliefs of the importance
of children as a source of old-age support.
fertility change and savings.

Section 3 documents the relationship between

Section 4 presents the results from the model, including the

calibration of the parameters and the quantitative estimates.

Section 5 oers concluding

remarks.

5

There also a number of studies of Chinese savings that emphasize factors other than demography: Cha-

mon and Prasad (2010) provides evidence that nancial underdevelopment and the precautionary motive are
important contributors to savings; similarly, a recent study by He, Huang, Liu, and Zhu (2014) nds precautionary saving and increased employment risk due to the downsizing of the state sector to be important
determinants of household savings; and Horioka and Wan (2007) nds that savings are associated with lagged
savings rate, the income growth rate, the real interest rate and the ination rate.

5

2

Children as Old-Age Security

In this section, we briey summarize we believe that the parents we study, who are 50 to 65
years old urban workers in 2008, anticipate that their children will be an important potential
source of support in old age; and that typically, sons are likely to provide more support than
daughters. This is certainly what one would have expected based on Confucian traditions, but
in contemporary urban China, state-provided pensions are a very important source of old-age
support (Song, Storesletten, Wang, and Zilibotti, 2012). However, since pensions have not
been indexed to the high income growth rates of urban areas, the real value of pensions have
tended to decline rapidly over time. In contrast, children's earnings will (on average) increase
with prices and thus remain a stable source of support for parents for long haul.

Also, it

is important to note that the elderly almost always live with their children (or other family
members) when they are very old.

There is very little old-age care in the form of nursing

homes, etc., that we see in more developed economies.
Outside of pensions and children, urban households have access to few savings instruments.
Bank interest rates are very low and though more recently access to nancial markets has
expanded, in 2007, almost all household savings (other than housing) in urban areas were in
bank deposits (He and Cao, 2007).
Existing descriptive evidence support the conventional wisdom that elderly parents in
urban China receive substantial old-age support from children, which is increasing in the
number of children, whether a parent has a son and the age of the parent. Using data from
the 2011 CHARLS survey, which samples a nationally representative set of households (see
the Data Appendix for a discussion of all of the surveys used in this section), Figure 1 plots
urban net household transfer income from children as a fraction of total household income
against the age of the main respondent.
the oldest male household member.

The main respondent in the survey is typically

The gure shows that total transfer income increases

with age and the number of children (total fertility). For example, for those with one child,
net transfer income increases to approximately 20% of total income by age 90.

For those

with two children, transfer income increase to almost 80% of total income by age 90. Since

6

the CHARLS only reports transfers for parents who do not live with their children, we also
examine co-habitation patterns. For this, we can use the UHIES, which is a representative
sample of urban households, of which we have data from nineteen cities in nine provinces.
Using the information on cohabitation and the relationship to the household head, we are
able to calculate the fraction of parents living with a child for the entire urban population.
Figure 2 shows an inverse U-shape.

The fraction of parents living with children decreases

from almost 100% at age 40 to around 50% by age 65 and returns to 100% by age 90.
Unfortunately, the UHIES does not allow us to distinguish whether parents live with their
daughter or son. However, the CHARLS (2011) data on cohabitation reports that for urban
households, approximately 20% of adult sons (age 4564) and only 10% of adult daughters
live with elderly parents (age 65 or older).
Finally, we examine the survey evidence on parents' perceptions of old-age support. In
the CHARLS (2011), respondents were asked Whom do you think you can (most) rely on
for old-age support?.

Figure 3 plots the answers given by urban households according to

the age of the household head.

It shows that, on average, less than 10% of respondents

rely on savings, approximately 60% choose pension or retirement salary and slightly less
than 30% choose children (the other possible responses to this question were commercial
pension insurance and other). As parents age from 65, when most workers retire to 90, the
percentage reporting pensions as the most important source of support declines from 65% to
40%, whereas those reporting children as the most important increases from 20% to 60%.

3

The PE Eects of Fertility on Savings

3.1 Family Planning Policies
In its early years, the communist government (1949 ) had a pro-natal stance on fertility

6

(Chang, Lee, McKibben, Poston, and Walther, 2005; Scharping, 2013).

The government

pursued policies that encouraged fertility such as conditioning food rations on the number

6

Most famously, Ma Yinchu's New Population Theory, which argued that a rapidly growing population

would hinder economic development and that the government should implement population control policies,
was ocially discredited as being pro-Malthusian and anti-Socialist (Yang, 1986).

7

of family members and making access to contraceptives dicult until a certain number of
children had already been born. Discussions about curbing population growth were conned
to the top policy makers until the early 1970s.

However in 1971, Mao Zedong and Zhou

Enlai made a sudden public policy shift and announced that population must be controlled ,
which signaled a turning point in family planning policy practice in China.

7 Eorts began

in earnest in 1972 with measures to clarify the shift in family planning policy and energize

8

the bureaucracy.

By 1973, 23 provinces had established the necessary bureaucracies for

implementing family planning related policies.
Our study focuses on the unanticipated and unprecedented initial shift in family planning
policy from anti-natal to pro-natal that occurred in 1972, which encouraged birth spacing
of three to four years.

An unanticipated increase in birth spacing is likely to reduce total

fertility since, for example, some mothers will become too old to have a second child after the
required waiting period. In urban China, the reduction due to birth spacing was magnied
by the subsequent introduction of the One Child Policy in 1980 (1979 in Shanghai), when
the government took another unanticipated move of restricting fertility to only one child.

9

When this occurred, parents who had their rst child after 1976 (1975 in Shanghai) and were
waiting to pass the required birth spacing to have their second child found that they would
remain one-child families.

7

On Feb. 15th, 1971, Zhou Enlai re-emphasized the importance of family planning when meeting with the

provincial representatives at the National Planning Conference in Beijing: It's important to control population
growth. Government should advocate late marriages and birth control, and vigorously publicize these policies
from now on. On July 8th, the State Council published the Report on Doing Well in Family Planning. The
written instruction by the State Council on the document pointed out that Family planning is an important
issue that Chairman Mao has advocated for years. All levels of ocials must treat the issue seriously.

8

On January 17, 1972, provincial leaders attended a meeting organized by the Ministry of Public Health

where the central government demanded that local governments publicize and enforce Mao's instructions
on family planning, and instructed all levels of government to establish or reinforce their bureaucracies for
organizing or implementing family planning related tasks. In May of that year, the Ministry of Public Health
organized a national workshop on family planning measures where all provinces had to participate. The details
of family planning policy history is documented (in Chinese) by the China Population Information Network
(POPIN), a branch of the China Population Development and Research Center (CPDRC or CPIRC) on their
website.

9

The One Child Policy (OCP) punished households that had more than one child with nes, job loss, and

the loss of access to public goods, and rewarded those with only one child with bonuses.

Family planning

polices also became better dened over time. For example, in 1978, the state dened details on things such
as what counted as late marriages and the bonuses and subsidies for workers and farmers if they go through
sterilizing operations, etc. See The Report on the State Councils Family Planning Groups First Meeting
(1978).

8

Similar policies were introduced in rural areas, but there was more exibility across regions

10

and over time.

3.2 Estimating the Eect of Fertility on Savings
We will use household-level data to rst demonstrate two reduced form relationships:
family planning reduced fertility; (ii) family planning increased savings.

(i)

These estimates,

together, imply that reduced fertility increased savings. Since parents traditionally rely on
sons more than daughters, fertility from the perspective of parents thinking about future
transfers is a weighted sum of children, where daughters receive less weight than sons. Since
we do not know the weights, we simply treat daughters and sons separately and estimate the
following reduced-form equation

y ij = δpij + αmij + ζ(pij × mij ) + ∆Xij + θj + εij .
yij ,

for household

i

living in region

j,

(1)

represents outcomes like the total number of children,

savings, etc. We specify that it is a function of: a dummy variable for whether the rst child
was born in or after 1972,
term between

pij

and

pij ; a dummy for whether the rst child is male, mij ; the interaction

mij ;

a vector of household-level controls,

and a household-specic error term,

εij .

X ij ;

region xed eects,

θi ;

The standard errors are clustered at the sex (of the

11

rst child), year of birth (of the rst child) and city level for all of our results.

δ

is the eect

of having a rst child in 1972 or afterwards for households that have a daughter for the rst
child.

δ+ζ

is the eect of having a rst child in 1972 or afterwards for households that have

a son for the rst child.
These estimates test the hypothesis that parents perceive children, especially the male rst
The variation in the implementation of the One Child Policy in rural China can be seen in the China
Health and Nutritional Survey, which reports the relaxations of the policy that are allowed at the community

10

and year level. In contrast, the data show very little variation in these variables across communities or over
time for urban areas. These descriptive statistics are available upon request.

11

There are 131 clusters. We can alternatively cluster the standard errors at the sex and year of birth (of the

rst child) level and then correct for the small number of clusters by estimating wild bootstrapped standard
errors.

The rst stage and reduced form estimates are very similar between these two levels of clustering.

These estimates are available upon request. There is no correction for the small number of clusters for the
2SLS estimates.

9

child, as an important provider of old-age support. The claim that having one's rst child
during or after 1972 decreased total fertility both when the rst child is female and when he
is male, translates into a test for whether both

δ̂ < 0

and

δ[
+ ζ < 0.

Similarly, the claim

that parents rely more on sons than daughters for old-age support, and therefore parents who
gave birth in or after 1972 and had a rst male child need to save less and can retire earlier
compared to parents who gave birth in or after 1972 and have a rst female child would imply,

ζ̂ < 0

in the savings equations. The vector

Xij

includes household-specic controls that we

will discuss and motivate later as they become relevant.
For a sense of the implied magnitudes, we also estimate an instrumental variables specication, which assumes that the only thing that changed in 1972 for this population was the
number of children they could have

y ij = δnij + αmij + ζ(nij × mij ) + ∆Xij + θj + εij .

Here,

nij

Similarly,

(2)

is the number of children the family eventually had and is instrumented by

nij × mij

is instrumented by

pij .

pij × mij .

The aim of our study is to assess whether GE eects should be taken seriously for understanding the relationship between aggregate fertility and savings. Thus, the instrumental
variables estimates are used to illustrate the approximate magnitude of the relationship between fertility and savings and to provide parameter values that are useful for the calibration
of our model in Section 4. We do not interpret the 2SLS literally as the causal eect of fertility
on savings since there are potential violations of the exclusion restriction.
Note that there is little sex selection in our sample.

12

Female infanticide rates in urban

China are very low and we restrict our sample to households that bore children before sexselective abortion became available in the 1980s. Consistent with no sex-selection, 50.3% of
all children in our sample are male. Thus, we interpret the coecient for the sex of the rst
child,

12

mijt ,

as exogenous. Also, note that given the introduction of family planning policies,

It is possible, for example, that even if the actual number of children was unaected, the option of having

another child later in life might have independent eects.

10

we have many fewer observations for second or higher parity children than for rst parity
children.

For this reason, our sample size is not large enough to examine the dierential

eects of male and female higher parity children.
There are two important caveats to our strategy. First, households in the control group
will be older on average than those in the treatment group, which can aect savings patterns
if parents of the two groups are at dierent parts in their life cycle (even within the narrow
age band that we examine). One way to address this is to control for the age of the household
head. However, while this controls for age, it can introduce selection bias if parents choose
fertility timing based on factors that are correlated with savings later in life. We will discuss
this in further detail when we interpret the results.
This raises a second diculty. For example, parents that have children later in life may be
more risk averse, which will, in turn, cause them to save more. To investigate this possibility,
we directly examine the correlation between age at rst birth and savings, controlling for the
same baseline controls. We nd no correlation.

13

3.3 Data
To document the relationship between fertility and household savings, we use the urban
household portion of the larger survey that we collected in 2008, called the 2008

Rural-Urban

Migration in China (RUMiC). At the time of our study, these were the only data that allowed
us to measure both the total number of children ever born and savings rate for a sucient

13

There are several additional facts to keep in mind for interpreting the coecients.

First, the policies

for population control gradually tightened over time. This means that the eect of family planning policies
on total fertility is not uniform across households that have their rst child in or after 1972; the later they
have their rst child, the fewer children they will have. This is important to keep in mind when interpreting
the magnitude of the estimates, which give the average post-reform eect. Second, family planning policy is
relatively uniform across urban areas (e.g., Ebenstein, 2010; Qian, 2009) and there are relatively few ethnic
minority households (who get some exemption from the policy in most Chinese cities). Our empirical strategy
estimates the average change after 1972.
Note that our identication strategy assumes that the shift to fertility control in the early 1970s was
unanticipated. For example, if parents anticipated fertility control policies, those who desired more children
may have had more children than otherwise in the years leading up the policy. This would cause an Ashenfelter
dip and our strategy will overestimate the eect of the policy on reducing the number of children. If parents
who intentionally had more children also had a lower propensity to save for reasons unrelated to fertility,
this will also cause our strategy to overestimate the eect of the policy on increasing savings. The historical
evidence discussed earlier suggests that it is very unlikely that there was anticipation.
knowledge, no existing study of family planning in China mentions this possibility.

11

To the best of our

14 In this paper, we only use the urban data

number of households for statistical analysis.

because family planning policies and access to savings instruments were relatively uniform
in urban areas, and equally importantly, because there was little sex-selection. The data are
organized as a household-level birth cohort panel according to the birth year of the rst child.
The empirical analysis focuses on households that had their rst child ve years before or after
the policy shift in 1972, i.e., 196777, an arbitrary interval that we chose to be symmetric
around the reform date. Figure 4a shows the kernel density plot for the distribution of the
ages of rstborn children in our sample.
We restrict the sample to households headed by individuals who are 50 to 65 years of
age to focus on a point in the lifecycle when individuals are most likely to be saving for
their retirement.

This is the period of the life cycle when children require relatively little

expenditure from parents, when parents are still working, and when children are not yet
making transfers to parents. Figure 4b is a kernel density plot for the distribution of the ages
of the household heads in our sample.
This is also the age range when co-residence is very low in the urban population.

15 This

allays two concerns: (i) that the households we observe are headed by individuals who are
selected on characteristics such as propensity to save; (ii) that the household savings decisions
that we observe are inuenced by expenditure on children. Indeed, there are very few house-

16 The narrow age band is also advantageous

holds with children living at home in our sample.

because individuals are likely to be on the same part of the life cycle and therefore comparable
to each other. Note that this sample is younger than the sample of elderly parents ages 65 or
older with which we examined transfers and cohabitation in Section 2.
The nal sample contains 475 households in eighteen cities. Table 1 shows the descriptive
statistics.

14
15

Households in our sample on average have total incomes of 49,584 RMB and

See the Data Appendix for a detailed discussion of the RUMiC and other survey data from China.
A 0.1% sample of urban households in eighteen provinces (UHIES, see Data Appendix) show that less

than 10% of individuals of this age range co-reside with children or parents. This is the lowest for any age
group.

16

In our sample, there are only ve households with any children eighteen or younger and only fteen

households with any children age 22 or younger. Figure 4c plots the kernel density plot of the distribution of
the youngest children in our sample.

12

expenditures of 32,421 RMB. Savings, the dierence between total income (except for transfer

17 The average savings rate is

income) and total expenditures, are on average 17,162 RMB.

26%. Figure 4d plots the kernel density of household savings in our sample. It is approximately
normally distributed and takes negative as well as positive values. Figure 4e plots the kernel
density of household savings rates in our sample.
The average household has approximately two children, 50.3% of which are male.

On

average, parents had their rst child in 1973 and their youngest child in 1976. This means
that when the survey was conducted in 2008, households in our sample on average had children
aged 3235 years. Our sample contains households headed by individuals 5065 years of age.
On average, household heads are approximately 61 years of age and have approximately ten
years of education (i.e. one year of high school education). Approximately 42% of our sample

18

is headed by women.

3.4 Results
The Eects of Family Planning on Fertility

Table 2 presents the estimated eects of

the introduction of family planning on fertility. Column (1) shows a specication that only
controls for city xed eects. The estimates show that parents that gave birth to their rst
child in 1972 or afterwards had, on average, 0.6 fewer children. In column (4), we estimate
equation (1) where we add controls for whether the rst child is a son and the interaction
of that term with whether the rst child was born during 1972 or afterwards. The estimate
for the uninteracted post-1972 term shows that parents who had their rst daughter in or
after 1972 had approximately one less child (-0.8). The sum of the uninteracted post-1972
term and its interaction with the rst child being a son, shown at the bottom of the table
along with its p-value, is also negative and signicant. But it is smaller in magnitude than

17

These variables are dened in detail in the Data Appendix. In results not presented in this paper, we used

several alternative denitions of expenditures, such as with or without including social security contributions
(which can be viewed partly as a form of savings).

These make little dierence to our results and are not

presented for brevity. They are available upon request.

18

This does not necessarily mean that these women had no male spouse  it could just be that the survey

respondent was the oldest female in the household. To be cautious and to avoid the potentially confounding
eects from having a female household head, we will control for this in our regressions.

13

the uninteracted term (-0.4).
The results mean that parents who had their rst son in or after 1972 were also likely to
have had fewer children than those who had their rst son before 1972 but the reduction in the
number of children was smaller in magnitude than for parents that had a rst daughter. This
is most likely driven by the boy-biased stopping rule: before 1972, some parents stopped
having children once they had a son, with the result that males have on average fewer siblings
than females. This can be seen in the negative coecient on the dummy variable for whether

19 All of the coecients discussed here are statistically signicant at

the rst child is a son.

the 1% level. In columns (2)(3) and (5)(8), we add controls which we will discuss in the
next section.
The results in Table 2 conrm that the introduction of family planning reduced total
fertility and that there is a prejudice in favor of sons. Both of these ndings are important to
keep in mind for interpreting our results later in the paper.

The Eect of Family Planning on Savings

Next, we examine the eect of the introduc-

tion of family planning on savings. We estimate the same regressions as before, except that
we replace the dependent variable with household savings rates. Table 3 shows the reduced
form results. Column (1) presents the estimates when we only control for city xed eects.
On average, parents that had their rst child after 1972 saved 6,175 RMB more in 2008. The
estimate is statistically signicant at the 1% level. In column (2), we control for basic demographic characteristics of the parents: the age of the household head and its squared term,
the educational attainment of the household head and its squared term. These are important
since income and consumption patterns, and thus savings patterns, can dier by age (even in
our limited age range). Similarly, educated parents may have a dierent propensity to save
than less educated parents. Column (2) shows that including these controls has little eect
on the estimated eect of having the rst child in or after 1972.
As we discussed earlier, controlling for the age of the household head introduces a specic

19

Consistent with the stopping rule, on average, boys in our sample come from households with 1.7 children,

while girls come from households with two children.

14

type of selection: it raises the question of whether parents that chose to have children at
an earlier time in life will save less than parents that chose to have children later in life for
reasons other than the dierence in total fertility. To address this, we drop the two controls
for the age of the household head in column (3). The estimate is only slightly smaller than
the one in column (2) and is statistically dierent from zero at the 1% level. The estimates
in columns (2) and (3) are not statistically dierent from each other.
In column (4), we introduce controls for the sex of the rst child and its interaction with
whether he/she is born in or after 1972. We return to a specication where we only control
for city xed eects.

In column (5), we add the four controls for parental characteristics

(age and its squared term, the years of education and its squared term).

The estimate of

the uninteracted eect of having a rst child in or after 1972 shows that parents that have a
daughter as a rst child in or after 1972 save 12,613 RMB more than parents that have a rst
daughter prior to 1972. The interaction eect shows the dierential eect for parents who
have their rst child in or after 1972 but who have a son. The sums of the uninteracted and
interacted eects are shown at the bottom of the table. This coecient, 1748, is positive, but
small in magnitude and statistically insignicant.
Thus, parents that have their rst child in or after 1972 save much more if their rst child
is a daughter and may save a little more if their rst child is a son. Given the earlier results
that parents who had their rst child in or after 1972 also had fewer children on average,
especially if the rst child was a daughter, these results are consistent with parents saving

20

more when they have fewer children.

In column (6), we remove the controls for the age of the household head and its squared
term for the reasons that we discussed earlier. The estimates change little. In column (7),
we add additional controls. The control for whether the head of the household is under 55
years of age addresses the possibility that being over the mandatory retirement age (from

20

Note that the uninteracted dummy variable for whether a rst child is a son is large, positive and sta-

tistically signicant. This variable, which reects the eect of having a rst child who is male prior to 1972
may partly reect the fact that such households had fewer total children because of the stopping rule (recall
Table 2 column (4) shows that the coecient of the rst child being on the total number of children is -0.455).
Fewer children can, in turn, results in lower expenditures, and higher savings.

15

public enterprises) increases unemployment probabilities and savings behavior. Controlling
for the age of the youngest child addresses the possibility that having a young child increases
consumption and aect savings. The dummy variable for whether the youngest child is under
22 years of age also addresses this point. Finally, we control for whether the mother is the
household head in case this variable reects intrahousehold bargaining power and, thereby,
savings behavior. In column (8), we include all of the controls in column (7) except for the
age of the household head and its squared term. The estimates are precisely estimated and
statistically similar to the baseline in column (5).
To summarize, the estimates in Table 3 show that parents that had their rst child in
or after 1972, in particular those with daughters, save more.

It is also interesting to note

that the estimates change very little with the changing controls.

This is consistent with

our identication assumption that the introduction of fertility restrictions was randomly
assigned.

21

The Implied Eect of Fertility on Savings

We use 2SLS to scale the reduced form

estimates from Table 3 and interpret the instrumented estimates as a rough approximation
of the eect of fertility.

In Table 4 columns (1)(3), we report the instrumental variables

estimates. The absolute value of the instrumented estimates is roughly similar in magnitude
to the reduced form estimate. Column (3) shows that an additional child reduces savings by
approximately 18,570 RMB if the rst child is a daughter. This is statistically signicant at
the 1% level. The interaction eect of the number of children with a dummy for rst child
being male is positive and signicant at the 1% level. As before, this suggests that family
size matters less if the rst child is male.

This is shown more formally by the sum of the

uninteracted and interacted eects of the number of children, which is -7,518 RMB for the
level of savings in column (3).

21

The joint estimates are statistically insignicant (they and

We also conduct a placebo experiment to examine the possibility that our post-1972 variable is picking

up parents who prefer to have children later in life. We estimate an equation similar to equation (1), except
that we replace the post-1972 dummy variable with the household head's age at rst birth (both by itself and
interacted with a dummy for whether the rst child is a son). If our main results were driven by selection,
should nd the coecient for the interaction eect to be positive. We nd no eect: the coecient is 0.00187
and the standard error is 0.00777 (these results are not reported in tables).

16

their standard errors are not reported in the tables). We also see that the eect of the rst
child being male is strongly negative and signicant, consistent with the theory that parents
who have an oldest son expect that they will be taken care of.
Finally, we consider the alternative mechanism raised by Wei and Zhang (2011) that
parents in regions with strong male-biased sex ratios and who have sons must save so that
their sons can obtain brides in the future.

We directly control for the interaction term of

regional sex ratio and a dummy variable for whether the rst child is a son (the uninteracted
eect of regional sex ratio is already controlled for by the city xed eects).

22 Our prior is

that this mechanism is less relevant for our study because there is little sex imbalance for
these cohorts. Indeed, column (4) shows that our key results are very robust to the inclusion

23

of this control.

The Eect of Fertility on Earnings

Table 5 reports the instrumented eect of fertility

on earnings. For brevity, we report the 2SLS estimates. Column (1) shows that an additional
child results in 11,236 RMB less income in 2008 for parents if the rst child is a daughter.
Fertility has little eect on income for parents whose rst child is a son (−11, 236

−2600).

+ 8, 636 =

Columns (2)(7) show that this is mainly driven by wage income. These results are

consistent with the notion that parents with only one daughter work more in order to increase
savings for old age.
We acknowledge that in inferring the stock of savings from savings in one year, we must
assume that the two variables are positively correlated. For example, our interpretation would
be misleading if parents with more children accumulated more assets than parents with fewer
children and therefore had stopped saving before the age at which we observe them (50
65).

We believe that this is unlikely since more children require more expenditures when

the children are young. So, if anything, parents with more children would have accumulated
less assets before age 50. In urban China, the two main savings vehicles are savings deposits

22

Regional sex ratio is measured as the fraction of males of those born during 19491975 in each city. We

experimented with several alternative measures and always obtain similar results. Estimates using these other
measures are available upon request.

23

Note that the uninteracted eect of whether the rst is a son is no longer meaningful by itself since it

captures the eect of having a son as the rst child in regions where there are no males.

17

and housing. Since savings deposits generate interest income and real estate generates rental
income, we can investigate this alternative explanation by examining interest income and
rental income, which should scale with the stock of assets. Column (5) of Table 5 shows that
there is no relationship between the instrumented fertility variable and interest and rental

24

income.

The Eect of Fertility on the Savings Rate

We recognize that fertility aects many

aspects of people's lives (e.g. it aects both level of savings and income). However, for the
purpose of the calibration, it will be convenient to summarize the eect on fertility by a
single variable, the savings rate. Since we wish to compare these results with a model where
only the number of children changes, we focus on the instrumental variables estimate. These
are reported in Table 4.

Columns (5) and (6) show that each additional child reduces the

savings rate by 11 percentage points. Column (7) shows that for parents with rst daughters,
additional children reduces the savings rate by 16 percentage points, while for those with sons,
an additional child reduces savings rates by four percentage points

(−0.158 + 0.118 ' −0.04).

We note that the estimates on the savings rate are less precise than the estimates on savings
levels. This is likely due to the fact that fertility and the sex of the eldest child also aect
income. This is another reason to interpret the instrumented estimates on the savings rate as
illustrative.

3.5 Interpretation
The main empirical nding is that the reduction in fertility caused by the introduction of
family planning policies increased household savings, especially for parents with only one
daughter. This is consistent with the descriptive evidence discussed in Section 2 that parents
see children, and particularly sons, as an important source of old-age support.
Note that our results also suggest that the relationship between fertility and savings is

24

In our data, we also observe households' own durables such as refrigerators, motorcycles, and cars; and

the imputed value of housing. We nd suggestive evidence that parents with children (instrumented) have, if
anything, more assets than parents with fewer children. The estimates are imprecise and are available upon
request.

18

driven by anticipated transfers rather than child-related expenditures. For example, consider
the alternative explanation that daughters and sons provide the same level of transfers to parents, but parents with only one daughter save more because daughters cost less to raise than
sons. This is inconsistent with the stopping rule that we see in the data (see Table 2) which
suggests that parents prefer to have sons.

If sons and daughters provide the same level of

support and daughters cost less, then parents should instead prefer to have daughters. Moreover, we note that for the cohort of urban children that we are studying, major expenditures
related to child rearing (child care, housing, schooling, and even food) were state-provided.

25

Thus, there was little cost dierence between male and female children.

4

A Model of Fertility and Savings

The empirical estimates showed that an additional child reduced savings for a household that
lives in an otherwise identical economic environment as a household that has one less child.
However, if we are interested in the eects of a change of aggregate fertility, the assumption of
an otherwise unchanged economic environment is unlikely to be right. A change in aggregate
fertility has an impact on the economic environment, for example, through its eect on factor
prices, which in turn aects savings.

26

The micro empirical evidence cannot therefore be

directly used to predict the relationship between aggregate fertility and savings. In order to
address this concern, we now develop a simple overlapping generation model of savings that
helps us to interpret the empirical results. We begin with the simplest version of the model
to build intuition and then proceed to a more quantitative version.

25

For example, in the 1989 UHIES, total expenditure for urban households with at least one male child was

on average 1122 RMB and for households with at least one female child was on average 1129 RMB. The gap
is similarly small for other years (19902005).
As emphasized by Wei and Zhang (2011), the tendency in China in recent years has been towards a bride
price rather than a dowry, which would raise the cost of male children, though in this cohort, which predates
sex-selective abortions, this eect is probably not very important either way.

26

For example, Horioka and Wan (2007) nds limited evidence that, in China, average household savings

rates at the province level are associated with real interest rates.

19

4.1 The simplest OLG Model
The empirical ndings that the policy-driven reduction in fertility increases household savings
are consistent with the qualitative evidence that parents anticipate more transfers in expectation when they have more children. We therefore start from a variant of the classic Diamond

τ

OLG model with two additional features: (i) children transfer a fraction
parents, (ii) parents pay a linear cost, a

θ

of their income to

fraction of their income, to raise each child. We do

not model the decision to have children, but assume that every household is endowed with
an exogenous number of children

ni .

This choice is due to the fact that we want to consider

the eect of an exogenous change in fertility, as generated by the One Child Policy (or its
relaxation), on savings. Endogenous fertility is nonetheless discussed in Subsection 4.5.1. We
assume log utility, a Cobb-Douglas production function, full depreciation of capital within
one generation (given that a generation is 25 years, this is not a restrictive assumption) and
constant productivity growth at an exogenous rate

1 + g.

The assumption of log utility im-

plies that income and substitution eects perfectly oset each other, so that a change in the
interest rate does not have any direct eect on savings. We relax this assumption later. The
economy is inhabited by a continuum of households with mass
except for the number of children. Household i, with children

1.

Households are identical

ni , solves the following problem



max log cYi,t + βlog cO
i,t+1

O
cY
i,t ,ci,t+1

s.t.
cYi,t +

cO
At+1 wt+1
i,t+1
≤ At wt (1 − τ − θni ) +
τ ni .
1 + rt+1
1 + rt+1

(3)

From the rst order condition of this problem, we can nd the household optimal savings
rate, dened as

si,t ≡

At wt (1−τ −θni )−cY
i,t
:
At wt



si,t

β
=
1+β


(1 − τ − θni ) −

τ ni
β (1 + rt+1 )



At+1 wt+1
At wt


.

(4)

From this formula, it is clear that the model predicts that households with more children

20

save less. More specically, the number of children,
channels. First, if

ni

ni ,

impacts the savings rate through two

increases, then parents have to spend more on children, so that their

disposable income is reduced and consequently they save less. We name this the expenditure
channel. An additional child decreases the savings rate by
channel. Second, if

ni



β
1+β



θ

through the expenditure

increases, then parents expect to receive more transfers in old age, their

need to save for retirement is therefore not as acute and this causes them to save less. We
call the latter mechanism the transfer channel.
rate by

τ
(1+β)(1+rt+1 )



At+1 wt+1
At wt



An additional child decreases the savings

through the transfer channel.

As we have demonstrated, this PE model is able to account for the cross-households
relationship between fertility and savings.

However, a change in aggregate fertility has an

impact on prices as well. In order to discuss how aggregate savings are aected, we therefore
need to understand the aggregation and GE properties of the model.

4.1.1 GE
n

and

ni di

and

In order to nd the GE solution, we need to show how the model aggregates. Dening

s

to be aggregate fertility and savings rate, the following relationships hold:

s=

´

si di.

n=

´

Aggregation is trivial due to the fact that households dier only with respect to

the number of children, and savings rates are linear in
The empirical results provide us with estimates of
would like to have estimates of

ni .
∂si
∂ni , while, as already pointed out, we

∂s
∂n in order to understand the eect of the One Child Policy

on Chinese savings rates. To this end, we need to solve the GE of the model.
We rst focus on steady states. The standard law of motion of capital for the Diamond
model applies to our setting and reads as

kt+1 = (1 − α)

st ktα
,
(1 + g) n

from which we get the steady state interest rate

1+r =

α (1 + g) n
.
(1 − α) s
21

We substitute the equilibrium interest rate into (4) and notice that, in steady state,

wt+1 = wt .

We nd that




ni s 1 − α
(1 − τ − θni ) − τ
.
(5)
si =
n
αβ
´
´
Summing (5) over all households and using the fact that s =
si di and n = ni di, we obtain


β
1+β

an explicit expression for the equilibrium aggregate savings rate

s=

αβ (1 − τ − θn)
.
α (1 + β) + (1 − α) τ

(6)

Equations 5 and 6 allow us to clearly see the dierences between the PE and GE eects of a
change in fertility on savings.

∂si
∂ni for xed

The PE eect is the derivative

∂si
≡
=−
∂ni

∂P E



and

s.

It is given by



τ s (1 − α)
θ+
.
n αβ

β
1+β

∂P E

We can then substitute equation (6) to nd

∂P E,EQ

n

evaluated at equilibrium, which we name

and reads as


∂P E,EQ = −

β
1+β




θ−

β
1+β

The GE eect is instead the derivative

 

τ
(1 − τ − θn) (1 − α)
.
n
α (1 + β) + (1 − α) τ

(7)

∂s
∂n , which must be computed from the equilibrium

savings rate given by equation (6). It is given by


∂GE,EQ ≡ −

β
1+β


θ

α (1 + β)
.
α (1 + β) + (1 − α) τ

(8)

Comparison of PE and GE eects
We now compare the PE and GE eects of an increase of fertility on savings rates. First we

∂P E,EQ is made of two
 

(1−τ −θn)(1−α)
τ

note that

−



β
1+β

n

α(1+β)+(1−α)τ

.

parts: (i)

∂P E,Expend ≡ −



β
1+β



θ

and (ii)

∂P E,T ransf ≡

Part (i) is the expenditure channel: an additional child de-

creases savings due to the fact that current income is reduced by direct expenses for child

22

support. Part (ii) is the transfer channel evaluated at the equilibrium interest and savings
rates: an additional child increases the transfers received while retired so that households can

27 The transfer channel,

aord to save less.

is negative for all other admissible values of

∂GE,EQ

Second, notice that

∂P E,T ransf ,

is equal to zero when

τ = 0,

while it

τ.

can be rewritten as

∂GE,EQ = ∂P E,Expend ϕ (α, β, τ ) ,

where

ϕ (α, β, τ ) ≤ 1

for all parameters and is equal to

1

only if

τ = 0.

equation, we see that absent any transfer from children to parents (i.e.,

∂GE,EQ = ∂P E,EQ :

From this last

τ = 0),

the PE and GE eects of fertility on savings are identical because the

expenditure channel is identical in PE and GE. In contrast, for any positive

∂P E,EQ ,

we will get

τ , ∂GE,EQ >

so that the eect of an additional child on saving is smaller in GE than in PE.

It is important to note that the extent to which GE and PE eects of fertility on savings
are similar depends on the relative contributions of the expenditure and transfer channels
in explaining the PE relationship between fertility and savings.

If the PE relationship is

generated only by the expenditure channel, as in the case in which

τ = 0,

then the PE and

GE are identical. Instead if the PE relationship is generated only by the transfer channel, as
in the case in which

θ = 0,

then the GE eect is muted, and thus very dierent from the PE

one. In Section 4.3, we use the empirical estimates to assess the relative contributions of the
expenditure and transfer channels and quantify the dierence between PE and GE.

Discussion
PE and GE eects are dierent for two reasons: (i) in GE, the transfer channel is muted, so
that

27

∂GE,T ransf = 0;

and (ii) in GE, the expenditure channel is smaller than in PE, which is

Note that an additional child provides a negative income shock through channel (i), while it provides

a positive income shock through channel (ii).

Our interpretation of the timing of this model is that the

negative income shock happens when the household is saving while the positive income shock happens when
the household is dissaving.

Note that when we observe these households in the data, children are already

adults and beyond the age when they major expenditures are needed. The interpretation of the expenditure
eect therefore rests on the idea that households spent more on their children when their children were young,
thus postponing other expenditures (house purchase, house repair, etc.) until they are older.

23

given by

ϕ (α, β, τ ) ≤ 1.

We rst discuss (i).

An additional child provides a benet in the future: parents need

to save less today because they are expecting to receive more transfers from children after
retirement. The present value of these future transfers is lower if the interest rate is higher.
This is what Summers (1981) called a wealth eect, to distinguish it from the income eect of
increasing the interest rate, which exactly osets the substitution eect in this log utility case.
In GE, an increase in aggregate fertility raises the interest rate and under the assumptions of
log utility and full depreciation, this consequent reduction in the value of the transfer exactly
osets the direct impact of increased fertility on total transfers. As a consequence, the transfer
channel is eectively turned o:

∂GE,T ransf = 0.

Next, we discuss (ii). The expenditure channel does not directly depend on the interest
rate. This is because both the spending on children and the savings decision are made in the
same period.

However, in GE, the direct eect of an additional child on spending reduces

aggregate savings, which then implies capital scarcity and higher interest rates. The resulting
reduction in the value of future transfers leads, as before, to higher savings, which partly
compensates for the reduction in savings coming from the expenditure channel. This is why
we nd that

ϕ (α, β, τ ) ≤ 1.

this eect is shut down and

Obviously, when there are no transfers from children (τ

=0

),

ϕ (α, β, τ ) = 1.

Out of Steady-State Dynamics
So far, our focus has been on steady states.

We now show that the previous results, and

in particular the important role that GE forces have on the relationship between fertility,
transfers and savings, hold on the transition path from one steady state to another. The only
change that occurs when we consider the transition path is that there is a wage eect as well
as an interest rate eect: wage growth is slowing down (relative to steady-state trend) and the
interest rate is rising as the labor force grows (because of increased fertility). Both of these
eects encourage parents to save more: the interest rate eect for reasons already discussed
and the wage eect because lower children's earnings imply lower transfers in the future.

24

More formally, we can substitute the equilibrium expression for interest rate,

1−α
αkt+1
,

and wage,

wt = (1 − α) ktα ,

si,t =

β
1+β

1 + rt+1 =

in the formula for the savings rate to obtain:



τ ni
kt+1
(1 − τ − θni,t ) −
(1 + g) α .
αβ
kt

We can further manipulate this expression, substituting the law of motion of capital, which
must hold even out of steady state, and summing over all households in order to solve for the
aggregate savings rate on the transition path

st =

αβ (1 − τ − θnt+1 )
.
α (1 + β) + τ (1 − α)

This formula mirrors the steady state formula in equation (6), such that

∂st
∂nt+1

=

∂s
∂n ,

∀t.

In

other words, in this example with full depreciation and log preferences, being on the path
to a steady state is identical with being at the steady with respect to how fertility aects
savings. This is because the smaller rise in interest rate along the transition path (because
capital does not jump to its new steady state value) is compensated by the reduction in wage
growth (which dissipates when we reach the new steady state).

4.2 Generalizing the model
In order to bring the model closer to the data, we enrich the set of demographic features and
relax the assumption of log utility in favor of a CRRA utility function.

Demographics

We introduce two new elements into the previous model: (i) we allow a

household to include a father and a mother, both of whom transfer to their own parents;
(ii) we distinguish between sons and daughters, to match the fact that parents rely more on
sons than daughters for old-age support. We assume that males and females earn the same.

28

λ < 1,

29

However, daughters transfer a fraction,

28

of what sons transfer to their parents.

We could in principle allow for earnings to be dierent between men and women by adjusting the relative

shares of income transferred by men and women.

29

We could alternatively assume that females earn a fraction

of their income to parents.

25

λ

of males and transfer the same proportion

Following the discussion in Section 3.5, we assume that the cost of raising children is the
same whether they are a boy or a girl.
Accounting for these demographic characteristics, the budget constraint in equation (3)
becomes

cYi,t +

where

nm
i



 A w


cO
i,t+1
t+1 t+1
f
f
m
≤ 2At wt 1 − τ (1 + λ) − θ nm
+
n
+
τ
n
+
λn
i
i
i
i ,
1 + rt+1
1 + rt+1

is the number of sons in household

i and nfi

is the number of daughters in household

i.

CRRA Utility Function

To allow households to have an inter-temporal elasticity of sub-

stitution dierent than one, we use a CRRA utility function,
inter temporal elasticity of substitution (IES). If

ρ > 1,

u (x) =

x1−ρ
1
1−ρ , where ρ is the

then the IES is smaller than 1, which

implies that an increase in the interest rate decreases savings because the substitution eect
is weaker than the income eect.

ρ=1

gives the log utility case already analyzed.

4.2.1 Some Intuition for this Case
We solve the rst order conditions of the model with the new budget constraint and the
CRRA utility to obtain the savings rate for household

"
si,t =

1

β ρ (1 + rt+1 )
1

1−ρ
ρ

1 + β ρ (1 + rt+1 )

i

#

1−ρ
ρ





f 



 τ nm
+
λn
i
i
At+1 wt+1 
f
 1 − τ (1 + λ) − θ nm
− 1
.
1
i + ni
2At wt
β ρ (1 + rt+1 ) ρ

(9)

To build some intuition, we sum equation (9) over all households and using the formula
for the steady state interest rate, which is unchanged by the new assumptions, we obtain a

26

formula for the steady state aggregate savings rate





nm +nf

 1−ρ



ρ

α(1+g)(
)
 β

(1−α)s




s=

 1−ρ 
ρ
m
f
1


α(1+g)(n +n )
1 + βρ
(1−α)s

1
ρ





m
f
1
−
τ
(1
+
λ)
−
θ
n
+
n
−



where

nm

and

nf



f

1

βρ

τ nm + λn
(1 + g) 

,

1
2

α(1+g)(nm +nf ) ρ
(1−α)s

are the aggregate numbers of sons and daughters fertility, and

s

is the

aggregate savings rate.
The steady state savings rate is the product of two square-bracketed terms. Within the
second bracket, the rst term is the cost of an extra child and the second term captures the
fact that an extra child brings more future income and hence reduces savings. In GE, these
two PE eects are augmented by two more eects, both operating through the denominator of
the second term. The rst is the wealth eect resulting from the increase in the interest rate
caused by the increase in fertility. The second is the feedback from the increase in savings,
which pushes the interest rate down and therefore mitigates the wealth eect.
The rst square bracket captures the income and substitution eects resulting from the
increase in the interest rate. Assuming that

ρ>1

(we later argue that this is the interesting

case), the increase in the interest rate induced by the increase in fertility must reduce the
part of savings that is determined by the income and substitution eects. This reduction in
savings in turn has a feedback eect which further raises the interest rate and further reduces
savings. This positive feedback loop is the reason why the GE eect can be larger than the
PE eect. We will provide some examples when we present the quantitative results.

4.3 Using the Micro Evidence to Identify Model Parameters
In this section, we use the micro empirical evidence from earlier to pin down some of the
key parameters of the model and predict the GE relationship between fertility and savings.

27

In particular, as previously emphasized, we wish to use the empirical estimates in order to
understand the relative weights that the expenditure and transfer channels have in explaining
the estimated PE relationship between households savings and fertility.
The regressions from Section 3.4 give us two coecients that are useful for identifying
the relative magnitudes of the expenditure and transfer channels.

The results in Table 4

column (7) show two relationships: (i) that households with only one son save on average
approximately 10 percentage points less than households with only one daughter; and (ii)
that households with two children save on average approximately 10 percentage points less

30

than households with only one child.
estimated.

Admittedly, the coecients are not very precisely

Thus, in Section C in the Online Appendix, we conduct a robustness exercise

to show how our results are sensitive to dierent parameter values.

Finally, we note that

the average savings rate in our sample, which allows us to pick the discount factor

β,

is 26

percentage points.
Empirical results (i) and (ii) identify the contributions of the expenditure and transfer
channels to savings as a function of the parameter

λ,

which captures the relative transfers of

a daughter as a function of those of a son. As an intermediate step, it is useful to redene

31 We call the two channels

the expenditure and transfer channels in the complete model.

∂˜P E,Expend

and

∂˜P E,T ransf

to distinguish them from the previous formula of the simplest

model. They are given by

#
β̃t+1 (1 + rt+1 )−1
θ,
≡
1 + β̃t+1 (1 + rt+1 )−1
"

∂˜P E,Expend
30

The coecients are the following:

(10)

# kids -0.158, # kids times 1st is male 0.116, 1st is male -0.215.

Ignoring the constant, xed eects and controls in the regression, the predicted savings rates for households

−0.158 + 0.118 − 0.215 = −0.255, 1
−0.158, 1 son + 1 other child 2(−0.158) + 2(0.118) − 0.215 = −0.295, 1 daughter + 1 other child
2(−0.158) = −0.316. Thus, the dierence in savings rate between a household with only one son and only one
daughter is −0.255 − (−0.158) ≈ 0.1, and the dierence between households with two children and households
with one child is around 0.099, which is the average of −0.295 − (−0.255), −0.295 − (−0.158), −0.316 −
(−0.255), −0.316 − (−0.158).
with dierent numbers and sexes of children are the following: 1 son

daughter

31

The introduction of CRRA utility slightly alters the formula for the expenditure and transfer channels,

which now both depend on the values of the IES (Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution) and the interest
rate. Note that in PE, we can decompose the eect of an additional child on savings in the direct eect from
higher immediate expenditures (the expenditure channel) and the indirect eect from expected future transfers
(the transfer channel). Thus, we can still consider the formula under CRRA as capturing the expenditure and
transfer eects. Taking GE eects into account will aect savings through both the channels.

28

"

∂˜P E,T ransf

β̃t+1
≡
1 + β̃t+1 (1 + rt+1 )−1

1

where we have dened

#

At+1 wt+1
2At wt

1

β̃ ≡ β ρ (1 + rt+1 ) ρ .

In order to identify


τ,

∂˜P E,T ransf ,

(11)

we use empirical

result (i). According to the model, the dierence in the savings rate between a household with
only one daughter and a household with only one son is given by

(1 − λ) ∂˜P E,T ransf .

Hence,

using the empirical evidence, we have

0.10 = (1 − λ) ∂˜P E,T ransf ,

which identies

∂˜P E,T ransf

In order to identify

as a function of

∂˜P E,Expend ,

(12)

λ.

we use empirical result (ii). According to the model, the

dierence in the savings rate between a household with one child and a household with two
children is given by

∂˜P E,Expend +

1
2

(1 + λ) ∂˜P E,T ransf .

Hence, using the empirical evidence,

we have

1
0.10 = ∂˜P E,Expend + (1 + λ) ∂˜P E,T ransf .
2

(13)

Equations (12) and (13) can be solved to obtain values for the expenditure and transfer
channels as a function of

λ:



1 1+λ
∂˜P E,Expend = 0.10 1 −
,
2 1−λ
1
1−λ



is decreasing in

λ,

∂˜P E,T ransf = 0.10
It is immediately obvious that

λ.

Intuitively, if

λ

∂˜P E,Expend



.
while

∂˜P E,T ransf

is increasing in

is close to one, parents expect similar transfers from daughters and sons.

For parents with sons and daughters to have very dierent savings, the level of the transfers
must be high enough to magnify the relatively small gender dierence in transfer rates into
large dierences in transfers and hence savings, which implies that
large. If

∂˜P E,T ransf

∂˜P E,T ransf

must be very

is large, all of the dierence in savings between households with one and

two children will be driven by the expectation of future transfers, and the expenditure channel

29

will thus be of limited relevance, which explains why
Since it is costly to raise children, we assume that
that



λ ∈ 0, 31 ,

∂˜P E,Expend

is instead decreasing in

∂˜P E,Expend ≥ 0.

λ.

This restriction implies

which is consistent with the stylized evidence from Section 2 that daughters

transfer considerably less than sons.

h
i
0, 21 ∂˜P E,T ransf 

The range of



λ ∈ 0, 13

corresponds to

∂˜P E,Expend ∈

i.e., the empirical evidence implies that the transfer channel dominates the

expenditure channel.
Next, we want to solve for the primitive parameters

θ

and

τ.

To do this, we need to

pin down a few additional parameters. In particular, equations (13) and (12) show that we
need to choose values for

At+1 wt+1
At wt ,

1+r

β̃ .

and

We calculate

At+1 wt+1
At wt , the growth rate of

wage income, from the UHS data. We use the average real deposit rate in China as the value
for

r.

Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2013) reports that the average real deposit rate in

China between 1998 and 2012 is equal to

0.91%.

the average savings rate is strictly increasing in

We use this estimate. We then notice that

β̃

and we thus pick

average savings rate in our data, which is equal to

26%.

β̃

in order to match the

In order to calculate the average

savings rate, we need to pick a value for the average number of children. We use

n = 1.88,

which is the average number of children in the sample used for our regression analysis. Then,
for a given value of

λ,

we can calculate the corresponding values of

θ, τ .

In Table 6, we report the estimated parameter values for the two extreme cases of
and

λ=

1
3 . The value of

τ

λ=0

implies that an adult male transfers between 8% and 15% of his

income to his parents. This is consistent with the UHIES data, which report that total transfer
expenditures are approximately 8% of total household income for the average household with
a male household head between 25 to 40 years of age.

Our estimated value of

τ

is thus

32

consistent with the limited empirical evidence.
The value of
no more than
by the

32

θ

is estimated to be no more than 10%, which implies that every child costs

10%

of household income. This is roughly consistent with the data reported

China Health and Nutritional Survey, which shows that an urban household in 1989

We acknowledge that assessing the plausibility of the transfer rate is dicult. To the best of our knowledge,

there is no reliable data on transfers to parents at the individual level. Moreover, the ability of children to
insure old parents in bad states of the world and cohabitation during old age is likely to be very valuable to
parents and is dicult to measure or monetarize.

30

33

spends approximately 8% of total income on food, clothing and schooling for children.
The value of

β

depends on the value of

our preferred estimates,

ρ = 1,

and

β

ρ,

and thus varies for dierent calibrations. For

is equal to 0.995. This means that to match the high

savings rate in the data, individuals need to be quite patient.

4.4 Quantitative Results
With the estimates of the primitive parameters, we can now quantify how the GE eect relates
to the PE eect. Before doing so, we need to discuss how we deal with the interest rate within
the model. In the calibration exercise, we have used the market interest rate that households
face on deposits.

The model has instead a prediction for the marginal product of capital.

The marginal product of capital implied by the model in the baseline equilibrium, the one
with

s = 0.26

and

n = 1.88,

is not equal to the observed returns on savings in China. We

thus need to calibrate a last parameter  the wedge between the marginal product of capital
and the interest rate that households face on savings.

1+r = ψ

h

α
1−α



n
s



(1 + g)

We call this wedge

ψ,

which solves

i

, where the left-hand side of the equation is the market interest

rate in China, as previously discussed, and the right-hand side is the wedge multiplied by the
marginal product of capital in equilibrium as a function of savings rate and fertility, evaluated
at the baseline parameters of

n = 1.88 and s = 0.26.

We assume that

ψ

is invariant to policies

that aect fertility and we thus keep it constant throughout the counterfactual experiments,
so that changes in

n

and

s

are going to be reected into changes of the interest rate that

households face. Given this setup, we can vary the exogenous level of fertility
for the endogenous savings rate

s

n,

and solve

that is predicted by the model.

Using this simple procedure, we compute the hypothetical aggregate savings rates that
the model implies for values of
values of

33

ρ

n between 1 and 3.

We repeat the same procedure for dierent

between 0.5 and 3. In Figure 5, we plot aggregate savings rates as a function of

This result must be interpreted with caution. The fact that our empirical results use a sample of individuals

age 50 to 65 who spend less on children than younger parents who have younger children means that our results
could underestimate the eect of the expenditure channel. In light of this, the benchmark exercise considers
the case where parental expenditures on children,

θ,

takes the maximum value (i.e.,

λ = 0).

C further explores the sensitivity of our calibration results to alternative parameter values.

31

Appendix Section

aggregate fertility for the case in which
the case in which

λ=

λ = 0.

In Figure 6, we repeat the same exercise for

1
3 . For comparison purposes, we include the PE relationship between

fertility and savings in the gure, which is from the earlier empirical estimates.
Figure 5 is the case where

λ = 0,

such that daughters transfer nothing.

The red line

displays the PE relationship, which is the observed savings rates of households in the same
economy with dierent numbers of children. The black solid line displays the GE savings rates
that are implied by dierent levels of aggregate fertility when

ρ = 1.

It shows the savings rate

that the model predicts for a hypothetical situation in which all households would change
their fertility level. The black line is atter than the red line. This implies that an increase in
aggregate fertility has a smaller eect on savings than the one that we estimated comparing
dierent households.
The dierence between PE and GE is large: a household that has one additional child on
average saves ten percentage points less; but if all households have one additional child, the
aggregate savings rate decreases by only 3.3 percentage points. The additional lines in the
gure show aggregate savings rates for dierent values of

ρ.

As noted earlier, if

ρ

is larger

than one, then the general and PE eects are more similar. For very high values of

ρ,

it is

even possible for the GE eect to be stronger than the PE eect. For example, as shown in
Figure 5, if

ρ = 3, then due to a very strong income eect, the GE eect would be larger than

the PE eect.
Figure 6 is identical to the previous one, but uses the parameters estimated assuming that

λ=

1
3 . When

θ = 0),
when

λ=

1
3 , the expenditure channel is completely shut down (since

λ=

1
3 implies

which means that an increase in aggregate fertility has no eect on aggregate savings

ρ = 1.

This is why the black GE line is at at 26 percentage points in the gure. In

general, increasing

λ

because for a high

λ,

magnies the estimated dierence between PE and GE eects. This is
the transfer channel (which is substantially dierent in PE and GE)

plays a larger role in explaining the relationship between fertility and savings.
In summary, the quantitative analysis shows that extrapolating from the PE evidence to
predict the eect of the removal of the One Child Policy is likely to signicantly overestimate

32

the resulting reduction in savings. We note that the literature has not yet formed a consensus
on the true value of
that

ρ.

A recent review of the literature, Attanasio and Weber (2010) argues

ρ is likely to be around 1.5.

Our results indicate that in this case, extrapolating from the

PE evidence to predict the eect of an aggregate increase in fertility would overestimate the
increase in savings rate by as much as 50%, even in the most conservative calibration with

λ = 0.

4.5 Further Generalizations
Thus far, we have considered a model with the minimal amount of structure that is necessary
for matching the empirical results and which allow us to conduct the GE counterfactual.
We now explore the implications of an extended model where we endogenize fertility, human
capital investment and transfer rates. We investigate how they change the dierence in the
PE and GE eects of fertility on savings.

The discussion follows the baseline model from

34

Section 4.1 and focuses on the key insights.

4.5.1 Endogenous Fertility
In the baseline model, we assumed that fertility was exogenous, which was appropriate since
the PE empirical estimates relied on exogenous variation in fertility caused by family planning
policies and also because the GE counterfactual aims to understand the eect of an exogenous
increase in aggregate fertility caused by policy changes.

Now, we consider the case where

fertility is a choice.
If we assume instead that parents treat children as investment goods (e.g. Caldwell, 1982
and Boldrin and Jones, 1988), then the decision to have a child is an investment that has
an immediate cost (from raising the child) and entails the future benet of transfers that are
received from the adult child.
Suppose that parents can invest in two assets, children and savings, and try to optimize
their portfolio across these two assets.

34
35

35 Because of the lumpiness of the number of children,

Section B in the appendix provides a more formal and detailed description.
We use the word invest to indicate actions that move wealth from one period to the next. In the context

33

not everyone will invest in the same number of children  i.e., at the optimum, otherwise identical families will choose dierent portfolios of children versus investment. In a cross-section
of families, the correlation between savings and the number of children will be negative.
Now suppose a new regulation is introduced which restricts the preferred number of children to be below a certain cuto. For the households for whom this constraint is binding,
the number of children will go down and savings will go up in PE. This is very similar to our
analysis of an exogenous change in the number of children.
However, in GE, there are two additional eects. First, wages will rise faster than productivity for some time, and this might induce some unconstrained households to increase
their fertility.

This will counteract the eect of the regulation.

Second, interest rates will

decline, making investment in children relatively more attractive. This again would push the
unconstrained households to have more children. Thus, the PE and GE relationships between
fertility and savings are still likely to be quite dierent with endogenous fertility.

4.5.2 Human Capital Investment
Here, we discuss the implications of allowing parents to choose the amount to invest in the
human capital of their children. In the model, parents are willing to invest in their children's
human capital in anticipation of higher future transfers  i.e., investment in children's human
capital increases their future wages and, as a consequence, anticipated transfers. Children's
education is thus an investment, which requires an upfront cost but pays a benet in the form
of higher expected transfers.
We begin by assuming that there is no quantity-quality tradeo in PE, such that parents' investment in their children's human capital is independent of the number of children.
Nevertheless, a quantity-quality tradeo emerges in GE: increased

aggregate fertility causes a

reduction in human capital investment per child. The reason is that higher aggregate fertility
increases the interest rate, which reduces the value of transfers and thus the incentives for
of our model, households invest to have income available for when they retire.

We use the word savings

to uniquely indicate investment in monetary instruments, for example in a bank account.

We adopt this

distinction due to the fact that in our model households can invest in both children and savings.

34

parents to invest in children's education. The decrease in human capital investment, in turn,
reduces expenditure per child, which will increase savings.

Under the assumptions of the

model in Section 4.1, the decrease in human capital caused by the increase in aggregate fertility will compensate for the increase in expenditure caused by having more children. Recall
that the transfer channel is muted in GE (see Section 4.1.1). Thus, in GE, the relationship
between fertility and savings will be signicantly muted relative to the case in PE.
Next, we consider the presence of PE quantity-quality tradeos such that households with
more children invest less in human capital per child. The PE quantity-quality tradeo does
not have a corresponding eect in the steady state of the GE economy because an increase
in fertility also reduces the human capital of parents and thus the opportunity cost of raising
children.
These two results together imply that the introduction of endogenous human capital investment makes the dierence between PE and GE results even larger, and thus cannot
overrule our main qualitative result that GE forces are important to take into account for
understanding the eect of a change in aggregate fertility.

4.5.3 Endogenous Transfers
We now extend our model along the lines of Boldrin and Jones (2002) and assume that children
make transfers because they care about their parents' well-being. If we allow the transfer rate
to be endogenously determined, the PE and GE relationships between fertility and savings
become even more dierent.

When the transfer rate is endogenous, increasing the number

of children reduces the transfer rate from each child.

This occurs for three reasons.

First,

the increase in fertility decreases the incentive of each child to transfer to parents due to the
strategic interactions among siblings. Second, it implies that young individuals must spend
more on child rearing, and thus, they transfer less to their own parents. Third, an increase in
aggregate fertility increases the interest rate, which reduces the value of transfers to parents,
and thus reduces the incentives of altruistic children to make transfers.
The rst two reasons are present both in PE and GE, while the third one emerges from

35

the eect of fertility on the interest rate  in GE, the negative relationship between the
number of children and the transfer rate is stronger. As aggregate fertility increases, the total
amount of transfers received from children increase less than proportionally because each child
transfers less. Consequently, parents save more relative to the case with exogenous transfer
rates. Allowing for endogenous transfer rates thus magnies the dierence between PE and
GE results.

5

Conclusion

The goal of this paper is to illustrate the challenges of using PE estimates of behavioral parameters to analyze the eects of policies that aect the whole economy, but also the rewards
of using them in combination with a model to infer what the full equilibrium eect would
be. In the world described by our model, the PE eects of demographic changes substantially
overestimate the GE eect. It is important to consider this key fact  that accounting for
general equilibrium eects can substantially change the relationship between fertility and savings implied by partial equilibrium results  because many important macroeconomic policies
depend on the anticipated results of imminent changes in aggregate fertility caused by factors
such as the end of China's fertility restrictions, or the end of Japan's demographic collapse.
At the same time, our study highlights the sensitivity of the model-derived quantitative
eects to the parameters that are used. Thus, an important endeavor for future studies on
the eect of aggregate fertility change is to obtain reliable parameter estimates from careful
micro-empirical estimates.
There are, of course, many caveats to keep in mind in interpreting our main result. Most
importantly, rational expectations about the relatively distant future play an important role
in our argument. In our model, parents react to the fact that the current boom in fertility
will raise interest rates in the future when these children join the labor force. In contrast, if
parents do not make the connection between current fertility changes and future price changes,
the PE predictions would be the right ones. Finding reliable evidence that helps us determine
the plausibility of this assumption remains a very important part of this research agenda.

36

References
Acemoglu, D. (2010): Theory, General Equilibrium, and Political Economy in Development

The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3), 1732.

Economics,

and

Attanasio, O. P.,

G. Weber (2010): Consumption and saving: models of intertem-

poral allocation and their implications for public policy, Discussion paper, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Banerjee, A., X. Meng,

and N. Qian (2011):

Micro evidence from urban china,
Banerjee, A. V.,

economics,

and

The life cycle model and household savings:

Unpublished Manuscript, Yale University.

E. Duflo (2005): Growth theory through the lens of development

Handbook of economic growth, 1, 473552.

Banister, J.,

Popul Stud (Camb),

and

K. Hill (2004): Mortality in China 1964-2000.,

and

G. S. Becker (1989): Fertility choice in a model of economic growth,

58(1), 5575.
Barro, R. J.,

Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 481501.

Becker, G. S.,

fertility,

and

R. J. Barro (1988):

A reformulation of the economic theory of

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(1), 125.

Becker, G. S., K. M. Murphy,

and

R. Tamura (1994): Human capital, fertility, and

Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special
Reference to Education (3rd Edition), pp. 323350. The University of Chicago Press.

economic growth, in

Boldrin, M., M. De Nardi,

and

L. E. Jones (2005):

Fertility and social security,

Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Boldrin, M.,

Economy,

and

L. E. Jones (2002): Mortality, Fertility, and Saving in a Malthusian

Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(4), 775814.

Browning, M., L. P. Hansen,

and

J. J. Heckman (1999):

Micro data and general

Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford,
vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 8, pp. 543633. Elsevier.
equilibrium models, in

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski,

and Y. Shin (2012):

 The Macroeconomics of Micronance,

NBER Working Papers 17905, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Caldwell, J. C. (1978): A Theory of Fertility: From High Plateau to Destablilization,

Population and Development Review, 4(4), 553577.
Caldwell, J. C. (1982): Theory of fertility decline. Academic Press New York.
Chamon, M. D.,

and

E. S. Prasad (2010): Why Are Saving Rates of Urban Households

American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1), 93130.
Chang, C., C. Lee, S. McKibben, D. Poston, and C. Walther (2005): Fertility, Family
Planning and Population Policy in China, Routledge Studies in Asia's Transformations.
in China Rising?,

Taylor & Francis.

37

Choukhmane, T., N. Coeurdacier,

and

K. Jin (2013):

The One-Child Policy and

Household Savings, Lse working papers, London School of Economics.
Curtis, C. C., S. Lugauer,

and

N. C. Mark (2011): Demographic Patterns and House-

hold Saving in China, NBER Working Papers 16828, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
De La Croix, D.,

matters,

and M. Doepke (2003):

Inequality and growth: why dierential fertility

The American Economic Review, 93(4), 10911113.

Ebenstein, A. (2010): The "missing girls" of China and the unintended consequences of

the one child policy,

and

Fernandez, R.,

ence,

Journal of Human Resources, 45(1), 87115.

A. Fogli (2006): Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family Experi-

Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3), 552561.

(2009): Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,

ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 14677.
Galor, O.,

and

D. N. Weil (1996): The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth,

ican Economic Review, pp. 374387.

Amer-

The Amer-

(2000): Population, technology, and growth: From Malthusian stagnation to the
demographic transition and beyond,
Ge, S., D. T. Yang,

and

American economic review, 90(4), 806828.

J. Zhang (2012): Population Policies, Demographic Structural

Changes, and the Chinese Household Saving Puzzle, IZA Discussion Papers 7026, Institute
for the Study of Labor (IZA).
He, H., F. Huang, Z. Liu,

and

D. Zhu (2014):

Breaking the "Iron Rice Bowl" and

Precautionary Savings: Evidence from Chinese State-Owned Enterprises Reform, FRBSF
Working Paper 2014-04, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
He, X.,

and

Y. Cao (2007): Understanding High Saving Rate in China,

Economy, 15(1), 113.

Heckman, J. J., L. Lochner,

and

Eects: A Study of Tuition Policy,
Horioka, C. Y.,

and

C. Taber (1998):

China & World

General-Equilibrium Treatment

The American Economic Review.

J. Wan (2007):  The Determinants of Household Saving in China: A

Dynamic Panel Analysis of Provincial Data,

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(8),

20772096.
Jones, C. I. (1999): Growth: with or without scale eects?,

American economic review,

pp. 139144.
Kremer, M. (1993): Population growth and technological change: one million BC to 1990,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 681716.

Manuelli, R. E.,

and A. Seshadri (2009):

 Explaining International Fertility Dierences,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 771807.
38

Manuelli, R. E.,

and

A. Seshadri (2014): Human Capital and the Wealth of Nations,

The American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Modigliani, F.,

Hypothesis,
Piketty, T.,

and

S. L. Cao (2004): The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life-Cycle

Journal of Economic Literature, 42(1), 145170.

and

N. Qian (2009): Income Inequality and Progressive Income Taxation

in China and India, 1986-2015,

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2),

5363.
Qian, N. (2009): Quantity-Quality and the One Child Policy:The Only-Child Disadvantage

in School Enrollment in Rural China, NBER Working Papers 14973, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
Romer, P. M. (1986):

Increasing returns and long-run growth,

economy, pp. 10021037.

Rosenzweig,

M.,

and

J. Zhang (2014):

The journal of political

 Co-resident, Life-Cycle Savings and Inter-

generational Support in Urban China, Yale university working paper, Yale University.
Ruthbah, U. H. (2007): Essays on development economics, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts

Institute of Technology.

Birth Control in China 1949-2000: Population Policy and Demographic Development, Chinese Worlds. Taylor & Francis.

Scharping, T. (2013):

Song, Z., K. Storesletten,

and

F. Zilibotti (2013): Growing (with capital controls)

like China, Discussion paper, Mimeo, Univ. Zurich.
Song, Z. M., K. Storesletten, Y. Wang,

and

F. Zilibotti (2013):

Sharing High

Growth Across Generations: Pensions and Demographic Transition in China, CEPR Discussion Papers 9156, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Song, Z. M.,

and

D. Yang (2010): Life Cycle Earnings and Savings in a Fast Growing

Economy, Working paper, Chicago Booth School.
Summers, L. H. (1981): Capital taxation and accumulation in a life cycle growth model,

The American Economic Review, 71(4), 533544.

Tertilt, M. (2005):  Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings,

Journal of Political Economy, 113(6),

13411370.
Wei, S.-J.,

and

X. Zhang (2011): The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising

Journal of Political Economy, 119(3), 511  564.
Weil, D. N. (1994): The saving of the elderly in micro and macro data, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109(1), 5581.
(1997): The economics of population aging, in Handbook of population and family
economics. Citeseer.
Yang, J. (1986): Ma Yinchu zhuan (Biography of Ma Yinchu). Beijing: Zhongguo qingnian
Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,

chubanshe (China Youth Press).

39

40

Obs
475
475
475
475
475
475
475
475
475
475
475

Variable
Income
Expenditure
Savings (Income-Expenditure)
Savings Rate (Savings/Income)
# Kids
Fraction male
Year of Birth of First Child
Year of Birth of the Last Child
Age of Household Head
Years of Education for the HH Head
Fraction of Female HH Heads

Table 1: Means

1.88
0.498
1973
1976
60.66
9.73
0.42

Mean
49583.57
32421.29
17162.28
0.26
0.84
0.38
2.94
4.23
3.03
1.49
0.49

Std. Dev.
37070.81
26117.09
25361.96
0.29

41

1.88

1.88

1.88

1.88

Dependent Variable: # Kids
(3)
(4)
(5)
Baseline
1.88

(6)
1.88

(7)
1.88

(8)

475
0.265

475
0.276

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
475
0.270

N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
475
0.302
-0.405
0.000

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

475
0.313
-0.338
0.000

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

475
0.307
-0.398
0.000

N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

475
0.417
-0.539
0.000

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

475
0.405
-0.628
0.000

N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: All estimates control for city fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the level of birth year-sex-city are presented in
parentheses. There are 131 clusters. The sample uses households that have their first child during 1967-77, and where the
age of the household head is 50-65. Source: RUMiC (2008).

Observations
R-squared
Joint: 1st Born 1972+ 1st Born 1972 x 1st is a Son
p-value

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

-0.455 -0.454 -0.454 -0.398 -0.398
(0.064) (0.061) (0.062) (0.066) (0.068)

1st is a Son

Controls
HH Head Age
HH Head Age Squared
HH Head Years of Edu
HH Head Years of Edu Squares
HH Head Age >55
Age of Youngest Child
Youngest Child Age < 22
Mother is HH Head

0.417
0.416
0.413
0.375
0.369
(0.085) (0.083) (0.085) (0.090) (0.092)

-0.589 -0.521 -0.581 -0.822 -0.754 -0.812 -0.913 -0.997
(0.106) (0.098) (0.064) (0.010) (0.027) (0.012) (0.030) (0.029)

1.88

(2)

1st Born 1972+ x 1st is a son

1st Born 1972+

Dep. Var Mean

(1)

Table 2: The Eect of Family Planning on Fertility

42
475
0.106

475
0.129

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
475
0.125

N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
475
0.125
348.4
0.893

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

475
0.147
1748
0.521

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

10,989
(1,701)

-12,613
(2,638)

14,361
(1,042)

475
0.144
37.94
0.988

N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

10,981
(1,715)

-12,692
(2,663)

12,730
(512)

475
0.158
487.2
0.871

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

11,795
(1,868)

-12,979
(2,718)

13,466
(1,226)

17162

(7)

475
0.152
-1703
0.543

N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

11,783
(1,870)

-13,119
(2,710)

11,417
(968)

17162

(8)

Notes: All estimates control for city fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the level of birth year-sex-city are presented in parentheses. There are 131 clusters.
The sample uses households that have their first child during 1967-77, and where the age of the household head is 50-65. Source: RUMiC (2008).

Observations
R-squared
Joint: 1st Born 1972+ 1st Born 1972 x 1st is a Son
p-value

Controls
HH Head Age
HH Head Age Squared
HH Head Years of Edu
HH Head Years of Edu Squares
HH Head Age >55
Age of Youngest Child
Youngest Child Age < 22
Mother is HH Head
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

13,453
(470)

11,097
(1,741)

5,673
(2,366)

Dependent Variables: Savings
(4)
(5)
(6)
Baseline
17162
17162
17162

1st is a Son

7,355
(4,065)

17162

(3)

-13,104
(2,687)

6,175
(3,689)

1st Born 1972+

17162

(2)

1st Born 1972+ x 1st is a son

17162

Dep. Var Mean

(1)

Table 3: The Eect of Family Planning on Household Savings

43

475
0.008
53.51

N
475
0.008
55.86

N
475
0.001
20.02

N
475
0.003
19.94

Y

-30358
(15853)

11163
(6806)

-18574
(1741)

17162

(4)
0.26

0.26

Savings/Income
(6)
(7)

475
0.018
53.51

N

475
0.018
55.86

N

475
0.006
20.02

N

0.007 -0.215
(0.025) (0.184)

0.118
(0.098)

-0.110 -0.110 -0.158
(0.063) (0.062) (0.028)

0.26

(5)

Dependent Variables

475
0.007
19.94

Y

-0.026
(0.261)

0.116
(0.098)

-0.158
(0.028)

0.26

(8)

Notes: All estimates control for baseline controls: city fixed effects, age of the household head and its squared term,
education of the household head and its squared term. Standard errors, clustered at the level of birth year-sex-city are
presented in parentheses. There are 131 clusters. The excluded instruments are: a dummy variable for whether the
first child is born after 1972, and the interaction terms between whether the first child is male and dummy variables for if
the first child is born after 1972. The sample uses households that have their first child during 1967-77, and where the
age of the household head is 50-65. Source: RUMiC (2008).

Observations
R-squared
F-stat (1st Stage)

Controls
Regional Sex Ratio x 1st is a Son

-19910
(12401)

803
(1723)

-18571
(1752)

1st is a Son

-14155
(5780)

17162

(3)

11052
(6846)

-14122
(5828)

# Kids

17162

(2)

# Kids x 1st is a Son

17162

Dep Var Means

(1)

Savings

Table 4: The Eect of Fertility on Household Savings

44

8,636.034
(9,044.960)
-11,361.338
(16,015.243)
475
0.280

# Kids x 1st is a Son

1st is a Son

Observations
R-squared

475
0.126

5,893.019
(14,710.105)

-2,890.272
(8,178.309)

-8,803.966
(1,637.266)

19708

(2)
Wages

475
-0.081

1,778.735
(868.134)

-897.833
(450.710)

-65.054
(123.057)

120.1

(3)
Other Labor

475
0.160

-7,844.857
(7,383.570)

5,317.645
(4,210.454)

-1,851.312
(726.407)

2132

475
0.198

-2,742.532
(3,540.745)

1,397.633
(1,850.359)

-411.131
(394.466)

1800

Dependent Variable: Income
(4)
(5)
Business Interest & Rent

60.291
(169.558)

288.8

(7)
Welfare

475
0.346

475
-0.079

-3,919.576 -2,679.567
(7,214.946) (1,766.620)

3,020.509
1,760.605
(4,090.164) (1,083.093)

-211.735
(718.815)

25650

(6)
Pension

Notes: The excluded instruments are the dummy variable for the 1st child born in 1972+ and its interaction with whether the first child
is male. All estimates control for baseline controls: city fixed effects, age of the household head and its squared term, education of the
household head and its squared term. Standard errors, clustered at the level of birth year-sex-city are presented in parentheses.
There are 131 clusters. The sample uses households that have their first child during 1967-77, and where the age of the household
head is 50-65. Source: RUMiC (2008).

-11,235.635
(1,973.216)

49584

# Kids

Dep Var Means

(1)
Total

Table 5: The Eect of Fertility on Income

Table 6: Parameter Values

λ=0
θ
τ

λ=

1
3

10.18%

0%

8.77%

15.32%

45

Figure 1:

Household Net Transfer Income (as a Fraction of Total Household Income) as

Function of the Age of the Main Respondent and the Number of Children  CHARLS (2011)

Net Transfer from Children as a Ratio of Income
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

Nationally Representative Sample, Urban Households

40

50
1 Child

60
70
Age of Main Respondent
2 Children

46

80
3 Children

90

Figure 2: The Fraction of Urban Parents Cohabiting with at Least One Child  UHIES (1990,

Fraction of Parents Living with at least a Child
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
1

1998, 2005) from 19 Cities in 9 Provinces

40

50

60
70
Age of Parents
2005

1998

47

80
1990

90

Figure 3: Responses to the Survey Question Whom do you think you can (most) rely on
for old-age support? as a Function of the Age of the Main Respondent  CHARLS (2011)

0

20

% of Respondents
40
60

80

Nationally Representative Sample, Urban Households

40

50

60
70
Age of Respondent
Children

Pensions

48

80
Savings

90

Figure 4: Distribution of Age and Savings in RUMiC Sample  Kernel Density with Gaussian
Kernel Function

.1
Density
.05
0

0

.05

Density

.1

.15

(b) Age of the Household Head

.15

(a) Age of the First Child

15

20

25
Age of the 1st Child

30

35

50

65

(d) Savings

Density
0

0

.05

.00001

Density

.1

.00002

.15

.00003

(c) Age of the Youngest Child

55
60
Age of Household Head

0

10

20
Age of the Youngest Child

30

40

-200000

0

.5

Density

1

1.5

(e) Savings Rate

-4

-3

-2
-1
Savings Rate (Savings/Income)

0

1

49

-100000
0
100000
Savings (Income-Expenditure)

200000

Figure 5: PE vs. GE for

λ=0

0.5
Partial Equilibrium
General Equilibrium with rho = 1
with rho = 0.5
with rho = 1.5
with rho = 2
with rho = 3

0.45

Saving Rate

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

1

1.5

2
Number of Children

50

2.5

3

Figure 6: PE vs. GE for

λ=

1
3

0.5
Partial Equilibrium
General Equilibrium with rho = 1
with rho = 0.5
with rho = 1.5
with rho = 2
with rho = 3

0.45

Saving Rate

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

1

1.5

2
Number of Children

51

2.5

3

ONLINE APPENDIX  NOT FOR PUBLICATION
A

Data Appendix

The sample frame used in the RUMiC is the same as the one used in the National Bureau
of Statistics (NBS)

Annual Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey (UHIES). Sam-

ple selection is based on several stratications at the provincial, city, county, township, and
neighborhood community levels. Households are randomly selected within each chosen neighborhood community.

The RUMiC covers 19 cities in nine of the provinces.

36 The sample

aims to include 0.01% of households in the population. This sampling frame typically misses
migrant laborers. For our study, this is an advantage since we assume that urban households
we observe in 2008 also had urban status when they had their rst child.
The survey was conducted in March and April, 2008. In addition to general information
(including fertility) for household members, the questionnaire also included the demographic
characteristics, education, and employment situation of other family members who are not
residing with the household head and spouse, including parents, children, and siblings.

37 This

allows us to know the total fertility history and characteristics of adult children such as sex,
age and marital status.

In our study, total fertility is synonymous with the total number

of living children. In our sample, the total number of living children is very similar to the
total number of children ever born since infant mortality during the early 1970s was very low
(Banister and Hill, 2004).
The information on household income and expenditure from the RUMiCI in China are
directly recorded from the UHIES survey (which is administered to the same households),
which records income and expenditure variables using a diary.

Specically, households are

required to record each item (disaggregated for hundreds of product categories) purchased
and income received for each day for a full year (in our case, 2007).

Enumerators visit

sample households once or twice each month to review the records, assist the household with

36

The provinces included in the RUMiCI urban survey are: Shanghai, Guangdong, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Henan,

Anhui, Hubei, Sichuan, and Chongqing. The detailed list of cities can be found at http://rumici.anu.edu.au

37

The questionnaires are available from http://rumici.anu.edu.au

52

questions, and take away the household records for data entry and the aggregation of the
annual data at the local Statistical Bureau Oce.
The UHIES data is the best available data on urban household economic variables. According to interviews with NBS statisticians and a detailed examination of income and expenditure distributions conducted by researchers in study of the income distribution and income
taxation using the UHIES data, researchers concluded that the households that refuse to participate are typically the poorest and the richest households (Piketty and Qian, 2009). This
makes it dicult to use the UHIES to study the extreme tails of the income distribution, but
should not aect our study, which focuses on the mean household.
In our data, total household income is the sum of incomes from labor, business, property,
pension and retirement allowances and other social welfare benets. Total expenditure is the
sum of consumption expenditure (e.g.

food; clothing; housing; family equipment; service;

health; transpirations and communication; education; cultural and entertainment; other commodity and services), operational expenditure, property expenditure, social security expenditure (e.g. individually paid pension fund, individually paid public housing fund, individually
paid health care fund, individually paid unemployment fund, and other social security).

38

Other recent studies of Chinese household savings or expenditures have mainly used the
following surveys, which we discuss briey to motivate the need to collect a new survey.
The UHIES (1988 ), which we discuss above, surveys contain high quality income and expenditure data, but do not report total fertility. The China Health and Nutritional Surveys
(CHNS) urban sample is small. The China Household Income Project (CHIP) does not report
completed fertility and has a very small urban sample. The China Health and Retirement
Longitudinal Survey (CHARLS, 2008, 2011) contains similar information to our survey and
in addition, report transfers. We use these data for our descriptive statistics. Once we apply
our sample restrictions, the CHARLS and RUMiC provide similar sample sizes for our study.
Unfortunately, we are unable to use the CHARLS for the regression analysis because the ID

38

Food expenditure is the sum of expenditure on the following categories: grain, wheat, and rice coarse

grains; pork, beef, and mutton; edible vegetable oil, fresh vegetables, dried vegetables, poultry, meat, eggs,
sh; sugar, cigarettes, liquor, fruit, wine, beer, fresh melons and fruit cake; and milk.

53

variables required for linking the transfer data to other household data are not yet available
for the full-sized surveys (they are only available for the 2008 pilot, which we use and discuss
in Section 2).

B

Details on Further Generalizations

B.1 Endogenous Fertility Choice
We now extend the model of Section 4.1 and allow parents to optimally decide how many
children to raise. Children are an indivisible good, so that parents may choose
where

N

ni,t+1 ∈ N ,

is the set of non-negative integers. We also assume that parents have heterogeneous

costs of raising children, in order to have a non-degenerate distribution of fertility choices,
and we let the cost of raising children to be convex in the number of children itself.

This

assumption is necessary in order to have a unique optimal solution for each household. The
parameter

γ>1

controls the degree of convexity. Last, fertility is constrained by a possibly

binding constraint

Λ.

As an example, the relaxation of the One Child Policy can be modeled

in this context as an increase in

Λ.

The household problem now reads as

max

O
cY
i,t ,ci,t+1 ,ni,t+1 ∈N



log cYi,t + βlog cO
i,t+1
s.t.

cYi,t +


 A w
cO
i,t+1
t+1 t+1
≤ At wt 1 − τ − θi nγi,t+1 +
τ ni,t+1
1 + rt+1
1 + rt+1
ni,t+1 ≤ Λ

The optimal savings rate of the model is identical to the one of Section 4.1, and is given by



si,t

β
=
1+β


(1 − τ − θi ni,t+1 ) −

τ ni,t+1
β (1 + rt+1 )



At+1 wt+1
At wt


.

The dierence with the baseline model is that now the optimal number of children is endogenous. In order to describe household behavior is useful to rst consider the latent number of

54

children,

ñi,t+1 ,

that would be optimally chosen if household could have any real number of

children. This is given by


ñi,t+1 =

where

µ̃i ≥ 0

At+1 wt+1
At wt



τ
γ (1 + rt+1 )

is the rescaled multiplier on the constraint

that, as long as the constraint is not binding,

ñi,t+1

 1
 
γ−1
1
− µ̃i
θi
ni,t+1 ≤ Λ.

is strictly decreasing in

households cannot have a fraction of a child, so that true fertility,
In particular, it is easy to verify that for each value

θi = θn

then

ni,t+1 = n

and if

θn−1 ≤ θi < θn

then

It is immediate to notice

ni,t+1 ,

θi .

However,

jumps discretely.

n = {1, 2, ..., Λ} ∃θn , θn−1

such that if

ni,t+1 = n − 1.

In order to understand the implications of this model for the PE estimates on the relationship between savings and fertility, it is interesting to compare two households which are
identical, but for the observed number of children. In particular, let's assume that household

1

has

θ 1 = θn

and household

is going to have

n

2

has

θ2 = θ1 − ,

children, while household

2

where



is a very small number. Household

is going to have

compare the savings rates of the two households: since
see that

s2 > s1 :

household

2



n−1

1

children. We can then

is very small, it is immediate to

has less children and thus saves more. The model therefore is

consistent with the PE evidence that shows, comparing households that are identical but for
the number of children, that fertility and savings display a negative relationship.
Let's now discuss the GE implications of the model for aggregate fertility changes. As an
illustrative example, let's consider the eect on savings of an aggregate reduction in fertility
as caused by a tightening of the fertility constraint.

Within the model, we thus consider

Λ.

The reduction in fertility is going to

the eect on fertility and savings of a decrease in

have the same GE eects on prices as in the baseline model of Section 4.1. Specically, the
reduction in fertility is going to reduce the interest rate and, as long as the economy is out
of steady state, increase the growth rate of wage. However, the eect of the decrease in

Λ

on

households' behavior is going to be dierent for dierent groups of households. In particular
we need to distinguish between two dierent possibilities.

The rst type of households is

represented by those that are constrained by the tightening of

55

Λ.

Those households are going

to decrease their fertility, and for them the analysis is identical to the case with exogenous
fertility reduction: the extent to which their savings rate is going to increase depends on the
relative strength of the consumption and transfer channels and on the responses of prices.
There is, however, a second type of households, namely those that are not constrained even
after the tightening of

Λ.

Those households are going to increase fertility on average. This

is easy to see from the fact that, keeping

µ̃i

xed at zero (since those households are not

constrained the multiplier is zero), the latent number of children is going to increase due to
fact that

wt+1
wt increases and

1 + rt+1

goes down. Hence, this second group of households is

going to increase fertility and consequently reduce savings. As a consequence, the eect of
the tightening of

Λ

on aggregate savings rate is further dampened by the GE eects on this

second group of individuals, beyond what it is in the case with exogenous fertility.

B.2 Endogenous Investment in Human Capital
We extend the model of Section 4.1 and allow parents to optimally invest in their children's
human capital. We rst consider the case in which in PE there is no quantity-quality tradeo,
so that neither the costs nor the benets of investing in children human capital depend on the
number of children itself. We model human capital as an increase in individual productivity.
The wage income of an individual

i

at time

t

is thus given by

At wt hi,t .

Aggregate income

is produced, as in the baseline case, with a Cobb-Douglas production function, where labor
is now calculated in eciency units, as standard in the human capital literature, so that

Y = Ktα (At ht Lt )1−α ,

where

ht

is the average human capital of the working population. Due

to the assumption of competitive markets, the interest rate is
per eciency unit is

α
wt = (1 − α) h−α
t kt .

of their children paying a convex cost

1 + rt = αktα−1 h1−α
t

and wage

Parents may invest in the human capital,

At wt hγi,t+1 ,

where

γ > 1.

hi,t+1 ,

Parents are willing to invest

in the human capital of their children in order to increase received transfers: if children have
more human capital they earn more and thus transfer more to parents.
household reads as follows:

56

The problem of a

max

o
cY
i,t ,ci,t+1 ,hi,t+1



log cYi,t + β log cO
i,t+1
s.t.

cYi,t

cO
i,t+1
+
≤ At wt hi,t
1 + rt+1

1−τ −θ

hγi,t+1
hi,t

!
ni

+

At+1 wt+1
(τ hi,t+1 ni )
1 + rt+1

Solving the rst order conditions of the model we obtain an equation for optimal savings rate
and one for optimal human capital investment



si,t

β
=
1+β

"
1−τ −θ

hγi,t+1
hi,t

!
ni

τ hi,t+1 ni
−
β (1 + rt+1 )



hi,t+1

At+1 wt+1 τ
=
γAt wt θ (1 + rt+1 )





At+1 wt+1
At wt hi,t

#
,

(14)

1
γ−1

,

(15)

The second equation shows that, at the household level, optimal human capital does not
depend on the number of children, but only on parameters that are identical across households,
so that

hi,t+1 = ht+1 ∀i.

Next, we focus on steady states and substitute 15 into 14 to get



β
si =
1+β

 


(1 + g) τ ni
(1 + g) τ ni
1−τ −
−
γ (1 + r)
β (1 + r)

(16)

from which we see that, even in the presence of endogenous human capital investment, fertility
and savings are negatively related at the household level, through both the expenditure and
the transfer channels.
Let's now solve for the GE. The law of motion of capital is given by

kt+1 = (1 − α)

st
h1−α ktα
(1 + g) nt+1 t

so that in steady state

k α−1 h1−α =

57

n (1 + g)
s (1 − α)

and hence, using the denition of the interest rate, we get that in steady state

1+r =

n (1 + g) α
.
s (1 − α)

Substituting the equilibrium interest rate into 16 and summing over all households yield a
formula for the aggregate savings rate

s=

αβγ (1 − τ )
αγ (1 + β) + τ (1 − α) (β + γ)

which is independent from aggregate fertility. As such, despite the fact that at the household
level fertility and savings are negatively related, aggregate fertility and aggregate savings are
not related.
This result comes straight from the equation 15 for human capital investment.

At the

household level, human capital investment does not depend on the number of children, but
is decreasing in the interest rate. At the aggregate level, however, human capital investment
is decreasing in fertility: an increase in fertility increases the interest rate which makes the
returns from investing in children human capital smaller.

A quantity-quality tradeo thus

emerges in GE, due to the role of fertility on the interest rate. Due to the assumptions about
the functions made in the model, the decrease in human capital investment exactly compensate
the expenditure channel relationship between fertility and savings. Moreover, the transfer
channel is muted in GE for the reasons discussed in the main text. The consequence is that
in GE there is no relationship between fertility and savings.

PE Quantity-Quality Tradeo

Alternatively, we could consider the case in which a

quantity-quality tradeo is present also in PE. A PE quantity-quality tradeo can be modeled as a cost of human capital investment that is increasing in the number of children, so
that the cost of investing in children human capital is now given by

∂ζ(nt+1 )
∂nt+1

> 0.

ζ (nt+1 ) At wt hγt+1 ,

where

This would imply that households with more children invest less in the human

58

capital of each one of them. The savings rate and optimal human capital are now given by



si,t

β
=
1+β

"
1−τ −θ

hγi,t+1
hi,t

!
ζ (ni ) ni



hi,t+1

τ hi,t+1 ni
−
β (1 + rt+1 )

At+1 wt+1 τ
=
γζ (ni ) At wt θ (1 + rt+1 )





At+1 wt+1
At wt hi,t

#
,

1
γ−1

.

Substituting the optimal human capital into the savings rate, and focusing to a steady state in
which the number of siblings of parents and children is identical, we obtain again 16, so that
the presence of PE quantity-quality tradeo does not change the results previously shown.

39

B.3 Endogenous Transfers to Parents
We extend the model of Section 4.1 and let transfers from children to parents to be an
endogenous outcome.

In order to do so, we develop the model along the lines of Boldrin,

De Nardi, and Jones (2005).

40 Individuals value their own consumption and the wealth of

their parents. Every individual thus solves

max

m
cY
i,t ,ci,t+1 ,τi,t




Y
log cYi,t + β log cO
i,t+1 + δ log ei,t−1

s.t.
cYi,t +
39

cO
At+1 wt+1
i,t+1
≤ At wt (1 − τi,t − θni ) +
(τt+1 ni )
1 + rt+1
1 + rt+1

The assumption that number of siblings of parents and children is identical implies that

hi,t = hi,t+1 ,

which is useful to simplify the algebra and have simple results. We can relax this assumption and show that
the GE relationship between fertility and savings is muted up to a covariance term. These results are available
upon requests.

40

The Boldrin, De Nardi, and Jones (2005) setting is slightly dierent than ours. Boldrin, De Nardi, and

Jones (2005) uses a utility function of the form

 


 
O
U = log cYt + β log cO
t+1 + δ log ct
such that children value the consumption of their parents when parents are old, rather than parents well-being
over the whole life. This assumption implies that parents have a strategic incentive not to save in the rst
period because savings crowd out transfers from children. We introduce the assumption that children care
about the total wealth of the parents to abstract from parents strategic behavior in savings. Conceptually,
we are assuming that children have the ability to commit to a level of transfer that does not depend on the
parents' behavior in the rst period, but only on the parents' income and macroeconomic condition.

59

eYi,t−1 ≤ At−1 wt−1 +

At wt
(τi,t + τ̃t (ñi − 1)) .
1 + rt

The previous notation applies. Also notice that when deciding how much money to transfer
to parents, individuals take as given the number of their siblings,
siblings,

τ̃t .

ñi ,

and the transfer of their

We focus on a symmetric solution, so that in equilibrium

τi = τ̃ .

Solving the rst order conditions of the model, we obtain the usual equation for optimal
savings rate and an additional equation that comes from solving for the optimal transfer rate



si,t

β
=
1+β


(1 − τi,t − θni ) −

τt+1 ni
β (1 + rt+1 )



At+1 wt+1
At wt


,

1
cYi,t = eYt−1 (1 + rt ) .
δ

(17)

(18)

Using 17, 18, and the budget constraints, we solve for the optimal transfer rate as a function
of the number of siblings and children


τt (ni , ñi ) =

1
1+β

h

(1−θni )
1+β

+

(τt+1 ni )
At+1 wt+1
At wt
(1+rt+1 )(1+β)
ñi
1
1+β + δ

i

wt−1
− 1δ (1 + rt ) At−1
At wt

The analysis of the optimal transfer rate is informative about the model implications
for the PE and GE relationships between savings and fertility. The presence of endogenous
transfer rate does not change the PE relationship between fertility and savings, which is still

41 In GE however, the interest rate has now two eects on

given by the usual equation 17.

savings: (i) a wealth eect through the change in the value of transfers, which was present
also in the model with exogenous transfer rate; (ii) a change in the transfer rate from each
child. Both eects (i) and (ii) go in the same direction, so that GE forces are larger in the
model with endogenous transfer rate. As an example, let's consider the foreseeable eects of
the relaxation of the One Child Policy. The increase in aggregate fertility puts an upward
pressure on the interest rate. The increase in the interest rate decreases the total value of

41

The model implies that household level savings and fertility are negatively related, as long as we restrict

the parameter set to obtain the natural assumption that households with more children receive more transfers.

60

transfers, so that parents save more with respect to the PE prediction. This mechanism is
identical to the case with exogenous transfer rate. But, in addition, the increase in the interest
rate implies that each child transfers less, due to the fact that parents value future transfers
less, and this reduces the total amount of transfers and thus again increases savings. This
additional channel means that the GE eect of an aggregate increase in fertility predicted by
the model with endogenous transfer rate is smaller than the one predicted by the model with
exogenous transfer rate.
To sum up, this analysis showed that if we believe that children transfer to parents as a
result of altruistic behavior, then the GE relationship between fertility and savings is even
weaker than if we assume the transfer rate to be exogenous.

C

Alternative Calibrations

In the main calibration exercise we used point estimates from Table 4. However, as already
discussed, two of the three coecients of interest are not precisely estimated, and are in fact
not signicant, with p-values of respectively

0.23

and

0.24.

For this reason, in this section we

perform a robustness exercise to understand the implications of our model for dierent sets of
parameters. We allow the three coecients of interest, namely the coecient on the number
of kids (φ henceforth), the coecient on the interaction between the number of children and
the rstborn being a male (κ), and the coecient on the rstborn being a male (ξ ), to take one
of three possible values: (i) the baseline value, which is simply the point estimates as shown
in the Table 4; (ii) the baseline value minus one third of its standard deviation; and (iii) the
baseline value plus one third of its standard deviation. The choice of one third is motivated
by the fact that we want the transfer rate (τ ) implied by the model to be non-negative, and
the maximum values of

φ, κ,

φ + 13 σφ , κ + 13 σκ ,

ξ + 31 σξ .

and

interest, hence we have
parameters,

τ, θ

and

β,

27

and

ξ

that are consistent with

τ

being non-negative are in fact

We have three values for each of the three coecients of

possible combinations.

For each of them we nd the primitive

such that the model generates an average savings rate of

0.26

and

matches the three coecients of interest. We then use the calibrated model to perform the

61

counterfactual exercises of increasing fertility by one child both in general and in PE. We
show that for almost all possible combinations of parameters the general and PE eects of
fertility on savings are very dierent. We now describe the results in more details.
For brevity, we focus on our preferred estimates, the one with

ρ = 1

and

λ = 0.

In

Table 7 we report the calibrated transfer rate (τ ) for each triple of coecients. Each matrix
corresponds to one value for the coecient on the rstborn being a male (ξ ), each row to
one value for the coecient on the number of kids (φ), and each column to one value for
the coecient on the interaction between the number of kids and the rstborn being a male
(κ).

In Table 8 we report the calibrated consumption per child (θ ).

In Table 9 we report

the percentage of the PE eect on savings that is still present in GE. Table 9 shows that for
almost all combinations of coecients the dierence between PE and GE eects are sizable.
The only exception is the case in which both
When

ξ

and

κ

ξ and κ take a high value.

The reason is intuitive.

are high, the dierence in savings rates between households with only one son

and households with only one daughter is very small. This dierence identies the transfer
rate, which is the driver of the GE eects. Indeed when

ξ

andκ are high the transfer rate

is almost identical to zero, which implies that the relationship between fertility and savings
is purely driven by the consumption channel. And, as shown in the paper, the consumption
channel is identical in PE and GE.

62

Table 7: Transfer Rate
(a) Low

Low
Low

φ

Baseline
High

φ

φ

κ

ξ

Baseline
High

φ

φ

10.91%

21.87%

14.84%

10.46%

20.02%

14.10%

10.06%

Baseline

13.51%

8.81%

5.29%

12.76%

8.44%

5.11%

12.12%

8.11%

4.94%

Baseline
High

φ

φ

κ

High

κ

ξ

κ

Baseline

6.47%

3.05%

0.22%

6.20%

2.95%

0.23%

5.96%

2.85%

0.24%

Low

φ

ξ

κ

(c) High

Low

κ

15.70%

Low

φ

High

25.02%

(b) Baseline

Low

κ

Baseline

63

κ

High

κ

Table 8: Consumption per Child
(a) Low

κ

Baseline

4.42%

5.30%

6.00%

3.25%

3.79%

4.27%

1.83%

2.10%

2.37%

Low

φ

Low

φ

Baseline
High

φ

ξ

(b) Baseline

Low
Low

φ

Baseline
High

φ

φ

κ

Baseline
High

φ

φ

κ

κ

High

κ

10.47%

11.77%

13.09%

9.24%

10.36%

11.54%

7.88%

8.83%

9.84%

Low

φ

High

ξ

Baseline

(c) High

Low

κ

κ

ξ

Baseline

κ

High

κ

17.12%

18.92%

20.85%

15.97%

17.66%

19.49%

14.71%

16.28%

18.01%

64

Table 9: Ratio between the GE and PE Eect on Saving
(a) Low

Low
Low

φ

Baseline
High

φ

φ

κ

ξ

Baseline

Baseline
High

φ

φ

21.80%

10.17%

12.74%

16.50%

5.86%

7.45%

9.85%

κ

Baseline
High

φ

φ

κ

High

κ

32.68%

24.89%

52.76%

29.81%

37.77%

49.56%

26.44%

33.99%

45.54%

Low

φ

ξ

Baseline

(c) High

Low

κ

17.12%

Low

φ

High

13.84%

(b) Baseline

Low

κ

κ

ξ

Baseline

κ

High

κ

58.21%

74.00%

97.31%

56.43%

72.62%

97.13%

54.34%

70.96%

96.90%

65

