NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOCALIZED AND BIASED TECHNOLOGIES:
ATKINSON AND STIGLITZ’S NEW VIEW, INDUCED INNOVATIONS,
AND DIRECTED TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
Daron Acemoglu
Working Paper 20060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20060
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

I am grateful to Anthony Atkinson and Andrea Galeotti for useful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Localized and Biased Technologies: Atkinson and Stiglitz’s New View, Induced Innovations,
and Directed Technological Change
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 20060
April 2014
JEL No. E25,J31,O30,O31,O33
ABSTRACT
This paper revisits the important ideas proposed by Atkinson and Stiglitz’s seminal 1969 paper on
technological change. After linking these ideas to the induced innovation literature of the 1960s and
the more recent directed technological change literature, it explains how these three complementary
but different approaches are useful in the study of a range of current research areas— though they
may also yield different answers to important questions. It concludes by highlighting several important
areas where these ideas can be fruitfully applied in future work.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E18-269D
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Atkinson and Stiglitz’s seminal paper in the Economic Journal 1969, “A New View of
Technological Change,” took an important departure from the orthodoxy of its time,
which assumed that technological improvements could be viewed as increasing productivity at all factor proportions (in particular, at all combinations of capital and labor).
In the language of modern growth theory, technological progress was neutral— in the
simplest form, Hicks neutral, creating the same proportional gain in output regardless
of factor proportions, though the Harrod neutral version that became more central to
growth theory is also broadly similar (see Acemoglu, 2009). Atkinson and Stiglitz, instead, noted that it would be much more plausible to assume that technological progress
is localized and improves the productivity of the techniques (or “activities”) currently
being used and perhaps some similar techniques with neighboring capital-labor ratios,
rather than all techniques regardless of whether or not they are being used and how
far they are from the current practice. This situation is illustrated in Figures 1 and 2,
adapted from Atkinson and Stiglitz (1969). Figure 1 represents a stylized version of the
orthodoxy, while Figure 2 shows the improvement at the technique currently in use—
corresponding to the current capital-labor ratio, k0 — together with an improvement in
“neighboring”techniques (as well as a further improvement at k1 which we will discuss
later).
Atkinson and Stiglitz emphasized how their new view would be natural in the context
of “learning-by-doing,”but did not neglect the case where technological progress results
from research and development activity, writing (p. 575):
“But where technical progress is localized to one technique, there is a
second important question [in addition to the optimal amount of research and
development] that we must answer— which technique should we improve?
Research activity can be directed towards the improvement of any process
but once it has been carried out, the resulting knowledge is speci…c to one
particular process.”
Though they did not emphasize it, another important implication of this new view—
1

Figure 1: A technological improvement increases productivity by similar amounts at
capital-labor ratios.
again using a term that has since then become more widely used— is that technological
change is biased. This can readily be observed from Figure 2, where the slope of the production function, corresponding to the marginal product of capital in this case, changes
very di¤erently at di¤erent ratios of capital to labor. Moreover, as the above quotation indicates, Atkinson and Stiglitz did anticipate that technological change has to be
modeled as directed— towards speci…c capital-labor ratios or the speci…c techniques.
Atkinson and Stiglitz were not the …rst to make these observations. As they note
in passing, an earlier literature on “induced innovations,” which can be more directly
viewed as the harbinger of the endogenous growth literature of the 1980s and 1990s, also
concerned itself with the same questions. Just like Atkinson and Stiglitz’s new view,
the induced innovation literature was ahead of endogenous growth in one sense. It went
beyond studying the process of growth at the aggregate and also strove to understand
what type of innovations the economy would generate and what the implications of these
innovations were for factor prices and the factor distribution of income (but di¤erently
from Atkinson and Stiglitz’s approach, it did not attempt to unpack the production
function by working with technological progress at the level of techniques or “activities”).
It seems to have been Hicks who …rst discussed these issues in The Theory of Wages
(1932), in particular when he wrote (p. 124):

2

Figure 2: A technological improvement increases productivity at the current and neighboring capital-labor ratios, with no e¤ect on productivity at farther capital-labor ratios.
“A change in the relative prices of the factors of production is itself a spur
to invention, and to invention of a particular kind— directed to economizing
the use of a factor which has become relatively expensive...”.
This was followed up with the signi…cant progress by, inter alia, Kennedy (1964),
Samuelson (1965), Drandakis and Phelps (1965), and Ahmed (1966)— interestingly, all
except Samuelson’s article were also published in the Economic Journal in the 1960s.
Despite these important contributions, the orthodoxy that Atkinson and Stiglitz were
criticizing is still fairly in‡uential. But important advances that are closer in spirit to
Atkinson and Stiglitz’s vision have also been made, in large part because several central
questions, including the role of appropriate and inappropriate technology in economic
development, skill-biased technological change and wage inequality, the relationship between new technologies and tasks, and the impact of trade on technological change,
necessitate a clear departure from the conception of neutral technological change towards localized, biased and directed technological change.
In the rest of this short article, I …rst explain the logic of both the induced innovation
literature and Atkinson and Stiglitz’s seminal paper. In Section 3 I contrast them to the
more recent direct technological change literature. In Section 4 I discuss how Atkinson
and Stiglitz’s insights have been part of certain modern analyses— even though in many
3

cases these analyses themselves did not directly build on their work.

2

Modeling the “New View”

In this section, I brie‡y discuss the modeling approaches that Atkinson and Stiglitz
(1969) and the induced innovation literature adopted.

2.1

Modeling Localized Technological Progress

Atkinson and Stiglitz formulated how their new view would correspond to a di¤erent
type of shift of a production function, but did not present a detailed model of where this
type of technological progress comes from. There are two obvious ways of approaching this question. The …rst, which Atkinson and Stiglitz stress, is through learningby-doing. If the …rm (or the economy) uses a speci…c technique— corresponding to a
speci…c capital-labor ratio— then that speci…c technique will get better over time. This
type of technological progress was emphasized and discussed by, among others, Stewart
(1977), and modeled by Basu and Weil (1998). In their model, the aggregate economy
operates at a capital-labor ratio determined by the stock of capital (given by past saving
decisions) and the inelastically supplied labor in the economy. Then in the next period,
productivity improves at the capital-labor ratio currently in use and at neighboring
capital-labor ratios— but not at all capital-labor ratios.
We can see how this type of technological progress works with the help of Figure 2
above. Suppose that after the technological improvement starting at the capital-labor
ratio k0 , the economy accumulates further capital, increasing its capital-labor ratio to
k1 . Then with a similar logic, there will be a localized improvement at k1 . We can now
see that capital-labor ratios above k1 will bene…t indirectly from both improvements,
but the extent of this will depend on how localized these spillovers are. I will return
to the implications of this type of localized technological progress in the context of a
speci…c application in Section 4 below.
Though learning-by-doing is undoubtedly important for the improvement of certain
technologies, it seems unsatisfactory to assume that this is the only, or the primary, form

4

of technological progress. A great number of innovations in the world today are a result of
purposeful activity, as evidenced by the fact that companies (and governments) spend a
signi…cant fraction of their resources for research and development, patent this research,
and use and defend the resulting patents (see Hall, 2011, for a recent survey). But it
is far from straightforward to have purposeful research and development activity be the
engine of economic growth together with this new view— or for that matter together
with the induced innovation literature.
While Atkinson and Stiglitz never attempted to formulate a model in which biased
technological change arises endogenously from research and development activities, this
was the main focus of the induced innovation literature. The di¢ culties that they faced
illustrate a number of important issues, as I discuss below.

2.2

Modeling Induced Innovations

I now consider a prototypical model of induced innovation. Suppose that the economy
is populated by many …rms, each with a constant returns to scale production function,
Y = F (NL L; NZ Z) ;

(1)

where L is labor, which is assumed constant (inelastically supplied) throughout the
paper, Z is another factor of production, for example capital or another type of labor,
and NL and NZ are factor-augmenting technology terms, which are controlled by each
individual …rm. The induced innovation literature assumes that …rms hire the pro…tmaximizing amount of factors, but they choose their technologies to maximize “the
current rate of cost reduction”for given factor proportions (see, Kennedy, 1964, p. 543,
Drandakis and Phelps, 1965, p. 824). This is equivalent to maximizing the rate of
output growth, R, taking Z and L as given. This rate of output growth, holding Z and
L constant, is
R = (1

s)

N_ L
N_ Z
+s
;
NL
NZ

5

(2)

where s = wZ Z=Y is the share of factor Z in GDP.1 The constraint facing …rms, and thus
the maximization problem is given by the “innovation possibilities frontier,” a concept
…rst introduced by Kennedy (1964), which I write as
!
N_ L
N_ Z
=
;
NL
NZ
where

(3)

is a strictly decreasing, di¤erentiable and concave function. This innovation

possibilities frontier captures the trade-o¤ that, at the frontier, a higher rate of laboraugmenting technological change must come at the expense of a lower rate of technological change favoring the other factor, Z. Once formulated in this way, the solution to
the problem of determining endogenous technology is straightforward, and some of its
implications will be discussed in the next section. For now it is also useful to note that
the determination of endogenous technology in this model can be represented as a point
of tangency between the contours of (2) and the innovation facilities frontier given by
(3) as shown in Figure 3, which also shows how this point of tangency changes when the
share of factor Z in GDP, s, increases as I discuss further below.
But does this formulation make sense?
Given our modern modeling sensibilities, the answer must be no. The objective
function posited for the …rms, maximizing (2), is di¢ cult to motivate (as already noted
by Samuelson, 1965, and Nordhaus, 1973). The natural thing would have been to simply
assume that each …rm, taking all prices as given, maximizes the discounted value of its
pro…ts. This dynamic maximization problem can be written as
Z T
max
exp ( rt) (F (NL L; NZ Z) wL L wZ Z) dt
Z;L;NZ ;NL

(4)

0

subject to (3) and for given factor prices (relative to the price of the …nal good), wL and
wZ (where I set the planning horizon arbitrarily to some T , which could be in…nity).
But a moment’s re‡ection will show why induced innovation literature shied away from
it. In general, (4) is not a convex optimization problem and does not have an interior
1

To obtain this expression, di¤erentiate both sides of (1) with respect to time, holding Z and L
constant, and use the fact that the marginal product of labor is equal to the wage rate and the constant
returns to scale assumption on F .

6

Figure 3: An increase in the share of factor Z in GDP, s, makes the counters representing
the rate of output growth steeper. This changes the point of tangency with the innovation possibilities frontier from A to B, inducing further Z-augmenting technological
change.
solution because the production function exhibits increasing returns to scale in factors
of production and technology terms combined.
The induced innovation literature came before the advances in the modeling of monopolistic competition, which formed the basis of Romer’s (1990) model of endogenous
growth, as well as that of Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992).
Without modeling monopolistic competition (or monopoly or oligopolistic competition),
there was no obvious way of overcoming the non-convexity of (4), unless one adopted
the assumption of Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988) that technological progress was generated as a byproduct externality of investment in physical capital or education, which
is ultimately unsatisfactory for the same reason as noted above— i.e., because much of
innovation results from purposeful, pro…t-maximizing decisions.
The same di¢ culty that dogged the induced innovation literature would have prevented progress in modeling research and development activity within the context of
Atkinson and Stiglitz’s new view.

7

3

Directed Technological Change

A more recent literature, one with which I have been heavily involved, shows how induced innovations and Atkinson and Stiglitz’s new view of technological change can
be microeconomically modeled. The approach, …rst developed in Acemoglu (1998) and
Kiley (1999), is similar to that used in the …rst-generation endogenous technological
change models such as Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and
Howitt (1992), but with a richer menu of technologies towards which innovations can be
directed— hence the designation directed technological change. Here I present a strippeddown version similar to Acemoglu (2002). As in the …rst-generation endogenous technological change models, new technologies create monopoly power for their inventor, thus
leading to monopolistic competition. But di¤erently from these models, the implications
are much richer as in the induced innovation literature and Atkinson and Stiglitz’s vision. In this section, I brie‡y overview this approach. In the context of the applications
presented in the next section, I will then show how the problems with which the induced
innovation literature concerned itself can be analyzed (but with some notably di¤erent
conclusions) when new innovations can be directed to factor-augmenting technologies,
and how Atkinson and Stiglitz’s new view can be obtained when new innovations are
directed to techniques or tasks.
Suppose that a continuum of …rms have access to the production function for producing a unique …nal good,
(5)

Y = F (YL ; YZ ) ;

where YL and YZ are two intermediate goods that are themselves produced competitively
with the following production functions.2
Z NL
YL =
xL (j)1 dj L and YZ =
0

where

Z

NZ

xZ (j)1

dj Z ;

(6)

0

2 (0; 1). The labor-intensive intermediate good is produced from labor and a

range of labor-complementary machines, xL (j) denotes the amount of the j-th labor2

This formulation is identical to (1). To see this, rewrite that problem as in here. In particular,
suppose that the …nal good is produced from two intermediates as in (5) with these two intermediates
being produced competitively as YL = NL L and YZ = NZ Z.

8

complementary (labor-augmenting) machine used in production. The range of machines
that can be used with labor is denoted by NL . The production function for the other
intermediate di¤ers only because it uses Z-complementary machines. That these two
sets of machines are di¤erent is important because it implies that some technologies
will be augmenting labor, while others increase the productivity of factor Z. In fact,
the functional form in (6) is immaterial and is only adopted for transparency here as I
discuss below.
Suppose that machines in both sectors are supplied by pro…t-maximizing “technology
monopolists”. Each monopolist will set a rental price

L

(j) or

Z

(j) for the machine it

supplies to the market in order to maximize its pro…ts. For example, we can assume that
technology monopolists have access to production functions for new technologies— or to
the innovation possibility frontier in Kennedy’s terminology— given by
N_ L =
where

(1+ )=2 (1
NZ
L NL

)=2

SL and N_ Z =

(1
Z NL

)=2

(1+ )=2

NZ

SZ ;

(7)

2 (0; 1) is a parameter that determines the relative degree to which advances in

one technology depend on the current state of knowledge in that technology relative to
the other one (see Acemoglu, 2002).
Observe that for given NL and NZ , the production functions in (6) exhibit constant
returns to scale. However, when NL and NZ are also treated as choice variables, there
will be increasing returns to scale in the aggregate as in (4) above. Despite this non-

convexity, the reason why the pro…t-maximization problems of …rms in this economy
are well de…ned is because technology choices, NL and NZ , will be made by a di¤erent
set of agents— the technology monopolists— than the producers of YL and YZ (see the
discussion in Acemoglu, 2007, on the importance of this assumption).
Acemoglu (2002) characterizes dynamic equilibria (and balance growth paths) in this
model, emphasizing in particular how the direction (and bias) of technological change
depends on relative abundance of di¤erent types of labor.
An important generalization of this framework studied in Acemoglu (2007) is worth
mentioning. In particular, this paper generalizes the framework mentioned above such

9

that the overall (aggregate) production function can be written as
Y = F (L; Z; ) ;
where

is a vector of technologies (thus generalizing the functional form in (6)). The

vector

could include factor-augmenting technologies like NL and NZ above, but also

potentially includes other types of technologies that a¤ect, say, the elasticity of substitution between factors, or create localized technological change as in Atkinson and
Stiglitz’s vision. Acemoglu (2007) characterizes the nature of technological change in
this economy, and shows that the relationship between factor supplies and equilibrium
bias of technology derived in Acemoglu (2002) extends to this more general environment.

4

Applications

In this section, I provide several applications of the ideas presented so far, stressing how
the micro-founded directed technological change model gives di¤erent or more nuanced
implications than the induced innovation literature and Atkinson and Stiglitz’s approach,
but also highlighting certain important parallels and interesting new directions based on
Atkinson and Stiglitz’s ideas.

4.1

Appropriate Technology

One of the important applications of Atkinson and Stiglitz’s idea that technological
progress is localized— rather than being neutral— is one that the authors themselves
mentioned: the potential inappropriateness of frontier technologies to less developed
economies (Stewart, 1977). Consider the case of agricultural technology for example. Because frontier technologies are developed in rich, capital-intensive countries, the resulting
agricultural technologies will be capital-intensive and tend to improve the e¤ectiveness
of such capital-intensive techniques (such as tractors and mechanical harvesters), and
even use computer and GPS technology to improve productivity. But the contribution
of these technologies to a capital-scarce agricultural economy where such machinery are
absent may be limited. Basu and Weil (1998) modeled this idea in a framework where

10

all technological progress results from learning-by-doing as in Atkinson and Stiglitz’s
baseline approach.
Though this idea has obvious appeal, it does also illustrate some of the major shortcomings of Atkinson and Stiglitz’s modeling approach. The reason why advanced countries are so important for frontier technologies is that they undertake research and development to create and develop new technologies. But this cannot be captured in a
model in which all technological progress results from learning-by-doing.
The induced innovation and directed technological change literatures may therefore
o¤er a more appealing framework for studying these e¤ects. Acemoglu and Zilibotti
(2001) were the …rst, to the best of my knowledge, to have done so using this complementary approach. Acemoglu and Zilibotti focused on di¤erences in human capital
rather than capital-labor ratio. This is motivated both by the increasing importance of
human capital for modern technology (and the sharp di¤erences in human capital endowments across countries) and by the link that this creates between ideas of appropriate
technology and skill-biased technological change (which I discuss next).
I now present the Acemoglu-Zilibotti model brie‡y to illustrate how, for this application, these di¤erent approaches lead to similar and complementary conclusions.
Acemoglu and Zilibotti utilize a framework similar to the one presented in Section 3,
with Z = H corresponding to skilled labor. The world economy consists of two sets of
countries, the North and the South, the …rst corresponding to richer countries with a
higher relative endowment of skilled to unskilled labor (i.e., higher H=L). All research
and development takes place in the North using an innovation possibilities frontier similar to (7) above. But the South can costlessly copy frontier technologies from the North.
Because intellectual property rights are not enforced in the South, Northern technology
monopolists cannot make any pro…ts from the Southern market. This implies that all
technological change will be directed to the relative skill abundance of the Northern market. However, because skilled labor is scarcer in the South, this implies that technologies
developed in the North are partly inappropriate to the South. In particular, Acemoglu
and Zilibotti show that measured productivity will be endogenously higher in the North
(controlling for di¤erences in capital intensity). Relatedly, in a hypothetical world in
11

which new technologies were directed to the world ratio of skilled to unskilled labor, the
South would have been richer relative to the North than it is in this equilibrium.
The similarities between this story and Atkinson and Stiglitz’s model are worth emphasizing. In both models, technology can be inappropriate to the needs of poorer
economies (because of di¤erences in capital intensity or scarcity of skill). In both cases,
this is because technological change is biased and localized. In particular, technological
change is localized in Acemoglu and Zilibotti’s model as well because new technologies
are created with an innovation possibilities frontier, just like (7), where research directed
to skill-intensive products generates limited spillovers to labor-intensive products and
vice versa. However, there are also important di¤erences between these approaches.
For example, Acemoglu and Zilibotti’s analysis shows why these results depend on the
international enforcement of intellectual property rights. If these were enforced, then
research would be also directed more towards Southern needs and the extent of this
e¤ect would be more limited. In addition, international trade can exacerbate the inappropriateness of technology by creating a price e¤ect (see also Acemoglu, 1998, 2003b,
as well as Diwan and Rodrik, 1991). This suggests that a modeling approach in which
new technologies are determined by forward-looking research behavior is not only better
able to make contact with stylized patterns and data on innovation and patents, but
also generates richer comparative statics and new insights.

4.2

Skill-Biased Technological Change

A major application of emphasized by the induced innovation literature, Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1969) and the directed technological change literature is to skill-biased technological change. There is now a huge empirical and theoretical literature on this topic
(see Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1998, for the empirical relationship between technology
and wages, and Acemoglu and Autor, 2011, for a recent review). Much of this literature,
however, treats technology as exogenous. But an idea already clear from Hicks’s quote
given above is that the type of technologies, and hence skill bias of technology, should
respond to various factors in the economy, primary among them the abundance or skill
of di¤erent types of labor. Though this was emphasized by Hicks, neither the induced
12

innovation literature nor Atkinson and Stiglitz dwelt much on the endogenous skill bias
and the inequality implications of their approach.
Hicks’s statement above, which was partly formalized by the induced innovation
literature, can be read in one of two ways. First, “economizing on a factor” can be
interpreted as “biased against that factor,”in which case Hicks’s statement can be read
as suggesting that technology should become endogenously biased in favor of a factor
that becomes more “expensive”or scarce. Second, it can be interpreted as “augmenting
that factor,” in which case Hicks would appear to argue that technology will naturally
tend to further augment a factor that becomes more “expensive”.
As shown in Acemoglu (2003a), a variant of the second interpretation can be derived
from the above stylized model of induced innovations. In particular, from Figure 3
introduced above, we can see that the relative rate of growth of NZ (relative to that of
NL ) and thus NZ =NL will be increasing in the factor share of Z (i.e., in s = wZ Z=Y ):
a higher s leaves the innovation possibilities frontier unchanged but makes the contours
of (2) steeper as shown in the …gure. This then increases NZ =NL , which is also shown
in the …gure. Setting Z = H again, this implies that technology will become relatively
more augmenting H, i.e., NH =NL will increase, when s = wH H=Y increases.
However, this result implies that things are a little more nuanced than a simple
reading of Hicks’s statement because what is important is not the scarcity of a factor
but its factor share, s, which is a non-monotonic function of its relative abundance (or
conversely, scarcity) H=L. The factor share s is increasing in H=L if the elasticity of
substitution between the two factors is greater than 1, thus making NH =NL increasing
in H=L, and decreasing in H=L when this elasticity is less than 1 (Acemoglu, 2003a),
hence making NH =NL decreasing in H=L in this case. In summary, whether relative
scarcity of H will encourage further advances in NH or NH =NL depends on the elasticity
of substitution between the two factors. The answer is yes when elasticity of substitution
is greater than 1, and no when it is less than 1.
What about Atkinson and Stiglitz’s approach? Though these authors do not provide
a framework that can readily speak to these issues, the following would be a natural
formalization of their baseline scenario for the origins of localized technological progress
13

which, as already mentioned above, relies on learning-by-doing. Suppose, in a similar
spirit to the discussion in the previous subsection, that localized technological change
implies that learning-by-doing will spread to techniques employed in the same sector—
i.e., greater H will imply more learning-by-doing in the H-sector and thus higher NH .
This of course implies that NH =NL will be increasing in H=L, so that relative scarcity
of H will discourage further advances in NH or NH =NL , which is quite di¤erent from
the induced innovation literature’s conclusion. Which perspective is correct?
It turns out that the correct answer is closest, but not identical, to the induced
innovation literature— and thus somewhat more subtle than what Hicks anticipated or
the localized learning-by-doing a la Atkinson and Stiglitz would imply.
In Acemoglu (2007), I show that, under very weak regularity conditions, whenever
a factor becomes more scarce, technology becomes endogenously biased against that
factor. This conclusion is independent of whether the menu of technological changes
is assumed to be factor augmenting. It clearly goes against the …rst reading of Hicks’s
statement.
If, in addition, we assume that there are only two factors and only factor-augmenting
technologies are allowed, then whenever a factor becomes more scarce, technology will
tend to further augment that factor if the elasticity of substitution between the two
factors is less than 1, and the opposite conclusion (technology endogenously augmenting
the factor becoming more abundant) holds when the elasticity of substitution is greater
than 1 (see Acemoglu, 2002, 2007). This is related closely to the result from the version
of the induced innovation literature presented above. But crucially, it is derived from
a coherent, micro-founded model of innovation incentives rather than the induced innovation literature’s ad hoc rule of maximizing the rate of growth of output technology
choices while maximizing pro…ts with factor demands.
The importance of microeconomic modeling and the fact that a micro-founded model
does give di¤erent and richer results can be highlighted by considering another set of
results derived in Acemoglu (2002, 2007), which have no equivalents in the induced
innovation literature or in Atkinson and Stiglitz’s approach. If, in addition, the elasticity
of substitution between factorprocess is su¢ ciently large (in particular, larger than a
14

threshold that is equal to 2

in the model highlighted above, where

is the parameter

in the innovation possibilities frontier, (7), above), the relative demand curves for factors
with endogenous technology is upward sloping (and under a related condition, demand
curves for factors are also upward sloping). In particular, this implies that, in this
case, technology responds to changes in skill supply so much that when H=L increases,
wH =wL also increases— rather than decreasing as in basic producer theory— in the longrun equilibrium after technology has fully adjusted to the change in supplies and prices.

4.3

Tasks and Technologies

Another modern application of the ideas in Atkinson and Stiglitz (1969) is to models of
labor markets with task-speci…c technologies. In particular, Acemoglu and Autor (2011),
building on Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), Zeira (1998) and Acemoglu and Zilibotti
(2001), consider the following model of the labor market. Suppose that there are four
factors of production, high, medium and low skilled workers and capital, with respective
supplies given by L, M , H, and K. Aggregate output is produced by combining the
output of a continuum of tasks, normalized to lie on the unit interval. For example, it
R1
may be given by ln Y = 0 ln y(i)di, where y(i) denotes the output of task i.

Let us assume that each task can be produced according to the production function
y(i) = AL

L

(i) l(i) + AM

M

(i) m(i) + AH

H

(i) h(i) + AK

where A terms represent factor-augmenting technology, and
K

L

(i),

K

(i) k(i);

M

(i),

H

(8)
(i) and

(i) are the task productivity schedules, designating, respectively, the productivity

of low, medium and high skill workers and capital in di¤erent tasks. This speci…cation
implies, for instance, that

L

(i) is the productivity of low skill workers in task i, and

l (i) is the number of low skill workers allocated to task i. Acemoglu and Autor (2011)
argue why a model along these lines provides a much better framework for changes in
wage and employment patterns in the United States and other advanced labor markets
over the last three decades, in particular allowing for technologies replacing certain sets
of tasks and new technologies, while increasing productivity, still reducing the wages of
certain groups of workers.
15

This model shares with Atkinson and Stiglitz (1969) the feature that new technologies
exist at the task/activity level. It is potentially richer than Atkinson and Stiglitz’s
formulation, however, because some new technologies can increase productivity of a
task when performed by one type of worker without a¤ecting the productivity of other
factors at this task (e.g.,

H (i)

may increase while the other

terms remain constant).

As we have already noted, Atkinson Stiglitz did not provide a detailed analysis of
how localized technological change could take place. In this framework, however, where
task-based technologies come from is as important as their implications for wages and
employment. Acemoglu and Autor (2011) use results from Zeira (1998) and Acemoglu
(2007, 2010) to show how this can be done. First, as emphasized by Zeira (1998) and
Acemoglu (2010), high wages could be an impetus for more rapid technological change.
But more importantly, and in line with Acemoglu (2010), these changes will be directed
towards certain tasks, and hence will be localized and biased. Though these results
take some steps towards a general framework for endogenous task-based technological
change, much more remains to be done here, and Atkinson and Stiglitz’s approach will
remain relevant for these new investigations.

4.4

Other Applications

Several other applications of ideas stemming from the induced innovation literature and
from Atkinson and Stiglitz are important, even if most of them have been even less well
developed than those already discussed. Here I mention a few.
First, Atkinson and Stiglitz are not clear on whether what matters is capital per
worker at the economy level or at the …rm level. If the latter, then equilibria could be
asymmetric. In particular, …rms could choose di¤erent capital-labor ratios in order to
bene…t from di¤erent types of localized technological changes. Figure 4 illustrates this
possibility by showing that if there are two di¤erent types of …rms with (very) di¤erent
capital-labor ratios (the …gure k0 and k1 ), then the aggregate production function could
become endogenously non-convex, encouraging …rms in the future to choose di¤erent
capital-labor ratios, perpetuating this non-convexity. To the best of my knowledge,
this topic has not been investigated systematically in any of the literatures discussed
16

so far. This type of non-convexity might be particularly important for less developed
economies, creating another reason why dual economies may emerge in such societies. In
particular, if technologies imported from the world technology frontier have undergone
much improvement only in high capital-labor ratios, then despite the relatively high
price of capital, some …rms in developing economies may end up choosing to operate at
these high capital-labor ratios, leaving even lower capital-labor ratios for the rest of the
economy.

Figure 4: After productivity improvements at the capital-labor ratios used by the two
types of …rms (k0 and k1 ), the new aggregate production function is no longer concave.
Second, another important set of applications of these ideas is to the relationship
between trade and technology. Grossman and Helpman (1991) investigated the relationship between trade and the overall rate of technological progress. Acemoglu (2003b)
showed how trade can have a critical impact on the direction of technological change (see
also Thoenig and Verdier, 2003, Epifani and Gancia, 2008, and Acemoglu, Gancia and
Zilibotti, 2013). The same forces would be present in Atkinson and Stiglitz’s modeling
approach based on learning-by-doing on the basis of the current factor proportions, but
with some notable di¤erences. The type of learning-by-doing envisaged by Atkinson and
Stiglitz would imply that as international trade leads to greater specialization, it will
also cause a divergence between the technologies of the trading countries (divergence
17

in terms of which localized techniques are witnessing improvements). This is, in fact,
sharper than in the directed technological change models, because in these models, as
emphasized in Acemoglu (1998, 2003b) and Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001), the e¤ect
of trade on technology depends on how well intellectual property rights are enforced
internationally. As already noted above, when such property rights are enforced, trade
need not lead to a divergence of technologies because technology monopolists would …nd
it pro…table to produce machines useful for both countries. In contrast, localized technological change following from the techniques currently in use will necessarily lead to a
divergence regardless of whether intellectual property rights are enforced internationally.
Third, and relatedly, directed technological change models do not generally lead
to a major technological divergence between advanced economies (though see the last
section in Acemoglu, 2003b). Atkinson and Stiglitz’s approach might have di¤erent
implications. In particular, if the United States and European economies operate at
di¤erent factor proportions because of di¤erences in relative supplies or institutional
di¤erences, this could shape the path of learning-by-doing and create di¤erent types of
localized technological improvements.
Fourth, a major current debate concerns whether new technologies are creating “technological unemployment”whereby many workers are displaced by new technologies and
…nd it di¢ cult to become employed again. Critics of this view point to the fact that
employment has increased steadily in the face of major (and often disruptive) new technologies throughout the last 200 years, while its proponents emphasize the inability of an
important fraction of the US (and European) labor force to …nd jobs or at the very least
the stagnation or even the decline in real wages partly caused by these new technologies.
Localized technological change might put important new ideas on the table here. If
technological change has historically taken place at techniques that increase the wages
and demand for labor, but because of institutional, technological and supply reasons it
now takes place at techniques that do not do so, then the presence of technology-driven
unemployment today may not contradict the historical record.
Finally, the potential impact of these ideas— in any application— will ultimately depend on their ability to make contact with data and receive support from careful em18

pirical work. This has been the case in the study of changes in wage structures, which
has focused on the theoretical and empirical investigation of implications of skill-biased
technological changes (and sometimes also of the origins of such technological change)
as reviewed in Acemoglu and Autor (2011). With advances in microeconometric modeling and the greater availability of micro datasets with rich information on …rm, worker
and technology characteristics, much more fruitful work combining new theoretical ideas
with creative empirical strategies is likely to be forthcoming.

5

Conclusion

In many ways, Atkinson and Stiglitz’s short paper in the 1969 volume of the Economic
Journal was ahead of its time in emphasizing localized and biased new technologies and
challenging the orthodoxy in the modeling of technological change. At the same time,
it also had many similarities with the prior literature on induced innovations which was
also ‡ourishing in the 1960s (and mostly in the pages of the Economic Journal). Both of
these literatures are also closely related to the more recent directed technological change
literature, developing microeconomic models of endogenous bias and direction of new
technologies and their macroeconomic implications.
After overviewing and linking these three literatures, this paper has shown how they
generate complementary but sometimes also quite di¤erent answers in the context of
issues related to appropriate technology, the response of (skill-) biased technological
change to the abundance of di¤erent types of factors, and task-based technologies, and
technological change. It has also highlighted several important areas where the ideas
Atkinson and Stiglitz’s seminal paper and the induced innovation and direct technological change literatures can be fruitfully applied in future work. Though the orthodoxy
that Atkinson and Stiglitz challenged, which ignores the biased and localized nature of
technological change, is still widespread in much of macroeconomics, several important
literatures, perhaps most importantly the literature on changes in the wage structure,
have recognized the importance of biased technological change and even modeled the
endogenous determination of this bias. On this trend, Atkinson and Stiglitz’s ideas may

19

apply even more centrally in the next 50 years than the last 50 years.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and Wage Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998),
1055-1090.
Acemoglu, Daron, “Directed Technical Change”Review of Economic Studies, LXIX
(2002), 781-810.
Acemoglu, Daron, “Factor Prices and Technical Change: from Induced Innovations
to Recent Debates” in Philippe Aghion, Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz and Michael
Woodford (editors) Knowledge, Information and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press, 2003a
Acemoglu, Daron, “Patterns of Skill Premia”, Review of Economic Studies, LXX
(2003b), 199-230.
Acemoglu, Daron, “Equilibrium Bias of Technology” Econometrica, LXXV, (2007),
1371-1410.
Acemoglu, Daron, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 2009.
Acemoglu, Daron, “When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?” Journal of
Political Economy, CXIIX, 2010, 1037-1078.
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor, “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications
for Employment Earnings.”In: Ashenfelter, O., Card, D. (Eds.), The Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. 4b. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1043-1171, 2011.
Acemoglu, Daron, Gino Gancia and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “O¤shoring and Directed
Technical Change,”mimeo, 2013.
Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Productivity Di¤erences”(2001), Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116, pp.563-606.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”Econometrica, 110 (1992), 323-351.

20

Ahmad, Syed, “On The Theory of Induced Invention,” Economic Journal LXXVI,
(1966), 344-357.
Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “A New View of Technological Change,”
Economic Journal, LXXIX (1969), 573-78.
Autor, David, Alan Krueger and Lawrence Katz, “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998),
1169-1214.
Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
CXIIX, (2003), 1279–1334.
Basu, Susanto and David N. Weil, “Appropriate Technology and Growth,”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXIII, (1998),1025-1054.
Diwan, I. and Dani Rodrik, “Patents, Appropriate Technology and North-South
Trade”Journal of International Economics, XXX, (1991), 27-47.
Drandakis, E. and Edmund Phelps, “A Model of Induced Invention, Growth and
Distribution”Economic Journal, 76 (1965), 823-840.
Epifani, Paolo and Gino Gancia, “The Skill Bias of World Trade,”Economic Journal
CXIIX, (2008), 927-960.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1991.
Hall, Bronwyn H., “Innovation and Productivity”NBER Working Paper No. 17178.
Hicks, John The Theory of Wages, Macmillan, London, 1932.
Kennedy, Charles, “Induced Bias in Innovation and the Theory of Distribution”
Economic Journal, LXXIV (1964), 541-547.
Kiley, Michael, “The Supply of Skilled Labor and Skill-Biased Technological Progress”
Economc Journal, CIX (1999), 708-724.
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics XXII, (1988), 3-42.
Nordhaus, William; “Some Skeptical Thoughts on the Theory of Induced Innovation”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXXVII, (1973), 208-219.
21

Romer, Paul M., “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth” Journal of Political
Economy 94 (1986), 1002-1037.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change”Journal of Political Economy,
IIC (1990), S71-S102.
Samuelson, Paul, “A Theory of Induced Innovations Along Kennedy-Weisacker Lines”
Review of Economics and Statistics, XLVII (1965), 444-464.
Stewart, Frances, Technology and Underdevelopment, The Macmillan Press, Ltd.,
London, England, 1977.
Thoenig, Mathias and Thierry Verdier, “A theory of defensive skill-biased innovation
and international trade,”American Economic Review XCIII, (2003), 709-728.
Zeira, Joseph, “Workers, Machines and Economic Growth” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXIII, (1998), 1091-1113.

22

