NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRMS, DESTINATIONS, AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS
Julian di Giovanni
Andrei A. Levchenko
Isabelle Mejean
Working Paper 20061
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20061
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

We would like to thank the editor (Lars Peter Hansen), two anonymous referees, George Akerlof,
Gilles Duranton, Jonathan Eaton, Chris House, Ayhan Kose, Kory Kroft, Julien Martin, Akito Matsumoto,
Ryan Monarch, Peter Morrow, Sophie Osotimehin, Tiago Ribeiro, Matthew Shapiro, Rishi Sharma,
and seminar participants at various institutions for helpful suggestions. We are especially grateful
to Matias Cattaneo for extensive input that greatly improved the paper. Di Giovanni thanks the Marie
Curie International Incoming Fellowship FP7-PEOPLE-2013-IIF for financial support under Grant
Agreement Number 622959. All remaining errors are our own. This work is supported by a public
grant overseen by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the « Investissements d’Avenir
» program (Idex Grant Agreement No. ANR -11- IDEX-0003-02 / LabexECODEC No. ANR - 11-LABEX-0047)
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Julian di Giovanni, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate Fluctuations
Julian di Giovanni, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean
NBER Working Paper No. 20061
April 2014
JEL No. E32,F12,F41
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a database covering the universe of French firms for the period 1990--2007 to provide
a forensic account of the role of individual firms in generating aggregate fluctuations. We set up a
simple multi-sector model of heterogeneous firms selling to multiple markets to motivate a theoretically-founded
decomposition of firms' annual sales growth rate into different components. We find that the firm-specific
component contributes substantially to aggregate sales volatility, mattering about as much as the components
capturing shocks that are common across firms within a sector or country. We then decompose the
firm-specific component to provide evidence on two mechanisms that generate aggregate fluctuations
from microeconomic shocks highlighted in the recent literature: (i) when the firm size distribution
is fat-tailed, idiosyncratic shocks to large firms directly contribute to aggregate fluctuations; and (ii)
aggregate fluctuations can arise from idiosyncratic shocks due to input-output linkages across the economy.
Firm linkages are approximately three times as important as the direct effect of firm shocks in driving
aggregate fluctuations.
Julian di Giovanni
Department of Economics and Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
julian.digiovanni@upf.edu
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

Isabelle Mejean
Département d'Economie
Ecole Polytechnique
91128 Palaiseau Cedex
France
isabelle.mejean@polytechnique.edu

1

Introduction

A long tradition in macroeconomics seeks to understand the microeconomic underpinnings
of aggregate fluctuations. Starting with the seminal work of Long and Plosser (1983),
an important line of research explores the role of sectoral shocks in generating aggregate
fluctuations (see, e.g., Stockman, 1988; Foerster et al., 2011; Carvalho and Gabaix, 2013,
among many others). A running theme in this literature is that idiosyncratic shocks to a
single sector can have sizeable aggregate effects if the sector is strongly interconnected with
others in the economy through input linkages (Horvath, 1998, 2000; Dupor, 1999; Shea,
2002; Conley and Dupor, 2003; Acemoglu et al., 2012). The role of individual firms in the
aggregate business cycle has received comparatively less attention. Gabaix (2011) argues
that because the firm size distribution is extremely fat-tailed – the economy is “granular”
– idiosyncratic shocks to individual (large) firms will not average out, and instead lead to
movements in the aggregates. However, there is currently little empirical evidence on the
role of individual firms and firm-to-firm linkages in aggregate fluctuations.
This paper constructs a novel database covering the universe of French firms’ domestic
sales and destination-specific exports for the period 1990–2007, and uses it to provide a
forensic account of the contribution of individual firms to aggregate fluctuations. To guide
the empirical exercise, we set up a simple multi-sector model of heterogeneous firms in the
spirit of Melitz (2003) and Eaton et al. (2011a). The model implies that the growth rate of
sales of an individual firm to a single destination market can be decomposed additively into
a macroeconomic shock (defined as the component common to all firms), a sectoral shock
(defined as the component common to all firms in a particular sector), and a firm-level
shock.
Relative to standard empirical assessments of the role of sectoral or firm-specific shocks,
a novel aspect of our approach is that it accounts explicitly for the sector- and firm-level
participation in export markets. When firms sell to multiple, imperfectly correlated markets, total firm sales do not admit an exact decomposition into macroeconomic, sectoral,
and firm-specific shocks, whereas sales to an individual destination do. Thus, in our analysis
macroeconomic, sectoral, and firm-specific shocks are defined for each destination market.
The heterogeneity across markets also allows us to distinguish the firm-specific shocks affecting a firm’s sales to all markets it serves from shocks particular to individual markets.
We compute macroeconomic, sectoral, and firm-specific shocks using data on the annual firm-destination sales growth rates. The firm-specific component accounts for the

1

overwhelming majority (98.7%) of the variation in sales growth rates across firms.1 In
addition, about half of the variation in the firm-specific component is explained by variation in that component across destinations, which can be interpreted as destination-specific
demand shocks in our conceptual framework.
We extract the time series of the macroeconomic, sectoral, and firm-specific shocks
for each destination served by each firm. We use these realizations of shocks to assess
whether microeconomic shocks contribute significantly to aggregate volatility, and if yes,
through which channels. We derive a decomposition of aggregate volatility in the economy
into the contributions of macroeconomic/sectoral and firm-specific shocks, and quantify the
importance of the latter for aggregate volatility.
Our main finding is that the firm-specific components contribute substantially to aggregate fluctuations. The standard deviation of the firm-specific shocks’ contribution to
aggregate sales growth amounts to 80% of the standard deviation of aggregate sales growth
in the whole economy, and 69% in the manufacturing sector. This contribution is similar in
magnitude to the combined effect of all sectoral and macroeconomic shocks. The standard
deviation of the sectoral and macroeconomic shocks’ contribution to aggregate sales growth
is 53% of the standard deviation of aggregate sales growth for the overall economy, and 64%
for the manufacturing sector.2 To investigate whether exports differ systematically from
domestic sales, we then carry out the aggregate volatility decomposition for domestic and
export sales separately.3 The firm-specific component contributes more to the volatility of
exports than that of overall sales in both the economy as a whole and in the manufacturing sector, where exporting is more prevalent. Nonetheless, firm-specific shocks contribute
substantially to the volatility of aggregate domestic sales as well.
The overall contribution of firm-specific shocks to aggregate volatility can be decomposed
additively into terms that capture two proximate explanations for why firm-specific shocks
matter: (i) a weighted sum of all the variances of firm-specific shocks, and (ii) a weighted
sum of all the covariances between the firm-specific shocks. We refer to the first as the
1

This number is the share of the variance in the firm-destination growth rates that is not accounted for
by the macro- and sectoral components. Using the same metric, Haltiwanger (1997) and Castro et al. (2011)
find that idiosyncratic shocks account for more than 90% of the variation in firm growth rates in the U.S.
Census Longitudinal Research Database.
2
These numbers add up to more than 1 because they have been converted to standard deviations. Since
the aggregate variance is additive in the firm-specific and macro-sectoral variance components, the aggregate
standard deviation is smaller than the sum of the standard deviations of the components.
3
The analysis of the export subsample is motivated by two well-known facts: (i) aggregate exports are
more volatile than GDP, and (ii) the largest firms tend to be exporters. Canals et al. (2007) show that
international trade is very granular, both at the firm- and sector-destination level.

2

direct effect, since this is the aggregate variance that would obtain directly from shocks to
individual firms, and would be there even in the complete absence of interconnectedness
between the firms. Gabaix (2011) shows that firm-specific idiosyncratic shocks do not
average out because of the presence of very large firms. The second term collects cross-firm
covariances, and can thus be thought of as arising at least in part from interconnectedness
between firms (sector-level versions of this argument are explored in Horvath, 1998, 2000;
Dupor, 1999; Shea, 2002; Conley and Dupor, 2003; Acemoglu et al., 2012, among others).4
We refer to this as the linkages effect. Though both channels matter quantitatively, the
majority of the contribution of firm-specific shocks to the aggregate variance is accounted
for by the linkages term – the covariances of the firm-specific components of the sales growth
rates.
We then exploit cross-sectoral heterogeneity to provide further evidence on the direct
and linkages mechanisms. Gabaix (2011) shows that the direct effect of shocks to individual
firms on aggregate fluctuations will be more pronounced the larger is the Herfindahl index
of firm sales – a common measure of concentration. Confirming this result, firm-specific
shocks in more concentrated industries – such as transport, petroleum, and motor vehicles –
contribute more to aggregate volatility than firm-specific shocks in less concentrated sectors
such as metal products or publishing. We also compare the covariances of the firm-specific
shocks aggregated to the sector level to a measure of sectoral linkages taken from the InputOutput Tables.5 Sectors with stronger input-output linkages tend to exhibit significantly
greater correlation of firm-specific shocks. We thus find direct corroboration in the data for
the mechanisms behind both the direct and the linkages effects.
The results are robust in a number of dimensions. First and foremost, we continue to
find a large contribution of firm-specific shocks to aggregate fluctuations when we allow
for heterogeneous responses of firm sales growth to common shocks. In the baseline model
all firms have the same elasticity of sales with respect to the macroeconomic and sectoral
shocks. While our framework shares this feature with the large majority of quantitative
models in both macroeconomics and international trade, it is important to check whether
the results are driven by this feature. In an alternative approach, we thus allow for the
impact of sector-destination shocks on the growth rate of sales to vary by a wide variety of
firm characteristics, such as size, age, access to capital markets, R&D intensity, or export
4

Note that in this literature, the structural shocks are uncorrelated but generate positive covariances in
firm sales.
5
Ideally, we would relate the covariance of firm-specific shocks to a measure of linkages at the firm level.
However, currently firm-to-firm Input-Output Tables do not exist for France, and thus we must look for
these relationships at the sector level.

3

orientation. As additional checks, we also implement the model under several alternative
definitions of the sales growth rates, accounting for local geographical area effects, different
levels of sectoral disaggregation, and using multi-year growth rates instead of yearly ones.
The results are robust to all of these alternative implementations.
Our paper draws on, and contributes to, three key themes in macroeconomics. The
first is the quest to understand how aggregate fluctuations can arise from microeconomic
sources. This literature dates back to Long and Plosser (1983) and has traditionally focused
on shocks at the sectoral level (see, e.g., Jovanovic, 1987; Stockman, 1988; Carvalho and
Gabaix, 2013, among many others). The second theme is that input-output linkages are
the key mechanism through which microeconomic shocks propagate and lead to aggregate
fluctuations. Once again, this literature has predominantly focused on sector-level linkages
(see, e.g., Horvath, 1998, 2000; Dupor, 1999; Shea, 2002; Conley and Dupor, 2003; Foerster
et al., 2011; Acemoglu et al., 2012).6
The third theme is that studying firm- and plant-level behavior is essential for understanding aggregate fluctuations. For instance, evidence on large gross employment flows at
the micro level has stimulated a line of research into their aggregate implications (Davis
and Haltiwanger, 1992; Davis et al., 1996; Caballero et al., 1997; Davis et al., 2006). Similarly, plant-level investment is dominated by infrequent and large spikes, and an active
literature has explored whether these micro-level patterns affect the behavior of aggregate
investment (see, among many others, Doms and Dunne, 1998; Cooper et al., 1999; Cooper
and Haltiwanger, 2006; Gourio and Kashyap, 2007). Also closely related are studies of
firm-level volatility (see, e.g., Comı́n and Philippon, 2006; Davis et al., 2007; Castro et al.,
2011; Thesmar and Thoenig, 2011; Moscarini and Postel-Vinay, 2012; Lee and Mukoyama,
2012). These research agendas have tended to emphasize that studying micro behavior is
important as a way to learn what are the salient frictions in the economy. By and large, this
literature has not pursued the idea that shocks to individual firms can impact aggregate
fluctuations. A landmark recent exception is Gabaix (2011), who shows how idiosyncratic
shocks to firms can lead to aggregate fluctuations in an economy dominated by very large
firms, and provides empirical evidence for this phenomenon using U.S. data. Di Giovanni
and Levchenko (2012a) extend this model to a multi-country framework, and argue that it
can help rationalize cross-country differences in the magnitude of aggregate fluctuations.
In line with the first two themes, our analysis emphasizes both the role of individual
6
Important exceptions are Cohen and Frazzini (2008), Hertzel et al. (2008), and Kelly et al. (2013)
who relate the supplier relationships among U.S. listed firms to movements in their stock prices and sales
volatility.

4

shocks and of input-output linkages. In line with the third theme but in contrast to the
earlier literature, we shift the focus from sectors to firms. Our paper is the first to provide
comprehensive empirical evidence on firms’ contribution to aggregate fluctuations using the
population of firms in a particular country. In addition, we incorporate the international
dimension and show that it is important for a reliable computation of shocks. Finally, our
data enable us to examine in detail the mechanisms behind the role of individual firms in
generating aggregate volatility.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple heterogeneous firms model and derives a theoretically-founded decomposition of firm sales growth
in each market into firm-specific, sector-level, and macroeconomic components. The section
then derives a procedure to compute each component’s contribution to aggregate volatility.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the main results. Section 5 concludes.

2

Conceptual Framework

Total aggregate sales Xt by all French firms to all destinations in year t are by definition
P
given by: Xt ≡ f,n∈It xf nt , where xf nt is defined as the sales of firm f to market n in
year t, and It is the set of firms f and destinations n being served at t. Thus, the unit of
observation is a firm-destination pair, rather than a firm.7 The growth rate of aggregate
sales is then defined simply as γAt = Xt /Xt−1 − 1, where we assume that Xt−1 and Xt are
the aggregate sales of all firms that exist both at t − 1 and t, i.e. we restrict attention to
the intensive margin of aggregate sales growth. The choice to focus on the intensive margin
is motivated in part by the difficulty of measuring the extensive margin reliably. Online
Appendix A develops a complete decomposition of the total sales growth into extensive and
intensive margins, and presents the results for the relative contributions of the extensive (as
best as we can measure it) and intensive margins to aggregate volatility. The main result is
that the large majority of the variance of aggregate sales is accounted for by the volatility
of the intensive margin, with the extensive margin playing only a minor role.8 Section 4.4.2
demonstrates the robustness of the results to an alternative definition of firm sales growth
7

That is, suppose that there are two firms f
∈ {Renault, P eugeot} and two markets, n
∈
{F rance, Germany}, and both firms sell to both markets, then It
=
{{Renault, F rance} , {Renault, Germany} , {P eugeot, F rance} , {P eugeot, Germany}}, and Xt is simply a
summation over the sales of each firm to each destination.
8
These results are consistent with other work on the role of the extensive margin in short-run aggregate
fluctuations in the French economy. For instance, Osotimehin (2013) finds that entry and exit contribute
little to the year-on-year variability of French aggregate productivity.

5

rates, that treats entries and exits symmetrically with other sales.9

2.1

A Motivating Model of Firm Sales Growth

To motivate the decomposition of the growth of firm sales in a given year into (i) firmdestination, and (ii) sector and country components, we set up a multi-sector heterogeneous
firms model in the spirit of Melitz (2003) and Eaton et al. (2011a). While the model is
largely illustrative and we will not use its full structure for estimation purposes, it serves
to illustrate three main points. First, the sales decomposition adopted in the paper follows
naturally from the workhorse heterogeneous firms model used in the literature. Second, the
decomposition works only when applied to firm sales to an individual destination, rather
than total (domestic plus export) sales. This result motivates our approach of extracting
macro, sectoral, and idiosyncratic components for each individual destination market. And
third, the model provides a simple and natural economic interpretation of the shocks as
combinations of the demand and cost shocks that affect (sets of) firm-destinations.
There is a large number of countries indexed by n, and J sectors indexed by j. In
country n, consumer within-period utility is Cobb-Douglas in the sectors 1, . . . , J:
Unt =

J
Y

(Cjnt )ϕjnt ,

(1)

j=1

where Cjnt is consumption of sector j in country n at time t, and ϕjnt is a time-varying
demand shock for sector j in country n (as in Eaton et al., 2011b). The Cobb-Douglas
functional form for the utility function leads to the well-known property that expenditure
on sector j is a fraction ϕjnt of the total expenditure in the economy: Yjnt = ϕjnt Ynt , where
Ynt is aggregate expenditure in country n at time t, and Yjnt is the expenditure in sector j.
Each sector j is a CES aggregate of Ωjnt varieties available in country n at time t,
indexed by f :

Cjnt = 


X

1
θ

(ωf nt ) Cf nt

θ−1
θ



θ
θ−1

,

(2)

f ∈Ωjnt

where ωf nt is a time-varying demand shock for variety f in market n.
Every firm belongs to exactly 1 sector. Sector j in the producing country (d=France)
is populated by Ijdt firms. Each of these firms sells a unique variety, and thus has some
market power. Firms also differ in productivity, with firm f characterized by a time-varying
9
Recent work focuses on the importance of the extensive adjustment at the product level – potentially
within a firm (e.g., Bernard et al., 2010; Bilbiie et al., 2012), whereas in our data it is only possible to
measure the extensive margin at the firm level.

6

unit input requirement af dt . It takes firm f af dt input bundles to produce one unit of its
good in period t. The input bundle in sector j in country d and period t has a cost cjdt .
Note that it can vary by sector, but not across firms within a sector. This input bundle
can include, for instance, labor costs and the cost of capital. It is well known that these
firms will price at a constant markup over their marginal cost, and conditional on selling to
market n, sales by a French firm f (i.e., residing in country d) to market n in period t are
given by:
xf nt = ωf nt

ϕjnt Ynt
(Pjnt )1−θ



θ
κjnd cjdt af dt
θ−1

1−θ
,

(3)

where Pjnt is the price level in sector j in country n at time t, and κjnd is the iceberg
cost of selling from France to country n in sector j. This equation assumes that (i) κjnd is
sector-specific but does not vary over time (though that assumption can easily be relaxed,
in which case the time variation in κjnd will be absorbed in the sector-destination shock),
and (ii) the cost bundle cjdt and the marginal cost af dt may vary over time, but are not
destination-specific.
Sales to a single destination are then multiplicative in the macroeconomic, sectoral, and
firm-specific components. The sales growth rate γf nt of firm f in sector j to market n
between time t − 1 and time t is approximated by a log difference:
γf nt = δ̃nt + δ̃jnt + εf nt ,

(4)

where δ̃nt = ∆logYnt is the aggregate (“macroeconomic”) shock to the destination demand
(to France if n = d), δ̃jnt = ∆logϕjnt + (1 − θ)(∆logcjdt − ∆logPjnt ) captures the sectoral
(country n-specific) demand and cost shocks, and εf nt = ∆logωf nt + (1 − θ)∆logaf dt is the
firm-specific demand and cost shock. Equation (4) characterizes firm sales growth to the
domestic French market and to every foreign market.
While the theoretical framework distinguishes between macroeconomic shocks that are
common to all firms selling goods in the same market and sectoral shocks in that market,
in practice the macroeconomic shock and all of the sectoral shocks cannot be computed
separately without further restrictions on the form they can take. However, since we are
ultimately interested in the firm-specific component and its contribution to aggregate fluctuations, this does not pose a problem. In what follows, we work with a simpler model:
γf nt = δjnt + εf nt ,

(5)

that decomposes sales growth into a firm-specific shock εf nt and a sector-destination shock
δjnt = δ̃nt + δ̃jnt encompassing the macroeconomic and sectoral shocks.
7

2.2

Econometric Model

The analysis below views the εf nt ’s and δjnt ’s as a set of stochastic processes that are
(potentially) both cross-sectionally and serially correlated. Our ultimate goal is to assess
the impact of firm-specific shocks εf nt on aggregate fluctuations. Under the log-difference
approximation (5) to the growth rates of individual firms, the growth rate γAt of aggregate
sales between t − 1 and t can be written as:
γAt =

X

wjnt−1 δjnt +

X

j,n

wf nt−1 εf nt ,

(6)

f,n

where wjnt−1 is the share of sector j’s sales to market n in total sales of French firms to all
sectors and destinations, and wf nt−1 is the share of firm f ’s sales to destination n in total
sales. Unfortunately, working with equation (6) directly to produce a variance decomposition is impractical because time-varying weights wf nt−1 make the stochastic process (6)
difficult to analyze.
Instead, we work with a closely related set of stochastic processes:
γAt|τ =

X

wjnτ −1 δjnt +

j,n

X

wf nτ −1 εf nt .

(7)

f,n

For a given τ , γAt|τ is a stochastic process in which weights wf nτ −1 are fixed over time at
their τ − 1 values, and combined with shocks from period t. Naturally, when τ = t, the
“synthetic” aggregate growth rate γAt|τ coincides with the actual aggregate growth rate
P
γAt . The last term in (7), f,n wf nτ −1 εf nt , is none other than Gabaix (2011)’s “granular
residual,” with the key difference that we build it with the εf nt ’s of all firms in the economy,
rather than the top 100 firms as in Gabaix (2011).
2 the variance of γ
10 Using (7), it can be written as:
Denote by σAτ
At|τ .
2
2
2
σAτ
= σJN
τ + σF τ + COVτ ,

(8)

10
2
Online Appendix B presents further discussion of how our σAτ
’s relate to the variances of actual aggregate
growth rate γAt and its components.

8

where

2

σJN
τ = Var


X

wjnτ −1 δjnt 

(Sector-Destination Volatility)

j,n


σF2 τ = Var 


X

wf nτ −1 εf nt 

(Firm-Specific Volatility)

f,n


COVτ = Cov 


X

wjnτ −1 δjt ,

j,n

X

wf nτ −1 εf nt 

f,n

(covariance of the shocks from different levels of aggregation).
The intuition for this procedure can be conveyed as follows. Since δjnt and εf nt are
random variables, the growth rate of aggregate sales at time τ in (7) is itself a random
2 for a particular year can
variable, and its variance is given by (8). The estimate of σAτ

thus be thought of as the estimated variance of the aggregate growth rate in year τ . We
are interested in exploiting the form of γAt|τ to decompose the overall variance of γAt|τ into
firm-specific and other components, in order to assess the importance of firm-specific shocks
for aggregate fluctuations.
2 and its components for each τ =
In practice, we will be reporting estimates of σAτ

1991, ..., 2007, as well as their averages over this period. The approach of constructing
aggregate variances under weights that are fixed period-by-period follows Carvalho and
Gabaix (2013), who perform a related exercise using sectoral data.

2.3

Estimation

2 , σ2
2
The main goal of the paper is to provide estimates for σAτ
JN τ , and σF τ . Using sales

data γf nt , the macro-sectoral shock δjnt is computed as the average growth rate of sales of
all firms selling in sector j to market n. The firm-specific shock εf nt is computed as the
deviation of γf nt from δjnt . This approach to identifying firm-specific shocks is adopted by
Gabaix (2011) and Castro et al. (2011), and follows in the tradition of Stockman (1988),
who applied it at the sector level.
Our estimator for σF2 τ is simply the sample variance of the T realizations of the scalarP
2 and σ 2
valued time series f,n wf nτ −1 εf nt . Similarly, the estimators for σAτ
JN τ are the
P
sample variances of the realizations of γAt|τ and j,n wjnt−1 δjnt , respectively. Our sample
consists of the realizations of the stochastic processes δjnt and εf nt for T = 17 years.
Our framework allows for both cross-sectional and time dependence in the data-generating

9

process. That is, εf nt for firm f can be correlated with another firm’s εgnt , as well as
with its own past values. However, we do assume that the stochastic process for εf nt and
δjnt is jointly stationary, that its degree of time dependence is not too high, and that
γAt|τ as well as its constituent parts have enough finite moments. Since both εf nt and δjnt
describe growth rates, stationarity and limited time dependence are plausible assumptions.
In practice, in our sample the autocorrelation in the series for γAt|τ and its constituent
parts is minimal. Online Appendix C states these conditions precisely and proves the
consistency and asymptotic normality of the estimators as T grows large. The Appendix
also gives formulas for the analytical standard errors of these estimators, that we use below
to construct confidence intervals. For robustness, we also report confidence intervals based
on bootstrapping procedures.
We follow the convention in the literature and use the standard deviation as our measure
of volatility. Therefore, when discussing contributions to aggregate volatility we will present
the results in terms of relative standard deviations, such as σF τ /σAτ .

2.4

Discussion

The first term in (8) measures the volatility of sector-destination shocks, which affect
all firms in a sector selling to a particular destination market. It can be expressed as
P
P
2
σJN
k,m
j,n wjnτ −1 wkmτ −1 Cov (δjnt , δkmt ), making it clear that it is driven by the
τ =
volatility of the sector-destination shocks (Var(δjnt )) and their covariance across countries
and sectors (Cov(δjnt , δkmt )). Obviously, the importance of any country- or sector-specific
shock in explaining aggregate volatility is increasing in the relative size of that market
(measured by wjnτ −1 ). Thus, French shocks have a larger impact on aggregate volatility
than shocks affecting French firms’ sales to, say, Japan. Likewise, a country specializing in
highly volatile sectors is likely to display larger aggregate fluctuations (Koren and Tenreyro,
2007; di Giovanni and Levchenko, 2012b). In that sense, diversification of sales across markets and sectors helps reduce aggregate fluctuations. In the meantime, comovement across
countries or sectors tends to amplify aggregate fluctuations. For instance, an increased
synchronization of business cycles among EMU members might drive up French volatility.
Cross-sector correlations, created for example by input-output linkages, will also increase
aggregate volatility (see, e.g., di Giovanni and Levchenko, 2010).
The second term in (8), σF2 τ , is the variance of the granular residual. It measures the
contribution of firm-specific shocks to aggregate fluctuations. As in Gabaix (2011), the
firm-specific contribution to aggregate volatility is likely to be larger, everything else equal,

10

the more fat-tailed is the distribution of sales across firms. Furthermore, volatility also
increases if the larger firms face more volatile shocks. Finally, a positive correlation of
shocks across firms, for instance driven by input-output linkages, will increase firms’ contribution to aggregate fluctuations. Section 4.3 discusses in more detail the microeconomic
underpinnings of σF2 τ , both in theory and in our data.
The firm-specific shocks εf nt need not be uncorrelated with each other as in Gabaix
(2011). For example, these shocks may covary among firms if their activity is interconnected,
say through input-output linkages (e.g., Foerster et al., 2011; Acemoglu et al., 2012), or
other potential firm interactions. To illustrate this possibility, Online Appendix E presents
a simple extension of the model that includes intermediate inputs specific to the firm.
These intermediate linkages lead to positive comovement of firm-specific shocks through
the propagation of productivity shocks from input providers to downstream firms. To
assess the relevance of this channel, below we develop a decomposition of the firm-specific
variance and covariance contributions to aggregate volatility, and provide evidence that
industry structure and other proxies for linkages matter.
We had argued that from a theoretical perspective, it is important to compute shocks
for each market separately. In our theoretical framework, the firm-specific shock εf nt =
∆logωf nt + (1 − θ)∆logaf dt contains a component common across all destination markets
and a component that is destination-specific. Thus it can be further decomposed as:
εf nt = ε1f t + ε2f nt ,

(9)

where ε1f t is the firm-specific shock common to all destinations, and ε2f nt captures the
destination-specific demand shock. Specifically, we compute ε1f t as the time t average of
εf nt for each firm that serves multiple destinations (including the domestic market). Note
that this procedure does not allow us to separate demand shocks from cost shocks cleanly,
because ε1f t captures not only the productivity shock (1−θ)∆logaf dt but also other firm-level
shocks that are common across destinations, for instance common taste shocks. Nonetheless,
we can get a sense of the relative importance of the firm-wide vs. destination-specific shocks
by computing the share of variation in εf nt that is absorbed by ε1f t .

3

Data and Summary Statistics

The analysis employs firm-level data containing the universe of domestic and export sales
of French firms over the 1990–2007 period. Even though the time dimension is somewhat
limited, we are still able to pick up cycles of the French economy, including the 1992–93 and
11

2000–01 recessions and the acceleration of growth at the end of the nineties. The firm-level
information is sourced from two rich datasets provided to us by the French administration.
The first dataset, obtained from the fiscal administration, contains balance-sheet information collected from the firms’ tax forms, most importantly total firm sales. The second
dataset is the firm-level export data from the French customs authorities. This database
gives the (free on board) value of each French firm’s exports to each of its foreign destination
markets in a given fiscal year.
Online Appendix D contains a detailed description of the data. Our final dataset covers 1,577,039 firms undertaking activities in 52 NAF (Nomenclature d’Activités Française)
sectors, representing around 30% of industrial and service firms but more than 90% of aggregate sales. Of those firms, 208,596 belong to the manufacturing sector (22 NAF industries),
which accounts for around 30% of aggregate sales. In our sample, 18% of all firms (and
42% of manufacturing firms) export at some point in time. The total sales and export sales
in this sample of firms mimic aggregate activity quite well: the growth rate of total sales
tracks the growth rate of GDP (Figure 1), while the growth of total export sales moves with
the growth of country exports over time (Figure 2).
Table 1 presents summary statistics for firm-level growth rates for the whole economy
and the manufacturing sector. The average growth rate of aggregate sales, 0.0369 for the
whole economy and 0.0290 for manufacturing, is lower than the (unweighted) average growth
rate of individual firm-destinations, which is 0.0465 for the whole economy and 0.0537 for
manufacturing. This is to be expected, as smaller firms tend to grow faster than larger
firms, conditional on survival. The average firm-destination has a standard deviation of
sales growth of 0.23 in the whole economy and 0.28 in manufacturing. The table also
reports averages of firm sales volatility by quintile. Smaller firms are more volatile than
large ones. The very top firms, however, are even less volatile than the top quintile firms.
While the top 20% of firm-destinations by size have an average standard deviation of sales
growth of almost 20%, the top 100 firm-destinations have an average standard deviation
of 13%, and the top 10 firms slightly lower still. Finally, the table also reports the square
root of the firm-destination Herfindahl index of sales shares, as well as the square root of
the overall firm sales Herfindahl index. The Herfindahl indices have an order of magnitude
consistent with what has been conjectured by Gabaix (2011), and show that the economy
is “granular:” shocks to the large firms have the potential to lead to aggregate fluctuations.
All in all, the patterns for the manufacturing sector are quite similar to the whole economy.
Table A1 presents the average standard deviations of firm-destination growth rates

12

across sectors, along with the shares of each sector in total sales. The raw volatility of
sales growth varies across sectors, with the standard deviation ranging from a low of 0.1489
(Health and social work) to a high of 0.3248 (Coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel),
and a cross-sectoral mean standard deviation of 0.2593. The wholesale and retail trade
sector has by far the highest share in aggregate sales, at nearly 37% of the total. While the
standard deviation of sales growth, at 0.2188, is quite typical of the rest of the economy,
clearly wholesale and retail trade is quite special in other ways. To establish the robustness
of the results, all of the analysis below is carried out both on the whole economy and on
the manufacturing sector.
The analysis in the paper uses the growth rates of firm-destination sales. Other related work focuses on measures of firm productivity such as value added per worker (e.g.
Gabaix, 2011; Castro et al., 2011) or TFP (Carvalho and Gabaix, 2013), or employment (e.g.
Moscarini and Postel-Vinay, 2012). Unfortunately, neither employment nor value added per
worker data can be broken down into destinations – it is of course impossible to know which
workers in the firm are producing for exports and which for domestic sales – whereas we show
above that to carry out our analysis, the destination-by-destination breakdown is essential.
This is the reason we use sales growth in the baseline analysis. As a robustness check,
Section 4.2 presents the results for value added growth, under the (non-trivial) assumption
that a firm’s value added has the same breakdown across markets as its sales do. We cannot
compute the firms’ TFP process for the additional reason that we do not have firm-specific
input and output deflators (Klette and Griliches, 1996, among others, discuss the serious
shortcomings of firm-level TFP estimation that does not employ firm-specific price data).
We can also calculate the means and standard deviations of employment and value added
per worker growth rates, and compare them to firm-destination sales growth rates. It turns
out that these series have very similar first and second moments. For the whole economy,
employment growth is 0.0345 at the mean, with an average standard deviation of 0.2437;
value added per worker growth is 0.0400, with an average standard deviation of 0.2586. All
of these are quite close to the corresponding numbers for sales growth in Table 1.11
11
Average sales growth reported in the table is lower than the sum of average value added per worker
growth and average employment growth. Value added is defined as total sales minus input purchases (taking
into account changes in the value of input inventories) plus changes in inventories plus subsidies minus taxes.
Thus, sales would grow slower than value added if these other categories had slower growth rates than value
added. This appears to be the case in our data, reconciling the seeming discrepancy.

13

4

Empirical Results

4.1

Properties of Shocks

Before assessing the impact of firm-specific shocks on aggregate volatility, we present the
importance of the different components in explaining the variation in sales growth at the
firm-destination level. The top panels of Table 2 and Table 3 report the relative standard
deviations of the firm-destination components and the sector-destination shocks for the
whole economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. The last column reports the
correlation of each component with the actual firm sales growth. The bottom two panels
report the same statistics for domestic and export firm sales.
It is clear that at the level of an individual firm-destination, variation in sales growth
is dominated by the firm-specific component, rather than the sector-destination shocks.
The standard deviation of the firm-specific component is nearly the same as the standard
deviation of actual sales growth, and the correlation is almost perfect. By contrast, the
estimated sector-destination shocks are much less volatile, and have much lower correlation with actual sales growth. These results are of course not surprising, and confirm the
conventional wisdom that most shocks hitting firms are firm-specific (Haltiwanger, 1997;
Castro et al., 2011).12 Examining the bottom two panels, it is clear that the importance of
the firm-specific component is similar for both domestic and export sales.
It has been less well-understood whether the firm-specific shocks are mostly common to
all destination markets served by the firm or mostly destination-specific. Table 4 presents
the results of extracting the common firm component from firm-destination effects as in
equation (9), for both the whole economy and the manufacturing sector.13 Looking at the
data through the lens of the model in Section 2, this decomposition is suggestive of whether
supply or demand shocks are driving firms’ sales growth. Since the firm’s marginal cost
of serving each market (modulo iceberg trade costs) is the same, productivity shocks will
be part of the component of the firm-specific shock that is common to all destinations. In
addition, the common component will also include the part of the taste shock ωf nt for firm
f that is common across locations n. The destination-specific component of the firm shock
is then interpreted as a demand shock idiosyncratic to a particular location.
Results are similar for the two sets of firms. For the economy as a whole, the destination12

A variance decomposition of the firm-level growth rates indicates that 98.7% is accounted for by the
firm-specific component for the whole economy (98.2% for the manufacturing sector).
13
Note that this decomposition can only be done for firms that serve at least two markets. Therefore,
the number of firm-destination and firm-common observations will be smaller than the total number of
firm-specific shocks in Tables 2 and 3.

14

specific component has a higher relative standard deviation than the common factor (0.30
vs. 0.19). It is also more correlated with the total estimated firm-specific component
(correlation coefficient of 0.87 compared to 0.49 for the common component). For the manufacturing sector, the relative standard deviation of the destination-specific shock is 0.31,
whereas that of the common shocks is 0.19. Similarly, the correlation with the overall firmspecific component is higher for the destination-specific component than for the common
component (0.89 vs. 0.46). We conclude from this exercise that destination-specific shocks
at the firm level are more important than the shocks common to all destinations.14

4.2

The Aggregate Impact of Firm-Specific Shocks

The fact that most of the variation in the growth rate of sales is accounted for by firmspecific shocks does not mean that firm-specific shocks manifest themselves in aggregate
fluctuations. To assess the importance of the different types of shocks for the aggregate,
we must take into account the distribution of firm size by decomposing the aggregate sales
volatility as in Section 2.2.
Figure 3 and Table 5 report the main results of the paper. Figure 3 depicts the estimates
of σAτ and its main components: firm-specific (σF τ ), and sector-destination (σJN τ ) for
the whole economy (Panel I) and the manufacturing sector (Panel II). The figure also
displays two kinds of 95% confidence intervals: analytical and bootstrapped. Table 5 reports
the averages of our estimates of σAτ , σJN τ , and σF τ , as well as their ratios, over the
sample period. The results for the whole economy are in the first two columns, and for the
manufacturing sector in the next two columns.
Not surprisingly, the firm-destination component matters much less for the aggregate
sales volatility than for the volatility of individual firm sales. However, its importance is
non-negligible: for the whole economy the relative standard deviation of the firm-specific
component of aggregate sales is 0.8 relative to that of actual sales volatility. In fact, our
results show that the firm-specific component is more important for aggregate fluctuations
than the contribution of sector-destination shocks, which has a relative standard deviation
of 0.53.
The standard deviation of the firm-specific component comoves with the standard deviation of aggregate sales over time, whereas the standard deviation of sector-destination
14

This result is consistent with the findings of Eaton et al. (2011a) who estimate a structural trade model
on French export data and find that a firm-destination specific shock has to be added for the model to fit the
data. This suggests that firm-specific shocks common across destinations are not sufficient for explaining
aggregate exports.

15

shocks is nearly constant over time. Recalling how the different components are calculated
from (8), note that the time variation in sales’ share (at the firm and sector-destination
levels) will drive the time variation in the different volatility measures. These shares do not
change dramatically at the sector-country level. More interestingly, the firm-specific shocks
increase in importance over time. For the whole economy, the relative standard deviation of
the firm-specific to total sales is about 0.5 at the beginning of the sample, and about 0.85 at
the end. These results are a first glimpse of the importance of large firms and firm linkages
on aggregate fluctuations. We discuss further what drives these findings in Section 4.3.
The contributions of firm-specific and macro-sector shocks are both statistically significant throughout the sample. In spite of computing the sample variance on a time series of
only 17 observations for each σF τ and σJN τ , we always have enough power to reject the null
that the contribution of σF τ and σJN τ is nil. The analytical standard errors are computed
as detailed in Online Appendix C. These standard errors may not capture the full extent
of estimation uncertainty in such a small sample. To explore robustness of the results further, we also use a block bootstrapping procedure in which for each τ we sample 10001
P
draws of 17 observations with replacement from the time series of γAt|τ , j,n wjnτ −1 δjnt ,
P
and f,n wf nτ −1 εf nt . The results are robust to using bootstrapped rather than analytical
confidence intervals.15
The results for the manufacturing sector largely mimic those of the economy as a whole.
The relative standard deviation of the firm-specific component of aggregate sales is 0.69 of
actual sales volatility. In this set of firms, the firm-specific component is about as important
for aggregate fluctuations as the sector-destination shocks, which have a relative standard
deviation of 0.64. The contribution of firms to aggregate fluctuations also increases over
time in the manufacturing sector, from 0.45 in 1991 to 0.81 in 2007.
Panels II and III of Table 5 check the results on domestic and export sales separately.
Both panels confirm the importance of firm-specific shocks for aggregate fluctuations. Moreover, export sales are dominated by firm-specific shocks while the relative weights of firmspecific and sector-destination components as a driver of aggregate fluctuations are roughly
equal for domestic sales. The greater relative importance of firm shocks for exports compared to domestic sales is exactly as expected given that exports are more granular than
overall sales (Canals et al., 2007).
Since GDP is measured in value added, GDP fluctuations correspond more closely to
15
To account for time dependence in the data, the bootstrap procedure samples (overlapping) blocks of
1, 2, and 3 observations. The figures report the confidence intervals under a block size of 1, but differences
are minimal if we instead use blocks of size 2 or 3.

16

fluctuations in firm value added. We thus repeat the analysis using firm value added instead
of gross sales. This exercise entails a non-trivial assumption. Namely, our framework makes
it clear that for proper identification of shocks, we must use data on each destination
separately. Since both exports and domestic sales are recorded in gross terms, when we
use sales this is non-controversial: total firm sales are the sum of sales to each destination
market served by the firm. Indeed, this is the reason that we work with sales throughout
the paper.
However, for value added we do not have the right data, because value added exports
are not recorded. The data we have are (i) gross domestic sales and exports and (ii) total
firm value added. The assumption we make to move forward is that the breakdown of value
added across markets follows the same proportions as total sales. Thus, to compute a firm’s
value added exports to Germany, we multiply total firm value added by the share of exports
to Germany in the firm’s total gross sales. In the absence of value added export data, this
is the best we can do. It amounts to the restriction that the input usage inside the firm
is identical for each destination of its output. For an advanced economy like France, this
appears to be a reasonable assumption.
With that caveat, Table 5 reports the results. Shocks to firm value added explain if
anything more of the fluctuations in aggregate value added. The results are similar if we
break up value added into the domestic and export components, and thus we do not report
them to conserve space.

4.3

Channels for Firms’ Contribution to Aggregate Fluctuations

Having established the substantial contribution of the firm-specific component to aggregate
fluctuations, we next examine the estimates in greater detail in order to disentangle the
economic mechanisms at work. Aggregate firm-specific volatility σF2 τ can be written as:


X
XX
σF2 τ = Var 
wf nτ −1 εf nt  =
wgmτ −1 wf nτ −1 Cov(εgmt , εf nt ).
g,m f,n

f,n

We decompose it following Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) into the contribution of individual
variances and comovements between firms:
X
X
σF2 τ =
wf2 nτ −1 Var(εf nt ) +
f,n

|

X

wgmτ −1 wf nτ −1 Cov(εgmt , εf nt ) .

(10)

g6=f,m6=n f,n

{z

DIRECTτ

}

|

{z

LIN Kτ

}

This decomposition emphasizes two potential proximate channels through which shocks
to individual firms may lead to a large variance of the firm-specific component: (i) the
17

variance of individual shocks, labelled DIRECT , and (ii) the covariance of shocks across
firms, labelled LIN K.
The first term in (10) captures the direct effect of shocks to firms on aggregate volatility, in the sense that it would obtain in the complete absence of firm-to-firm linkages. The
predominant tradition in macroeconomics has been to assume that the DIRECT term is
negligible due to the Law of Large Numbers: when the distribution of firm size has finite variance, the impact of shocks to individual firms on aggregate volatility converges to
√
zero at the rate N , where N is the number of firms (or, more precisely in our context,
firm-destination sales) in the economy. However, recent literature in macroeconomics (most
notably Gabaix, 2011) challenges this view, by arguing that the observed firm size distribution is so fat-tailed that the conventional Law of Large Numbers does not apply and shocks
to individual (large) firms do in fact translate into aggregate fluctuations.16 The LIN K
component has also been ignored by most of the macroeconomics literature based on the
argument that covariances between firms were in fact an artefact of firms being hit by common aggregate or sectoral shocks. This view has also been challenged in recent papers, such
as Acemoglu et al. (2012) or Foerster et al. (2011).
Figure 4 presents the decomposition graphically for the whole economy and the manufacturing sector. The LIN K component explains the majority of total firm-specific volatility:
√
LIN Kτ /σF τ is over 90% on average over the sample period for both the whole economy
and the manufacturing sector. However, it is apparent from the figures that the DIRECT
√
component is also non-negligible. The ratio of DIRECTτ to σF τ is 26% on average over
this period for the whole economy, and 40% for the manufacturing sector.
4.3.1

The Contribution of the Direct Effect

As shown by Gabaix (2011), when the distribution of firm size is sufficiently fat-tailed (i.e.,
the economy is “granular”), idiosyncratic shocks to individual firms do not wash out at the
aggregate level, because the idiosyncratic shocks to large firms do not cancel out with shocks
to smaller units. This idea can be discussed most easily in the simplest case when shocks
are uncorrelated across firms (i.e., Cov(εgmt , εf nt ) = 0 ∀ (g, m) 6= (f, n)) and across markets
within a firm (Cov(εf mt , εf nt ) = 0, m 6= n), and the variance of shocks is identical across
firms (Var(εf nt ) = σ 2 ∀ f, n). Under these assumptions, aggregate firm-specific volatility
16

Gabaix (2011) shows that when the distribution of firm size follows a power law with an exponent
close to 1 in absolute value – a distribution known as Zipf’s Law – aggregate volatility declines at the rate
log N , and idiosyncratic shocks will not cancel out in aggregate under a realistic number of firms in the U.S.
economy. Di Giovanni et al. (2011) use the census of French firms to show that the firm size distribution in
France does indeed follow Zipf’s Law.

18

(10) is
σF2 τ = σ 2

X

wf2 nτ −1 = σ 2 × Herfτ −1 ,

(11)

f,n

where Herfτ −1 =

2
f,n wf nτ −1

P

denotes the Herfindahl index. The more fat-tailed is the

distribution of firm size, the larger will be the Herfindahl index, and the greater will be the
aggregate volatility generated by firm-specific shocks. In the opposite extreme case, if all
firm-destination sales are instead symmetric in size (wf nτ −1 = 1/Nτ −1 where Nτ −1 is the
√
number of firm-destination sales in the economy), σF τ = σ/ Nτ −1 and the contribution of
firms to aggregate volatility decays rapidly with the number of firms in the economy.
The role of the firm size distribution emphasized by Gabaix (2011) can be illustrated
using the following simple counterfactual. We calculate the DIRECT component under the
assumption that all firms and markets are of equal weight (i.e., wf nτ −1 = 1/Nτ −1 ∀ f, n).
When shocks are independent across firms, this “equal-weighted” aggregate variance is
expected to be vanishingly small. Instead, the contribution of firms to aggregate volatility
that takes into account the actual distribution of sales across firms is expected to be larger.
√
This is indeed what happens. For the whole economy, the DIRECT component im√
plied by equal weights is 0.0003, or 13 times smaller than the average DIRECT component, which is equal to 0.004. For the manufacturing sector, the standard deviation implied
√
by equal weights is 0.0008, an order of magnitude smaller than the DIRECT component
of 0.0065. This comparison clearly shows that the firm size distribution does matter a great
deal quantitatively for the contribution of individual firms’ shocks to aggregate fluctuations.
Next, we exploit differences across sectors to evaluate the importance of the direct effect.
To do so, we decompose the DIRECT component in equation (10) into sectors, where
P
sector j’s DIRECT component is defined as DIRECTjτ ≡ (f,n)∈j wf2 nτ −1 Var(εf nt ), and
P
DIRECTτ = Jj=1 DIRECTjτ . Again, if Var(εf nt ) = σ 2 ∀ f, n, we would expect that more
concentrated sectors would display larger volatilities.17 Figure 5 evaluates this prediction,
by plotting (the square root of) mean sectoral DIRECTjτ against the (square root of the)
mean sectoral Herfindahl index for the whole economy and the manufacturing sector. In
Figure 5, DIRECTjτ and the Herfindahl are computed with weights normalized by the size
of each sector in aggregate sales. Otherwise, they would mechanically be proportional to
the contribution of each sector to overall sales. The correlation is strongly positive – sectors
with higher sales concentration contribute more to the total DIRECT component, which
17

The firm-specific volatilities do in fact vary by sector, to the same degree as the standard deviations of
the raw growth rates in Table A1 – the correlation between the standard deviations of the actual growth
rates and the firm-specific shocks is 0.996 across sectors.

19

is consistent with granularity. The correlation is lower for the whole economy (0.86) than
for the manufacturing sector (0.93). The correlation is less than perfect because firm-level
variances differ both across and within sectors. In the data, small firms tend to be more
volatile on average (Table 1). This heterogeneity in firm-level volatilities counteracts the
impact of sales concentration, thus reducing the overall size of the DIRECT component
relative to what would be expected in a purely “granular” world with identical variances
across firms.
4.3.2

The Contribution of Firm Linkages

The second explanation for why firm shocks can drive aggregate fluctuations is inspired
by the literature on the role of sectoral input-output linkages in aggregate fluctuations
(Horvath, 1998, 2000; Dupor, 1999; Shea, 2002; Conley and Dupor, 2003; Gabaix, 2011;
Acemoglu et al., 2012), and is captured by the covariance term LIN K in (10). The idea
is that idiosyncratic shocks do not wash out at the aggregate level because they propagate
across firms or sectors through “interconnections.” If firms in the economy are connected,
say through input-output linkages, shocks affecting upstream firms propagate to downstream firms via adjustments in the price of inputs. This propagation mechanism amplifies
the initial impact of structural shocks. Moreover, it generates positive covariances in the
residual growth rate of sales for firms that are connected.
Note that simply observing positive covariances in the firm-specific components (gathered in the LIN K term) is not conclusive evidence that input-output linkages are responsible for the comovement, as there may be other reasons for cross-sectional dependence
between firms, such as local labor market interactions. While we cannot identify the precise
share of the LIN K term that is due to input-output linkages per se, we provide direct,
if suggestive, evidence that input-output linkages are at least partly responsible for the
positive LIN K term.
Online Appendix E lays out a simple model of such firm-level interconnections. Firms
produce with a constant marginal cost using labor and intermediate inputs bought from
other firms in the economy. Input-output linkages create a positive covariance of sales
growth rates for any two firms that are connected. For instance, take firms f and g and
assume firm g sells inputs to firm f . If the only source of shocks is productivity shocks to
firm g, then the covariance between the sales growth rates of those two firms is
Cov(εgmt , εf nt ) = (1 − θ)2 (1 − λf )ρf g Var(agmt ),

20

where θ is the elasticity of substitution, (1 − λf ) is the share of intermediate goods in firm
f ’s total costs, ρf g is the share of those inputs that is sourced from firm g and Var(agmt )
is the volatility of firm g’s productivity. The covariance is positive, and increasing in the
strength of the connection between f and g, i.e., in the share of inputs from g used in f ’s
production, (1 − λf )ρf g . In this setup, the propagation goes from upstream to downstream
firms, through the price of inputs. In a more general setting, one can also expect shocks to
propagate from downstream to upstream firms through the demand of intermediates.18
Ideally, one would test the linkage hypothesis using firm-level measures of interconnections. Since information on firm-to-firm input linkages (ρf g ) is not available, we instead
proxy for production networks using sector level data, and use the Input-Output (IO) tables
for France compiled by the OECD. Assuming that the share of intermediates in total costs
is homogeneous across firms within a sector (i.e. λf = λi ∀ f ∈ i) and that all firms within
a sector interact with the same input providers (i.e. ρf g = ρij w̃g/j ∀ f ∈ i, g ∈ j, where
w̃g/j is the share of firm g in total sector j intermediate input sales to i), the structure of
sectoral IO matrices can be used to approximate the intensity of IO linkages between firms
from each pair of sectors. The intensity of IO linkages between a pair of sectors can then
be related to the magnitude of covariances between firms in those sectors. We expect the
weighted sum of covariances to be higher for sector pairs that display stronger IO linkages.19
Figure 6 examines this hypothesis. We decompose the LIN K component in equation (10) across sector pairs, where the LIN K term specific to the pair (i, j) is defined as
P P
P
P
LIN Kijτ ≡ (f,n)∈i (g,m)∈j wf nτ −1 wgmτ −1 Cov(εf nt , εgmt ), and LIN Kτ = Ji=1 Jj=1;j6=i LIN Kijτ .
We then correlate the (square root of) the average LIN Kijτ of a pair of sectors to the mean
intensity of IO linkages between them. LIN Kijτ is normalized by the size of each sector to
control for the mechanical impact of sector sizes on the magnitude of the aggregated covariance terms. The mean intensity of IO linkages is defined as 0.5 × [(1 − λi )ρij + (1 − λj )ρji ],
where λi is the share of value added in sector i’s total output and ρij the share of inputs
from j in sector i’s spending on intermediates, both taken from the French IO tables for
1995. IO linkages are thus stronger if either one or both sectors intensively use intermediates
from the other sector.
The correlation between the LIN K term and the intensity of IO linkages is positive,
both for the whole economy (Figure 6a) and the manufacturing sector (Figure 6b).20 The
18

This is ruled out in the setting of Online Appendix E as well as in the model of Acemoglu et al.
(2012) because of the Cobb-Douglas assumption on the production function. More flexible specifications of
technology would allow downstream firms’ productivity shocks to propagate upstream to input providers.
19
See Online Appendix E for details.
20
Note that Figure 6 drops negative bilateral covariance terms as well as zero input-output linkages, since

21

relationship is marginally more pronounced for the manufacturing sector, with a correlation coefficient of 0.34 compared to 0.29 for the whole economy. The results are direct
empirical evidence that input-output linkages across firms are important in transmitting
microeconomic shocks across the economy.

4.4
4.4.1

Extensions and Robustness
Differences in Firm Sensitivity to Macro and Sectoral Shocks

In the baseline model the elasticity of firm sales with respect to aggregate and sectoral
shocks is the same across firms. Our conceptual framework shares this feature with Dixit
and Stiglitz (1977), Krugman (1980), Melitz (2003), and the enormous literature that followed in this tradition. However, it is possible that firms will systematically react differently to sector- and country-level shocks. In that case the computed values of εf nt will be
combinations of firm-specific shocks and the heterogeneous responses to the aggregate and
sectoral shocks. There are several theoretical channels that would deliver a heterogeneous
response. One example is a model laid out in Online Appendix F, in which firms react
heterogeneously to sector-destination shocks because of variable markups. Di Giovanni and
Levchenko (2012a) argue that the impact of this channel on aggregate volatility is small.
However, as a robustness check we carry out alternative estimations in which we instead
impose the following augmented model:
γf nt = δjnt + δjnt × CHARf nt + βCHARf nt + εf nt ,

(12)

where CHARf nt is a particular observable firm characteristic. In this model, heterogeneity
of firm responses to macroeconomic and sectoral shocks is thus systematically related to
observable firm characteristics. We attempt a variety of different types of CHARf nt : measures of (i) firm size (log sales or sales quintile dummy);21 (ii) firm age (log years or dummy
for whether the firm is less or more than 5 years old);22 (iii) R&D intensity (dummy for
whether R&D expenses are higher than 1% of value added);23 (iv) patent intensity (dummy
we are taking log transformations. Input-output linkages would not explain negative covariances according
to the model. Such negative numbers should instead reflect substitution effects across competing firms.
Likewise, our stylized model is unable to explain a strictly positive LIN K term between firms in sectors
that do not interact through IO linkages. Fortunately, observations with negative covariance terms and/or
zero input-output linkages are rare in our data, representing less than 6% of the total possible sector pairs.
21
Following the accepted practice in the literature, our preferred specification captures size differences
using quintile dummies, since that allows for greater (non-parametric) flexibility in the functional form. See
Firpo et al. (2011) for an exhaustive survey on decomposition methods.
22
Fort et al. (2013) report that in the United States, young/small businesses are more sensitive to the
cycle than older/larger businesses.
23
Comı́n and Philippon (2006) report that in the United States, sectors with largest increases in R&D
have become less correlated with the business cycle.

22

for whether patent expenses are more than 5% of value added); v) export intensity (ratio
of exports to total firm sales);24 and (vi) debt to sales ratio.25 We also implement a model
in which all of these characteristics are included together.
Table A2 reports the results. Allowing firm sensitivity to aggregate and sectoral shocks
to differ by firm size leaves the conclusions unchanged. The table reports the implementation
in which firm size is captured by sales quintile dummies. The results are unaffected if we
instead use a continuous measure of size, such as log sales, or use employment or total
assets as measures of size. If we allow a firm’s sensitivity to shocks to differ by firm age,
the contribution of firm shocks to aggregate fluctuations falls somewhat. Nonetheless, the
relative importance of firm-specific shocks for aggregate volatility, σF τ /σAτ is still nearly
0.6. The table reports the results of using a dummy for whether the firm is more than 5 years
old. Using actual years of age instead leaves the results unchanged. Allowing sensitivity to
differ by any of the other characteristics we consider – R&D and patent intensity, overall
export orientation, or debt structure, also leaves the results unchanged. While the table
reports the results using the quintile dummies for the debt to total sales ratio of the firm,
the results are unchanged if we instead use bond debt, bank debt, ratio of bond to bank
debt, each in both continuous and quintile dummy forms.
Finally, the last row of the table reports the results of allowing firm sensitivity to aggregate and sectoral shocks to depend on all of the above characteristics simultaneously. The
importance of firm specific shocks is somewhat lower than in the baseline, with σF τ /σAτ
equal to 0.65 for the whole economy and 0.5 for the manufacturing sector. Nonetheless,
this contribution is still sizeable. We take this as evidence that our results are robust to
allowing for firm-destination sales growth to react heterogeneously to macroeconomic and
sectoral shocks.
4.4.2

Entry and Exit

The baseline analysis is carried out on the intensive margin, that is, sales growth rates
for continuing firm-destinations. Online Appendix A presents an explicit decomposition of
aggregate sales growth into extensive and intensive margins, and argues that the bulk of
aggregate sales fluctuations is driven by the intensive margin. As an alternative approach,
we report results for the growth rates adopted by Davis et al. (1996) and the large literature
24

There is evidence that firms substitute domestic for foreign sales in response to demand shocks abroad
(e.g. Blum et al., 2013). Thus, it may be that exporters exhibit systematically different sensitivity to shocks
in an individual market.
25
There is evidence that access to capital markets affects firms’ responses to aggregate shocks (Gertler
and Gilchrist, 1994; Kashyap et al., 1994).

23

that followed:
γf0 nt ≡

xf nt − xf nt−1
.
0.5(xf nt + xf nt−1 )

(13)

This growth rate, which we label DHS, has a number of attractive properties: it encompasses
entries and exits (treating them in the same way as other observations), it ranges from −2
to 2 and thus limits the impact of outliers, and it lends itself to consistent aggregation.
Under this definition of growth rates, the correct weights for aggregation are
(xf nt + xf nt−1 )
,
f,n (xf nt + xf nt−1 )

wf0 nt ≡ P
and the aggregate growth rate of x is:
0
γAt
≡

X
Xt − Xt−1
wf0 nt γf0 nt .
=
0.5(Xt + Xt−1 )
f,n

Note however that a firm growth defined this way does not admit a log-difference decomposition (4) into macro, sectoral, and firm-specific components, and thus the results using
these growth rates should be interpreted as approximations. The results are presented in
Table A3, in the panel labelled “DHS growth rates.” Using these growth rates changes the
sample of firms and produces lower aggregate volatility, but the share of the firm-specific
contribution to the aggregate volatility remains very similar to the baseline, at σF τ /σAτ of
about 0.7 for both the whole economy and the manufacturing sector.
4.4.3

Other Robustness Checks

One may be concerned about differential trend growth rates across firms (especially of
different sizes) can affect the calculation of the firms’ contribution to aggregate volatility.
To check if this mattered, we demean each firm-destination growth rate by the average
growth rate of that firm-destination. The results are presented in Table A3, in the panel
labelled “Demeaned growth rates.” The contribution of the firm-specific component is still
important.
It may be that firms in different regions of France are subject to shocks specific to
their geographical location. This could be because factor (or goods) markets are local, for
instance. To check for this possibility, we implement an augmented model in which we add
a geographic location-specific shock, that affects all firms located in a particular geographic
area within France. The definition of geographic area corresponds to the “employment zone”
(zone d’emploi ), that is intended to capture the extent of the local labor market. It is larger
than a city (at least when the city is small), but smaller than a county. There are about
24

300 zones d’emploi in France. The results are reported in Table A3, panel “Additional local
market effects.” Adding shocks specific to the local labor market leaves the basic results
unchanged.
All of the above results use a particular level of disaggregation (about 50 sectors, among
them 22 manufacturing). It could be that sectoral shocks take place at a more detailed level.
To check for this possibility, panel “More disaggregated sectors” of Table A3 implements the
model under more finely disaggregated sectors: 5-digit NAF, or about 700 distinct sectors.
The results are virtually unchanged from the baseline.
Finally, as a different robustness check, the bottom panel in Table A3 presents results
when implementing the baseline model on three-year average firm-destination growth rates,
instead of yearly growth rates. The results are robust to time aggregation.26

5

Conclusion

Do firm-level dynamics have an impact on aggregate fluctuations? Recent contributions
argue that idiosyncratic shocks to firms can indeed manifest themselves in aggregate fluctuations if the firm size distribution is sufficiently fat-tailed (Gabaix, 2011), or when linkages
propagate microeconomic shocks across firms leading to positive endogenous comovement
(e.g. Acemoglu et al., 2012). However, the empirical evidence supporting these different
theories has been limited. This paper constructs a novel dataset that merges French domestic and export sales at the firm level over the period 1990–2007, and provides a forensic
account of the role of individual firms in generating aggregate fluctuations.
We begin by proposing a simple model, in the spirit of Melitz (2003) and Eaton et al.
(2011a), to motivate an estimation framework that allows us to extract the macroeconomic,
sectoral, and firm-specific components of a firm’s sales to a given destination. These estimates are then aggregated up to explain the relative contribution of each component to
the volatility of aggregate sales. Our main results can be summarized as follows. First,
the firm-specific component accounts for an important part of the fluctuations of aggregate
sales growth. The standard deviation of the aggregated firm-specific shocks amounts to 80%
of the standard deviation of aggregate sales in the whole economy, and 69% in the manufacturing sector. We interpret this as evidence for the relevance of firm-level shocks for
aggregate fluctuations. Second, while the direct effect of firm shocks on aggregate volatility
is quantitatively relevant, the majority of the contribution of firm shocks’ to aggregate fluc26

We also ran specifications restricting the sample to firms that exist for at least eight years. Results were
similar to the baseline specification, and are available from the authors upon request.

25

tuations is accounted for by firm-to-firm covariance terms, which we interpret as evidence
of linkages.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “The
Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, September 2012, 80 (5),
1977–2016.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Multiple-Product Firms
and Product Switching,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (1), 70–97.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety
and Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2012, 120 (2), 304–345.
Blum, Bernardo S., Sebastian Claro, and Ignatius Horstmann, “Occasional and Perennial
Exporters,” Journal of International Economics, May 2013, 90 (1), 65–74.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John Haltiwanger, “Aggregate Employment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomic Evidence,” American Economic Review,
March 1997, 87 (1), 115–137.
Canals, Claudia, Xavier Gabaix, Josep M Vilarrubia, and David E. Weinstein, “Trade
Patterns, Trade Balances, and Idiosyncratic Shocks,” 2007. la Caixa Working Paper
02/2007.
Carvalho, Vasco M. and Xavier Gabaix, “The Great Diversification and its Undoing,” American Economic Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1697–1727.
Castro, Rui, Gian Luca Clementi, and Yoonsoo Lee, “Cross-Sectoral Variation in PlantLevel Idiosyncratic Risk,” December 2011. NBER Working Paper No. 17659.
Cohen, Lauren and Andrea Frazzini, “Economic Links and Predictable Returns,” The Journal of Finance, August 2008, 63 (4), 1977–2011.
Comı́n, Diego and Thomas Philippon, “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and
Consequences,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth S. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2005, Vol. 20, Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 2006, chapter 1, pp. 167–201.
Conley, Timothy G. and Bill Dupor, “A Spatial Analysis of Sectoral Complementarity,”
Journal of Political Economy, April 2003, 111 (2), 311–352.
Cooper, Russell, John Haltiwanger, and Laura Power, “Machine Replacement and the Business Cycle: Lumps and Bumps,” American Economic Review, September 1999, 89 (4),
921–946.
Cooper, Russell W. and John C. Haltiwanger, “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
Costs,” The Review of Economic Studies, July 2006, 73 (256), 611.
Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
and Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1992, 107 (3),
819–863.
, , and Scott Schuh, Job creation and destruction, Cambridge and London: MIT Press,
1996.

26

, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Volatility and Dispersion in
Business Growth Rates Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2006, Vol. 21 MIT Press Cambridge, Mass. 2007, pp. 107–180.
, R. J. Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, “The Flow Approach to Labor Markets: New
Data Sources and Micro-Macro Links,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, July 2006, 20
(3), 3–26.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2010, 2 (2), 95–124.
and , “Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular
Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, December 2012, 120 (6), 1083–1132.
and , “The Risk Content of Exports: a Portfolio View of International Trade,” in Jeffrey Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, eds., NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, Vol. 8, University of Chicago Press, May 2012, chapter 3, pp. 97–151.
, , and Romain Rancière, “Power Laws in Firm Size and Openness to Trade: Measurement and Implications,” Journal of International Economics, September 2011, 85 (1),
42–52.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity,” American Economic Review, June 1977, 67 (3), 297–308.
Doms, Mark E. and Timothy Dunne, “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing
Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 1998, 1 (2), 409–429.
Dupor, Bill, “Aggregation and Irrelevance in Multi-sector Models,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, April 1999, 43 (2), 391–409.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel S. Kortum, and Francis Kramarz, “An Anatomy of International
Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” Econometrica, September 2011, 79 (5), 1453–1498.
, , Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, “Trade and the Global Recession,” January 2011.
NBER Working Paper No. 16666.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Decomposition Methods in Economics,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David E. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol. 4, Elsevier Science Publishing, October 2011, pp. 1–102.
Foerster, Andrew T., Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark W. Watson, “Sectoral vs. Aggregate
Shocks: A Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production,” Journal of Political
Economy, February 2011, 119 (1), 1–38.
Fort, Teresa C., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “How Firms Respond to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,” IMF Economic Review,
August 2013, 61 (3), 520–559.
Gabaix, Xavier, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, May
2011, 79 (3), 733–772.
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior
of Small Manufacturing Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1994, 109 (2),
309–340.

27

Gourio, Francois and Anil K Kashyap, “Investment spikes: New facts and a general equilibrium exploration,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007, 54 (Supplemen),
1–22.
Haltiwanger, John C., “Measuring and Analyzing Aggregate Fluctuations: The Importance
of Building from Microeconomic Evidence,” Federal Reserve Bank of St.Louis Review,
May 1997, 79 (3), 55–77.
Hertzel, Michael G., Zhi Li, Micah S. Officer, and Kimberly J. Rodgers, “Inter-firm linkages
and the wealth effects of financial distress along the supply chain,” Journal of Financial
Economics, February 2008, 87 (2), 374 – 387.
Horvath, Michael, “Cyclicality and Sectoral Linkages: Aggregate Fluctuations from Independent Sectoral Shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October 1998, 1 (4), 781–808.
, “Sectoral Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, February 2000, 45 (1), 69–106.
Jovanovic, Boyan, “Micro Shocks and Aggregate Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
May 1987, 102 (2), 395–410.
Kashyap, Anil K., Owen A. Lamont, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Credit Conditions and the
Cyclical Behavior of Inventories,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1994, 109
(3), 565–592.
Kelly, Bryan, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “Firm Volatility in Granular
Networks,” May 2013. mimeo, University of Chicago, UCLA, and NYU.
Klette, Tor Jakob and Zvi Griliches, “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When
Output Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, JulyAugust 1996, 11 (4), 343–61.
Koren, Miklós and Silvana Tenreyro, “Volatility and Development,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 243–87.
Krugman, Paul, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.
Lee, Yoonsoo and Toshihiko Mukoyama, “Entry, Exit, and Plant-Level Dynamics Over the
Business Cycle,” February 2012. Mimeo, Sogang Univerity, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland and University of Virginia.
Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser, “Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
February 1983, 91 (1), 39–69.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Moscarini, Guiseppe and Fabien Postel-Vinay, “The Contribution of Large and Small Employers to Job Creation in Times of High and Low Unemployment,” American Economic
Review, October 2012, 102 (6), 2509–39.
Osotimehin, Sophie, “Aggregate Productivity and the Allocation of Resources over the
Business Cycle,” August 2013. Mimeo, University of Virginia.
Shea, John, “Complementarities and Comovements,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May 2002, 34 (2), 412–433.

28

Stockman, Alan C., “Sectoral and National Aggregate Disturbances to Industrial Output
in Seven European Countries,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1988, 21, 387–409.
Thesmar, David and Mathias Thoenig, “Contrasting Trends in Firm Volatility,” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2011, 3 (4), 143–180.

29

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Whole Economy
0.0369
0.0465

Manufacturing Sector
0.0290
0.0537

Standard deviation of sales growth rate
Average

0.2342

0.2829

0-20 size percentile
21-40 size percentile
41-60 size percentile
61-80 size percentile
81-100 size percentile
top 100
top 10

0.3011
0.2425
0.2163
0.2043
0.2069
0.1319
0.1269

0.3550
0.3252
0.2654
0.2409
0.2278
0.1816
0.1364

p
Average pHerf (f, n)
Average Herf (f )

0.0301
0.0332

0.0447
0.0592

Average aggregate growth rate
Mean of individual growth rates

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the whole economy and manufacturing firms over 1991–
2007. Herf (f, n) is the Herfindahl index of the firm-destination sales shares. Herf (f ) is the Herfindahl
index of the total firm sales shares.

30

Table 2. Summary Statistics and Correlations of Actual Firm-Destination-Level Growth
and Firm-Specific versus Sector-Destination-Specific Components: Whole Economy

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

(1)
Obs.
9,856,891
9,856,891
16,235

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

(1)
Obs.
8,031,453
8,031,453
595

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

(1)
Obs.
1,825,438
1,825,438
15,640

I. Total Sales
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0467
0.2601
1.0000
0.0000
0.2584
0.9935
0.0762
0.1209
0.1140
II. Domestic Sales
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0410
0.2266
1.0000
0.0000
0.2255
0.9954
0.0453
0.0297
0.0957
III. Export Sales
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0718
0.3723
1.0000
0.0000
0.3697
0.9931
0.0774
0.1229
0.1171

“Actual” refers to γf nt , “Firm-Specific” to εf nt , and “Sector-Destination” to δjnt (equation (5)). Column
(2) reports the average γf nt , εf nt , and δjnt in the sample of firm-destinations and years. Column (3) reports
the average sample standard deviation of γf nt , εf nt , and δjnt . Column (4) presents the correlation between
γf nt and γf nt , εf nt , and δjnt .

31

Table 3. Summary Statistics and Correlations of Actual Firm-Destination-Level Growth
and Firm-Specific versus Sector-Destination-Specific Components: Manufacturing Sector

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

(1)
Obs.
2,436,013
2,436,013
10,269

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

(1)
Obs.
1,233,902
1,233,902
306

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

(1)
Obs.
1,202,111
1,202,111
9,963

I. Total Sales
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0542
0.3038
1.0000
0.0000
0.3011
0.9909
0.0727
0.0885
0.1342
II. Domestic Sales
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0378
0.2233
1.0000
0.0000
0.2214
0.9917
0.0416
0.0313
0.1285
III. Export Sales
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0709
0.3679
1.0000
0.0000
0.3652
0.9927
0.0737
0.0895
0.1207

Notes: “Actual” refers to γf nt , “Firm-Specific” to εf nt , and “Sector-Destination” to δjnt . Column (2)
reports the average γf nt , εf nt , and δjnt in the sample of firm-destinations and years. Column (3) reports
the average sample standard deviation of γf nt , εf nt , and δjnt . Column (4) presents the correlation between
γf nt and γf nt , εf nt , and δjnt .

32

Table 4. Summary Statistics and Correlations of Firm-Specific Growth and Components

Firm
Firm-Dest.
Firm-Com.

Firm
Firm-Dest.
Firm-Com.

(1)
Obs.
2,273,943
2,273,943
479,101
II.
(1)
Obs.
1,448,234
1,448,234
258,530

I. Whole Economy
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
0.0009
0.3450
1.0000
0.0000
0.3011
0.8728
0.0020
0.1949
0.4881
Manufacturing Sector
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean St. Dev. Correlation
-0.0003
0.3436
1.0000
0.0000
0.3052
0.8880
0.0007
0.1854
0.4598

Notes: “Firm” refers to εf nt , “Firm-Dest.” to ε2f nt , and “Firm-Com.” to ε1f t (equation (9)). This table
presents the average growth rates and standard deviations of εf nt , ε2f nt , and ε1f t in the sample, as well as
the correlations between εf nt and εf nt , ε2f nt , and ε1f t . The set of firm-destinations is restricted to firms that
serve at least 2 markets.

33

Table 5. The Aggregate Impact of Firm-Specific Shocks on Aggregate Volatility: Whole
Economy and Manufacturing Sector

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

Actual
Firm-Specific
Sector-Destination

I. Total Sales
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0206
1.0000
0.0244
1.0000
0.0165
0.8010
0.0168
0.6885
0.0109
0.5291
0.0157
0.6434
II. Domestic Sales
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0196
1.0000
0.0231
1.0000
0.0154
0.7857
0.0151
0.6537
0.0112
0.5714
0.0167
0.7229
III. Export Sales
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0361
1.0000
0.0374
1.0000
0.0304
0.8421
0.0287
0.7674
0.0129
0.3573
0.0153
0.4091
IV. Value Added
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0210
1.0000
0.0215
1.0000
0.0190
0.9048
0.0184
0.8558
0.0107
0.5095
0.0123
0.5721

Notes: This table presents the averages of
σF τ (“Firm-Specific”),
and σJN τ (“SectorP σAτ (“Actual”),
P2007
P2007
1
1
Destination”) over the sample period: T1 2007
σ
,
σ
,
σ
Aτ
F
τ
JN
τ ; and in relative
τ =1991 P T
τ =1991
τ =1991
T
P
2007
σF t
σJN t
1
terms with respect to the actual: T1 2007
,
.
τ =1991 σAτ
τ =1991 σAτ
T

34

0

.02

Growth rate
.04
.06

.08

.1

Figure 1. Growth of Aggregate Sales, Aggregate Value Added, and GDP

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Total sales
GDP

2002

2004

2006

Value added

Notes: This figure presents the time series of the growth rates of total sales, before-tax value added, in our
data and GDP sourced from the IMF International Financial Statistics.

35

−.05

0

Growth rate
.05

.1

.15

Figure 2. Growth of Aggregate Exports

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Export sales

2002

2004

2006

Exports (IFS)

Notes: This figure presents the time series of the growth rates of total exports in our data and total French
exports sourced from the IMF International Financial Statistics.

36

37

St. Dev. of Sales Growth

St. Dev. of Sales Growth

1992

1992

1994

1994

1998

2000

1998

2000

(d) Sales

1996

(a) Sales

1996

2004

2006

2002

2004

2006

Analytical 95% C.I.
Boostrap 95% C.I.

2002

Analytical 95% C.I.
Boostrap 95% C.I.

2008

2008

0
1990

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

0.05

0
1990

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

1996

1998

2000

(b) Idiosyncratic

1994

2002

1992

1996

1998

2000

(e) Idiosyncratic

1994

2004

2006

2002

2004

2006

Analytical 95% C.I.
Boostrap 95% C.I.

II. Manufacturing Sector

1992

Analytical 95% C.I.
Boostrap 95% C.I.

I. Whole Economy

2008

2008

0
1990

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

0.05

0
1990

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

1992

1992

1996

1998

2000

1996

1998

2000

2002

(f ) Macroeconomic

1994

2004

2006

2004

2006

Analytical 95% C.I.
Boostrap 95% C.I.

2002

(c) Macroeconomic

1994

Analytical 95% C.I.
Boostrap 95% C.I.

Notes: This figure presents the estimates of σAτ , σF τ , and σJN τ for the whole economy (Panel I) and the manufacturing sector (Panel II), along
with both analytical and bootstrap 95% confidence intervals.

0
1990

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

0.05

0
1990

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

St. Dev. of Idiosyncratic Shock

0.04

St. Dev. of Idiosyncratic Shock

Figure 3. Volatility of Sales Growth and its Components

St. Dev. of Macro−Sector Shock
St. Dev. of Macro−Sector Shock

2008

2008

Figure 4. Contribution of Individual Volatilities and Covariance Terms to Firm-Specific
Fluctuations
0.025

Standard Deviation

0.02

0.015

Firm−Specific

0.01

DIRECT1/2
LINK1/2

0.005

0
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(a) Whole Economy
0.025

Standard Deviation

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

Firm−Specific
DIRECT1/2
LINK1/2

0
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

(b) Manufacturing Sector
Notes: This figure presents a decomposition of the Firm-Specific
aggregate variance into two components
√
that
measure
the
contribution
of
firm-specific
variances
(
DIRECT
τ ), and of covariances across firms
√
( LIN K τ ). The decomposition is based on equation (10).

38

Figure 5. Firm-Specific Volatility Aggregated at the Sector-Level and the Sectoral Mean
Herfindahl Index
−2

Post telecom.

−2.5

Petroleum
Other business
Transport
eq.
Computer
serv
Office

−3

Communicat.
Motor vehic.

log DIRECT1/2
j

−3.5

Electricity

Basic metal
Mining
Medical
Health
Transport

−4

Research

Electrical
Real estate

RentingFood
Metal prod. Public
Chemicals
Machinery
ManufAgriculture
n.e.c. Mineral
Wood
Plastic
Paper
Hotels
Textiles
Finance
Construction
Wholesale Retail

−4.5

−5

−5.5

Education

−6
−4

−3.5

−3

−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

log Herf1/2
j

(a) Whole Economy
−2.5

Petroleum
−3

Transport

Office

Communication
Motor vehicules

−3.5
log DIRECT1/2
j

Basic metal
Medical
−4

−4.5

−5

−5.5
−3.5

Electrical

Fabric. metal
ChemicalsFood
Machinery
Manuf n.e.c. Mineral
Wood
Plastic
Paper
Textiles

−3

−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

log Herf1/2
j

(b) Manufacturing Sector
p
Notes: This figure plots the time average of the sectoral DIRECTjτ component against the square root
p
p
of the sectoral mean Herfindahl index. The correlation between time average DIRECTjτ and Herfjτ
is 0.86 for the whole economy and 0.93 for the manufacturing sector.

39

Figure 6. Covariances of Firm-Specific Shocks Across Sectors and their Input-Output
Linkages
−2.5

−3

−3.5

log LINK1/2
ij

−4

−4.5

−5

−5.5

−6

−6.5

−7
−15

−10

−5

0

log(Mean IO coefficient)

(a) Whole Economy
−2.5

−3

log LINK1/2
ij

−3.5

−4

−4.5

−5

−5.5
−11

−8

−5
log(Mean IO coefficient)

−2

(b) Manufacturing Sector
p
Notes: This figure plots the time average of the sector-pair LIN Kijτ component against the mean IO
linkage (share of intermediate inputs in total costs times the share of the upstreampsector in intermediate
consumption between sectors i and j). The correlation between the time average LIN Kijτ and the IO
linkages is 0.29 for the whole economy and 0.34 for the manufacturing sector.

40

41

Volatility by Sector
NAF Sector
35
Other transport equipment
36-37 Manufacturing n.e.c.
40-41 Electricity, gas, water supply
45
Construction
50
Wholesale and retail trade
55
Hotels and restaurants
60-63 Transport
64
Post and telecommunications
70
Real estate activities
71
Rental without operator
72
Computer services
73
Research and development
74
Other business services
75
Public administration
80
Education
85
Health and social work
90-93 Personal services

St. Dev.
0.3232
0.2853
0.2103
0.2314
0.2188
0.1614
0.2033
0.2425
0.2102
0.2158
0.2695
0.2915
0.2384
0.1734
0.2283
0.1490
0.1986

Share
0.0113
0.0096
0.0292
0.0495
0.3689
0.0141
0.0399
0.0226
0.0235
0.0070
0.0114
0.0015
0.0578
0.0003
0.0014
0.0069
0.0164

Notes: This table presents the standard deviations of firm-destination growth rates broken down by sector over 1991–2007. “Share” is the share of the
sector in total sales. The manufacturing sector covers NAF sectors 15 to 37.

NAF
01-05
10-14
15-16
17-19
20
21-22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

I. Firm-Destination Sales
Sector
St. Dev. Share
0.2389
0.0049
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Mining and quarrying
0.2533
0.0037
Food and tobacco
0.2340
0.0635
Textile, wearing apparel and leather 0.3118
0.0150
Wood products
0.2606
0.0049
Paper products, publishing
0.2558
0.0235
Coke, refined petroleum, nuclear fuel 0.3255
0.0241
Chemical industry
0.3193
0.0421
Rubber and plastics
0.3066
0.0145
Mineral products
0.2689
0.0114
Basic metals
0.3189
0.0129
Metal products
0.2715
0.0207
Machinery and equipment
0.3122
0.0203
Office machinery
0.3241
0.0051
Electrical equipment
0.3096
0.0111
Radio, TV and communication
0.3161
0.0100
Medical and optical instruments
0.3017
0.0079
Motor vehicles
0.2950
0.0332

Table A1. Firm-Level Volatility by Sector

Table A2. The Impact of Firm-Specific Shocks on Aggregate Volatility: Differing Firm
Sensitivity to Sectoral and Macroeconomic Shocks
Whole Economy
(1)
(2)
St. Dev. Relative SD
Actual

0.0206

1.0000

Manufacturing Sector
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0244

1.0000

Firm-Specific Component (average σF τ )
Differing Sensitivity
By size

0.0169

0.8204

0.0172

0.7049

By age

0.0122

0.5922

0.0133

0.5451

By R&D intensity

0.0164

0.7961

0.0167

0.6844

By patenting intensity

0.0162

0.7864

0.0167

0.6844

By openness

0.0166

0.8058

0.0167

0.6844

By debt

0.0164

0.7961

0.0167

0.6844

By all of the above

0.0134

0.6505

0.0123

0.5041

Notes: The row labelled
“Actual” reports the average standard deviation of actual aggregate sales growth
P
σAτ . The rest of the table reports the average standard deviation of the firmover 1991–2007: T1 2007
τ =1991
P
P2007 σF τ
1
specific component, T1 2007
τ =1991 σF τ , and its average value relative to the actual, T
τ =1991 σAτ , under a
series of augmented models (12), in which firms have heterogeneous sensitivity to sector-destination shocks.
“Size” is the dummy for the firm’s quintile in the sales distribution. “Age” is the dummy for whether the
firm is more than 5 years old. “R&D intensity” is a dummy for whether R&D expenses are higher than
1% of value added. “Patent intensity” is a dummy for whether patent expenses are more than 5% of value
added. “Export intensity” is the ratio of exports to total firm sales. “Debt” is the quintile dummy for the
firm’s debt to sales ratio.

42

Table A3. The Impact of Firm-Specific Shocks on Aggregate Volatility: Robustness Checks

Actual
Firm-Specific

Actual
Firm-Specific

Actual
Firm-Specific

Actual
Firm-Specific

Actual
Firm-Specific

I. DHS growth rates
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.1420
1.0000
0.1203
1.0000
0.1014
0.7141
0.0833
0.6924
II. Demeaned growth rates
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0206
1.0000
0.0244
1.0000
0.0128
0.6214
0.0152
0.6230
III. Additional local market effects
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0206
1.0000
0.0244
1.0000
0.0165
0.8010
0.0164
0.6721
IV. More disaggregated sectors
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0209
1.0000
0.0244
1.0000
0.0169
0.8086
0.0156
0.6393
V. Three-Year Growth Rates
Whole Economy
Manufacturing Sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0290
1.0000
0.0323
1.0000
0.0266
0.9140
0.0269
0.8885

Notes: The rows labelled
“Actual” report the average standard deviation of actual aggregate sales growth
P
over 1991–2007: T1 2007
The rows labelled “Firm-Specific” report the average standard deviation
τ =1991 σAτ . P
P2007 σF τ
1
of the firm-specific component, T1 2007
τ =1991 σF τ , and its average value relative to the actual, T
τ =1991 σAτ ,
under a series of alternative models. The panel “DHS growth rates” implement the model under the firm
growth rate defined as in (13). The panel “Demeaned growth rates” reports the results under first demeaning
firm sales growth by the firm-destination specific average growth rate. The panel “Additional local market
effects” reports the results of augmenting the model to include location-specific shocks. The panel “More
disaggregated sectors” reports the results under defining sectors according to the 5-digit NAF level of disaggregation (about 700 sectors in the whole economy). The last panel uses the baseline model, but takes
the average firm-destination growth rates over three year periods: 1990–93, 1994–97, 1998–2001, 2002–05.
Means of standard deviations and relative standard deviations are presented.

43

ONLINE APPENDIX
Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate Fluctuations
Julian di Giovanni

Andrei A. Levchenko

April 10, 2014

44

Isabelle Méjean

Appendix A

Intensive and Extensive Margins

This appendix decomposes the growth rate of aggregate sales into the intensive and extensive components, and shows that the bulk of the aggregate sales volatility is driven by the
intensive margin. The intensive component at date t is defined as the growth rate of sales
of firm-destination pairs that had positive sales in both year t and year t − 1. The extensive
margin is defined as the contribution to total sales of the appearance and disappearance of
firm-destination-specific sales. The log-difference growth rate of total sales can be manipulated to obtain an (exact) decomposition into intensive and extensive components:
X
X
xf nt − ln
γ̃At ≡ ln
xf nt−1
f,n∈It−1

f,n∈It

P
= ln P

f,n∈It/t−1

=

P

f,n∈It/t−1 xf nt

γAt
|{z}

xf nt−1
−

Intensive margin

−

ln

πt,t
ln
πt,t−1
| {z }

f,n∈It/t−1

P

f,n∈It

xf nt

xf nt

P

f,n∈It/t−1

− ln P

f,n∈It−1

xf nt−1

xf nt−1

!
(A.1)

,

Extensive margin

where It/t−1 is the set of firm-destination pairs active in both t and t − 1 (the intensive subsample of firms×destinations in year t) and πt,t (πt,t−1 ) is the share of output produced by
this intensive sub-sample of firms in period t (t − 1). Thus, the extensive margin calculation
treats symmetrically entry into domestic production (a new firm appearing) and entry into
exporting (an existing firm beginning to export to a particular destination n). Entrants have
a positive impact on growth while exiters push the growth rate down, and the net impact
is proportional to the share of entrants’/exiters’ sales in aggregate sales.27 Meanwhile, an
observation only belongs to the intensive margin if an individual firm serves an individual
destination in both periods.
Using equation (A.1), the impact of the intensive and extensive margins on aggregate
volatility then can be written as:
2
2
σ̃A
= σA
+ σπ2 − 2Cov(γAt , gπt ),

(A.2)

where gπt ≡ ln πt,t /πt,t−1 is the extensive margin component of equation (A.1), σπ2 is its
2 is the variance of the intensive margin growth rate γ , and Cov(γ , g ) is
variance, σA
At
At πt

the covariance between the two.
2 is the sum of three components:
Inclusive of entry and exit, the volatility of total sales σ̃A

i) the volatility of output produced by incumbent firms – the intensive margin, ii) the
27

This decomposition follows the same logic as the decomposition of price indices proposed by Feenstra
(1994).

45

volatility of entries and exits during the sample period – the extensive margin and iii) the
(potential) covariance of those two terms. A convenient feature of this decomposition is
that it accounts for the impact of extensive margin adjustments on aggregate volatility in
a very simple way.
Though we do our best to estimate the extensive margin of firm-destination sales, there
are several features of the data that may lead to overestimation of the importance of the
extensive margin. First, mergers and acquisitions will appear as exits for the acquired
firms, which would incorrectly add to the (negative) extensive margin.28 Second, we cannot
observe a firm’s behavior prior to and after our sample period. This censoring will lead to
an upward bias of the extensive margin in the first and last year of our sample, and thus we
ignore these years in calculating the volatility of the extensive margin. Third, new entrants
will be more likely to exhibit high growth rates as they start production and are growing
towards their “steady-state” size. If young firms exhibit growth rates above the cutoff in
the trimming procedure, we may record short-run entries and exits where only one entry
took place. This will again overstate the importance of the extensive margin.29
Table OA.1. Intensive and Extensive Margins and Aggregate Volatility

Actual
Intensive
Extensive

Whole Economy
(1)
(2)
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0228
1.0000
0.0206
0.9022
0.0083
0.3650

Manufacturing Sector
(3)
(4)
St. Dev. Relative SD
0.0309
1.0000
0.0260
0.8429
0.0103
0.3322

Notes: This table presents the standard deviations, in absolute and relative terms with respect to the actual,
for the two components of aggregate growth: intensive and extensive margins, over 1992–2006.

Table OA.1 presents the standard deviations of the intensive and extensive margins,
both in absolute terms and relative to the standard deviation of aggregate sales growth. We
restrict attention to the period 1992–2006, because it is not possible to measure the extensive
margin in the first and last years of the sample due to sampling issues discussed above. It
is clear that the impact of the extensive margin on aggregate volatility is minor. While the
28

M&A’s will also lead to artificially large growth rates for the acquiring firm in the year of the M&A,
which will appear in the intensive margin. The data do not record whether an M&A takes place, but our
cleaning procedure discussed in Section 3 – i.e., dropping extreme growth rates – should drop the acquiring
firm observation because of its large sales growth rate in the first year of acquisition.
29
To reduce the impact of this effect on the baseline results carried out on the intensive margin, we
aggregate the data over three-year periods, and the results are robust (see Section 4.4).

46

intensive margin aggregate volatility accounts for 90% and 84% of the overall sales volatility
in the whole economy and the manufacturing sectors, respectively, the extensive margin
accounts for only 37% and 33%. The results are robust to estimation of the extensive margin
at three-year intervals, as well as five-year intervals, though there are fewer observations to
calculate the variance for the latter, given the length of our sample period.30

Appendix B

2
to Aggregate Growth VolatilRelationship of σAτ
ity

2 the variance of γ , the growth rate of aggregate sales. Taking the variance
Denote by σA
At
2 can be exactly written as the sum of the variances and
of the right-hand side of (6), σA

covariances of the aggregated shocks:
2
2
σA
= σJN
+ σF2 + COV,
2
= Var
where σJN

P

j,n wjnt−1 δjnt

(B.1)



is the contribution of the sector-destination-specific
P

2
shocks to aggregate volatility; σF = Var
is the contribution of firmf,n wf nt−1 εf nt

P
P
specific shocks to aggregate volatility, and COV = Cov
f,n wf nt−1 εf nt
j,n wjnt−1 δjnt ,
is the covariance between the shocks from different levels of aggregation.
While equation (B.1) represents an exact decomposition of the variance of γAt , it is
inconvenient for our purposes because it conflates the variances of shocks δjnt and εf nt with
movements of the shares wjnt−1 and wf nt−1 over time. As a result, the properties of the
P
P
stochastic processes j,n wjnt−1 δjnt and f,n wf nt−1 εf nt are difficult to establish and relate
to the properties of the primitive shocks δjnt and εf nt .
If the shares were constant over time, and the sample of firms did not change, then
the aggregate variance would simply reflect the influence of the volatility of the different
shocks, and (B.1) and (8) would coincide. However, this is not the case in our data: the
shares and the firm-specific shocks are actually negatively correlated over time. This in turn
mechanically reduces the volatility of the aggregated firm-specific shocks. To understand
why this would happen, imagine a firm that either has low sales or high sales. When
switching from low sales to high sales between t − 1 and t, the firm’s growth rate is large
but it is weighted by the sales in t − 1, which are low, when calculating the aggregated
firm-specific component. On the other hand, when switching from high to low, the growth
rate is low but this is weighted by lagged sales that are high. A negative covariance between
30

These results are available upon request.

47

the shocks and weights is then created when computing the contribution of this firm to the
aggregate variance.
However, this does not appear to be a large force in practice. While we cannot make
P
precise statements about the stochastic processes governing γAt ,
f,n wf nt−1 εf nt , and
P
j,n wjnt−1 δjnt , we can use observed δjnt , εf nt , and wf nt−1 ’s to calculate sample variances,
2 , σ 2 , and σ 2 in (B.1). Overall, these match
which we could think of as estimators of σA
JN
F
2 , σ2
2
up both qualitatively and quantitatively with the time averages of σAτ
JN τ , and σF τ re-

ported in the main text (Table 5): σA = 0.021 and 0.026, and σF = 0.009 and 0.012 for the
whole economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. The firm-specific contribution
is somewhat smaller using the definition (B.1): the relative standard deviations,

σF
σA

= 0.45

and 0.46 for the whole economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively.

Appendix C
C.1

2
2
Properties of the Estimators for σAτ
, σJN
τ , and
2
σF τ

Obtaining δjnt ’s and εf nt ’s

Our approach to computing δjnt ’s and εf nt ’s has a natural fixed effects regression interpretation. It amounts to regressing the cross-section of γf nt ’s in a given year t and market
n on the set of sector fixed effects, and retaining the residual as the firm-specific shock.
This way of looking at things also makes it clear why we cannot isolate the macroeconomic
shocks δnt . For any given market n at time t the full set of sector effects will span the
country effect. Therefore, to include a constant term, a sector effect would have to be
dropped, and the constant term would then capture a conflation of the aggregate shock and
a shock to a “reference” sector. In turn, sector effects would then pick up sectoral shocks
relative to the reference sector shock. Changing this reference sector can affect the values
of δnt and δjnt as well as their variance. The combined overall impact of the macro and
sectoral components remains the same regardless of the choice of the reference sector, and
thus does not affect our computed values of firm-specific shocks, or their impact on the
aggregate economy. The extended model (12) is implemented by fitting a linear regression
on the cross-section of γf nt for each t and n, in which sector effects are interacted with the
observable firm characteristics.
Note that we assume the realizations δjnt and εf nt to be observed perfectly, rather than
themselves estimated. We can justify this by appealing to the fact that we are working
with the universe of French firms, rather than a sample. This assumption is imposed for

48

technical reasons. In order to establish the properties of the sample variances of a set of
observed realizations of γAt|τ and its constituent parts as estimators of their variances, as
well as state the conditions on the primitives (i.e. properties of δjnt and εf nt ) under which
we can prove results about the properties of this estimator, we rely on the assumptions that
(i) there is a well-defined and fixed set of firm-destinations, and (ii) the weights wf nτ −1 are
fixed and known for all f, n. If we had instead assumed that we only observe estimates
δ̂jnt and ε̂f nt of δjnt and εf nt , asymptotics would involve proving consistency of δ̂jnt and
ε̂f nt as estimators of δjnt and εf nt as the sample size of firm-destinations goes to infinity.
This, however, would not be logically consistent with keeping a fixed set of firm-destinations
comprising the summation in γAt|τ , or with the assumption of fixed weights wf nτ −1 .

C.2

Consistency and Asymptotic Normality

2 ,
The proof follows the same steps to establish the properties of our estimators for σAτ
0
2
2
σJN
τ , and σF τ . Consider a vector-valued random variable ψt = ψ1t ψ2t · · · ψF t ,
0
ψt ∈ RF , and a set of time-invariant weights w = w1 w2 · · · wF , w ∈ RF+ . Denote
P
by Zt = w0 ψt = Fi=1 wi ψit ∈ R a scalar-valued random variable that is a weighted sum

of ψit ’s. Assume we observe a stochastic process {ψt : t = 1, . . . T }, and consequently a
stochastic process {Zt : t = 1, . . . T }.
0
In specific cases relevant for us, when ψt = · · · εf nt · · · is the vector of εf nt and w =
0
P
· · · wf nτ −1 · · · is the vector of firm weights at time τ − 1, then Zt = f,n wf nτ −1 εf nt is
the contribution of firm-specific shocks to γAt|τ (the “granular residual”), and its variance
0
σF2 τ is what we are interested in estimating. Similarly, when ψt = · · · δjnt · · · and
0
P
2
w = · · · wjnτ −1 · · · , then Zt = j,n wjnτ −1 δjnt with variance σJN
τ . Finally, when
0
ψt = · · · εf nt · · · · · · δjnt · · · is the stacked vector of δjnt and εf nt and
0
w = · · · wf nτ −1 · · · · · · wjnτ −1 · · · is the stacked vector of wf nτ −1 ’s and wjnτ −1 ’s,
then Zt = γAt|τ .
This appendix states a set of sufficient conditions on the properties of the vector-valued
stochastic process ψt and the weights vector w such that Zt is stationary and the sample
variance of Zt for t = 1, ..., T is a well-behaved estimator of the true variance of Zt . Applying
these conditions to the three cases above separately yields a statement of the sufficient
conditions under which the sample variance of T realizations of γAt|τ is a well-behaved
2 , and similarly for the estimators of σ 2 and σ 2
estimator of σAτ
Fτ
JN τ .

49

Definition 1 A sequence (Zt )t∈N of random variables is called α-mixing if
m→∞

α(m) = sup {α ((Z1 , ..., Zk ), (Zj )j≥k+m ) |k ∈ N} −−−−→ 0

(C.1)

where α is the strong mixing coefficient defined as
α(Z, X) = sup |P (A ∩ B) − P (A)P (B)|,

(C.2)

A∈σ(Z)
B∈σ(X)

where σ(Z) is the σ-field defined by Z.
Lemma 1 Let ψt be a vector-valued jointly stationary and α-mixing stochastic process of
dimension F × 1 with mean µ and variance Ω. Denote by Zt ≡ w0 ψt the scalar-valued
process that corresponds to the weighted sum of the individual elements of ψt . Then,
1. Zt is a stationary, α-mixing process with mean µZ and variance σZ2 .
2. If Zt satisfies E|Zt |8 < ∞ and α(T ) = O(T −3 ),31 then the sample variance
T

s2Z =

1 X
(Zt − Z̄t )2 ,
T −1

(C.3)

t=1

where Z̄t =

1
T

PT

t=1 Zt

is the sample mean, is a consistent estimator of the variance

σZ2 of Zt , with a limiting distribution characterized by
√

where

d

T (s2Z − σZ2 ) −
→ N (0, ξ 2 ),

∞
X




2
ξ = V ar (Zt − µZ ) + 2
Cov (Zt − µZ )2 , (Zt+k − µZ )2 .
2

(C.4)

(C.5)

k=1

Proof: The function Z(x) = w0 x is measurable since w is known and not time-varying.
Theorem 1.1 in Durrett (2005, p. 333) combined with joint stationarity of ψt delivers the
result that Zt = Z(ψt ) = w0 ψt is stationary (a measurable function of a stationary process
is itself stationary). Similarly, Theorem 3.49 in White (2001, p. 50) combined with the
assumption that ψt is α-mixing of size −a delivers the result that Zt is also α-mixing of
size −a (a measurable function of an α-mixing process is itself α-mixing). This proves the
31

The statement of these conditions can be made more general. Namely, the proposition holds if ∃ ν > 0
and ∃ φ > 0 such that E|Zt |max{φ,2(2+ν)} < ∞ and α(T ) = O(T −ρ ) for ρ > 3φν+ν+5φ+2
. This more general
2φν
statement of the conditions captures the tradeoff between the number of finite moments and the degree of
time dependence: one can allow for more time dependence (lower ρ) if one assumes existence of higher order
finite moments, and vice versa.

50

first claim. The second claim follows directly from Theorem 1.8 of Dehling and Wendler
(2010, p. 128), since Zt satisfies all the conditions required in that theorem and it is easily
verified that the U −statistic corresponding to the sample variance satisfies the moment and
continuity conditions of that theorem.

C.3

Standard Errors

As is customary, in our empirical implementation we will compute the confidence intervals
based on the empirical counterpart of (C.5):
T
−2
T
−k
X
2 TX



1 X
1
(Zt − Z̄t )2 − s2Z +2
(Zt − Z̄t )2 − s2Z (Zt+k − Z̄t )2 − s2Z
T −1
T −k−1
t=1
t=1
k=1
(C.6)


PT −k 
2
2
2
2
For large k, the object t=1 (Zt − Z̄t ) − sZ (Zt+k − Z̄t ) − sZ cannot be precisely es-

ξˆ2 =

timated. Thus, we cut the number of maximum allowable lags to q  T − 2 and use the
HAC estimator that downweights more distant covariances (Newey and West, 1987):
2
ξˆHAC

=

T
2
1 X
(Zt − Z̄t )2 − s2Z +
(C.7)
T −1
t=1

q 
T
−k
X
X



k
1
1−
(Zt − Z̄t )2 − s2Z (Zt+k − Z̄t )2 − s2Z
2
q+1 T −k−1
k=1

t=1

Following Andrews (1991), we choose q as a function of sample size according to the following
rule of thumb:
q + 1 ≈ 0.75T 1/3
For us, with T = 17, this amounts to q + 1 ≈ 2, so we only use the covariance for one
2
lag. We are interested in the standard error of s2Z , which is obtained by dividing ξˆHAC
by
√
T . Finally, the figures and tables in the main text report the results expressed in terms
of the standard deviation sZ . We use the delta method to obtain the standard error of the
standard deviation.

Appendix D

Detailed Data Description

The sales data, as well as additional variables, come from the balance sheet information
collected from firms’ tax forms. The French tax system distinguishes three different regimes,
the “normal” regime (called BRN for Bénéfice Réel Normal ), the “simplified” regime (called
RSI for Régime Simplifié d’Imposition) that is restricted to smaller firms, and the “microBIC” regime for entrepreneurs. The amount of information that has to be provided to the
51

fiscal administration is more limited in the RSI than in the BRN regime, and even more
so for “micro-BIC” firms. Under some conditions, firms can choose their tax regime. An
individual entrepreneur can thus decide to enroll in the “micro-BIC” regime if its annual
sales are below 80,300 euros. Likewise, a firm can choose to participate in the RSI rather
than the BRN regime if its annual sales are below 766,000 euros (231,000 euros in services).32
Throughout the exercise, “micro-BIC” and “RSI” firms are excluded. We do not have
enough information for “micro-BIC” firms. We also exclude “RSI” firms, both because their
weight in annual sales is negligible and because it is difficult to harmonize these data with
the rest of the sample. In 2007, those firms represented less than 4% of total sales and
about 11% of total employment. Thus, our sample represents the bulk of the aggregate
French economy.
The BRN dataset contains detailed information on the firms’ balance sheets, including
total, domestic, and export sales, value added, as well as many cost items including the wage
bill, materials expenditures, and so on, as well as NAF sectors in which the firm operates.33
This represents around 30% of industrial and service firms but more than 90% of aggregate
sales.34 We do not have any information at the plant level, however.
The information collected by the tax authorities is combined with the firm-level export data for each foreign destination market from the French customs authorities. The
datasets can be merged using a unique firm identifier, called SIREN. In merging together
the customs and balance sheet data, we had to make a number of adjustments. First, we
drop observations for firms that appear in the customs but do not appear in the BRN data
(some of these firms may produce farming goods, which are not in the balance sheet data).
Second, a number of firms declare positive exports to the tax authorities but are not in
the customs files. Since our procedure exploits the bilateral dimension of exports, and the
32

Those thresholds are for 2010. They are adjusted over time, but marginally so.
“NAF”, Nomenclature d’Activités Française, is the French industrial classification. Our baseline analysis considers the level of aggregation with 60 sectors. This corresponds to the 2-digit ISIC (Revision 3)
nomenclature. We merge together some sectors in order for our nomenclature to be consistent with the
one used in the input-output tables. Namely, we merge agriculture, forestry and fishing (NAF 1, 2 and 5),
all mining and quarrying activities (NAF 10 to 14), tobacco and other food industries (NAF 15 and 16),
textile, wearing apparel and leather (NAF 17, 18 and 19), paper products and publishing (NAF 21 and
22), manufacturing n.e.c and recycling (NAF 36 and 37), all activities related to electricity gas and water
(NAF 40 and 41), wholesale and retail trade (NAF 50, 51 and 52), transport and storage activities (NAF
60 to 63) and all community, social and personal services (NAF 90 to 93). We also drop NAF sectors 95
(domestic services), and 99 (activities outside France). The NAF nomenclature has been created in 1993,
as a replacement for the “NES” (Nomenclature Economique de Synthèse). Data for 1990–92 are converted
into the NAF classification using a correspondence table.
34
We drop the banking sector because of important restructuring at the beginning of the 2000s that
artificially adds a large amount of volatility to the dataset. This sector represents less than 4% of total sales
in 1990 but more than 25% by the end of the period.
33

52

customs data are the most reliable source of exporting information, we assume that those
firms are non-exporters. Third, in a small fraction (6.6%) of exporter-year observations
present in both the customs and the BRN data, the value of export sales is not the same in
the two databases. We thus use the customs data to compute the share of each destination
market in total firm exports and apply these shares to export sales provided in the BRN
file.
The customs data are quasi-exhaustive. There is a declaration threshold of 1,000 euros
for annual exports to any given destination. Below the threshold, the customs declaration
is not compulsory. Since 1993, intra-EU trade is no longer liable for any tariff, and as
a consequence firms are no longer required to submit the regular customs form. A new
form has however been created that tracks intra-EU trade. Unfortunately, the declaration
threshold for this kind of trade flows in much higher, around 150,000 euros per year. A
number of firms continue declaring intra-EU export flows below the threshold however,
either because they don’t know ex ante that they will not reach the 150,000 Euro limit in a
given fiscal year, because they apply the same customs procedure for all export markets they
serve, or because they delegate the customs-related tasks to a third party (e.g., a transport
firm) that systematically fills out the customs form. Below-cutoff exports missing from
customs data can potentially create two problems (i) some export sales might be counted
as domestic, affecting the computation of domestic shocks; and (ii) some export sales that
occur in reality (a subset of those below 150,000 euros) are missing from our data, affecting
the computation of export shocks. We use the information contained in the tax forms to
both deal with this problem and assess its extent. On the tax form, the firms report their
total exports. Thus, we can conjecture that firms that do not appear in customs data but
report positive exports on their tax forms are those for whom exports (by destination) fall
below the customs cutoff. We address problem (i) by calculating the firm’s domestic sales as
the difference between their reported total sales and their exports reported on the tax form.
In this way, we do not “contaminate” domestic sales with erroneously classified exports.
Below, we report our main results for domestic sales only, and they are robust. For problem
(ii), this fix is not available. We can judge how many exports we are missing by comparing
exports declared on tax forms to exports declared to customs. It appears that the problem
is relatively minor. In 10% of firm-year observations, the tax form reports exports but the
customs data do not. These observations account for 7% of overall exports. On average,
the total exports reported in the tax form but missing from customs (413,000 euros per
year) are an order of magnitude smaller than average exports in the whole sample, which

53

are 3,056,000.
Our approach involves working with the sales growth rates of firms to individual markets.
One concern with these data is that firm sales could be measured with error, and thus the
volatility of firm-specific shocks we estimate may simply be the variance of the measurement
error. As is typical of micro data, there is a great deal of dispersion in the set of individual
growth rates we obtain. There are a number of reasons for which the data may contain
outliers. For instance, the BRN file does not provide any information on firms undergoing a
controle fiscal – i.e. a tax audit – during a given year. For these firms, the “sales” variable
is either zero or missing, which results in either extreme growth rates or artificial exits and
re-entries around those years.35 Also, firms can change their organizational structure in a
given year, grouping activities together in different entities, which can result in a number
of large “exits.” In a number of cases, firms decided to create new holding companies that
pooled together the charges and benefits of all firms comprising the group. The members
of those groups, that before filed separate tax forms, would then disappear from the fiscal
files.
While measurement error is by construction impossible to rule out, we believe that our
results are not unduly driven by it for a number of reasons. First, the French data we are
working with are high quality, coming from tax and customs records. These are the data
underlying the national accounts for France. Second, in order for extreme observations
not to introduce noise in the estimation and aggregation exercise, we apply a trimming
procedure. Namely, we drop the individual growth rates in which sales are either double
or half their previous year’s value. Third, we repeat the analysis on 3-year growth rates
instead of annual growth rates as one of the robustness checks, a procedure that should help
average out year-to-year measurement error. The fact that 3-year growth rates continue
to produce a significant firm component for aggregate fluctuations suggests that the main
results in the paper are not driven by measurement error.
35
The audit of the firm’s tax statements is over the period going back 3 years, and up to 10 years if fraud
is detected. This is relevant for us because this process often lasts for many months, and during the year the
company is in controle fiscal, there is no “regular” BRN declaration which may result in missing data values
for certain firm-years, even for big companies. Unfortunately, we do not have data on which firm-years are
under controle fiscal.

54

Appendix E

A Simple Model of Input-Output Linkages at
the Firm Level

This appendix presents a simple extension of the baseline model of Section 2 to illustrate
how interconnections between firms can generate positive correlation in the estimated firmspecific shocks. We model the interconnection through input-output linkages.
Suppose that the sales of a firm are given by (3), but the cost of the input bundle is
now firm- rather than sector-specific:
xf nt = ωf nt

ϕjnt Ynt
(Pjnt )1−θ



λ

(1−λf )ρf g

θ
κjnd cf dt af dt
θ−1

1−θ
,

where
cf dt = Ahdtf

Y

pgdt

,

X

ρf g = 1.

g

g∈Ξf dt

This specification assumes that the cost of firm f ’s input bundle cf dt has a Cobb-Douglas
form in labor, paid the equilibrium wage hdt , and the set Ξf dt of inputs bought from the
firm’s input providers at their equilibrium price pgdt . The parameter λf measures the share
of labor in the firm’s cost function, and ρf g is the share of spending on inputs produced
by firm g in the total intermediate input spending by firm f . Finally, A is a constant that
depends on the parameters of the production function.
Productivity shocks to an input provider g have a direct effect on its sales: d ln xgmt /d ln agmt =
1 − θ. Because of input-output linkages, they also transmit to firm f with the following
elasticity:
d ln xf nt
= (1 − θ)(1 − λf )ρf g .
d ln agmt
Intuitively, a positive productivity shock decreases the upstream firm’s output price and
thus the downstream firm’s input cost, positively affecting its sales. This transmission of
shocks via the IO linkage implies that the sales growth rates of firms f and g exhibit positive
comovement.
In particular, if idiosyncratic firm-specific productivity shocks are the only source of
shocks in the economy, the covariance of the firm-specific sales growth components between

55

any two firms f and g is


Cov (εf nt , εgmt ) = (1 − θ)2 (1 − λg )ρgf Var(af dt ) + (1 − λf )ρf g Var(agdt )
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Propagation from f to g

Propagation from g to f



(E.1)




(1 − λf )(1 − λg )ρf h ρgh Var(ahdt ) .
+

h∈Ξf dt ∩Ξgdt

|
{z
}
X

Propagation through common input providers

Summing over all firms connected to f and assuming that the variance of shocks is homogeneous over firms (Var(af nt ) = σ 2 ∀ f, n), one can recover the contribution of a single firm
to the overall linkage factor (neglecting the impact of weights):


 X
Cov(εf nt , εgmt ) = (1 − θ) σ 
(1 − λg )ρgf

g,m
 |g
{z
}

X

2 2

+(1 − λf )

Weighted out-degree df



(E.2)




+ (1 − λf )
(1 − λg )ρf h ρgh  .

g,m h∈Ξf dt ∩Ξgdt

|
{z
}
X

X

Second-order degree qf

As in Acemoglu et al. (2012), the impact of one single firm on the aggregate volatility
depends on how connected it is to the rest of the economy. Shocks affecting a firm that
provides inputs to a large number of downstream players, i.e., that has a large “weighted
out-degree” df in the words of Acemoglu et al. (2012), will have a larger impact. This is
what the first term of (E.2) captures. The second term accounts for the fact that firms
that use more inputs will fluctuate more as a result of productivity shocks affecting their
input providers. Finally, the third term captures “second-order connections” as denoted
by Acemoglu et al. (2012) – namely the fact that common input suppliers magnify the
propagation of shocks across firms.
Ideally, one would like to investigate the role of firm-level linkages in aggregate fluctuations using the insights of (E.1) and (E.2). Using these equations, it is possible to correlate
the magnitude of covariances at the firm-level to appropriate measures of linkages. Unfortunately, such firm-level measures of IO linkages are not available for France. Instead, we
use sectoral data on IO linkages as a proxy for the intensity of production networks. The
56

implicit assumption is that those sectoral measures of IO linkages are a good proxy for the
magnitude of interconnections between firms belonging to those sectors. Since the information is available at the level of each sector pair, we need to correlate them with measures
of the LIN K term that are also defined by sector pair.
Recall the definition of the LIN K term and write it as the sum over all sector pairs in
the economy:
X

LIN Kτ =

X

wgmτ −1 wf nτ −1 Cov(εgmt , εf nt ) =

i

g6=f,m6=n f,n

X X

LIN Kijτ =

XX

LIN Kijτ , where

j

wgmτ −1 wf nτ −1 Cov(εgmt , εf nt ),

g,m∈j f,n∈i

and Cov(εgmt , εf nt ) is defined by (E.1).
Assume that i) individual volatilities are homogeneous across firms: Var(af dt ) = σ 2 ∀ f ;
ii) the IO coefficients are homogeneous between firms within a sector: (1 − λf ) = (1 −
λi ) ∀ f ∈ i and ρf g = ρij ∀ f ∈ i, g ∈ j, and iii) Ξf dt ∩ Ξgdt is homogeneous between firms
within a sector pair. Then the LIN K term becomes

LIN Kijτ





X


ji
ik jk 
= wjmτ −1 winτ −1 σ (1 − θ) (1 − λj )ρ + (1 − λi )ρij +
(1 − λi )(1 − λj )ρ ρ  .
{z
}
|

First-order
|k
{z
}
2

2

Second-order

This expression thus motivates our approach in Section 4.3.2 of looking for a relationship
between the LIN Kτ term and the strength of IO linkages between the sectors.

Appendix F

Heterogeneous Response to Shocks at the Firm
Level

This appendix develops a variant of the model in Section 2 with variable markups. In
this more general framework, firms react heterogeneously to common shocks. When this
is the case, the firm-specific effect in the baseline estimation would capture not only the
impact on firm sales of idiosyncratic shocks but also the heterogeneous response of the
firm to sector-destination shocks. The model serves to motivate the alternative empirical
model (12), in which sector-destination shocks affect firm sales differently depending on
firm characteristics. The main results are robust to this alternative conceptual framework
and empirical model.

57

Consider the model in Section 2 that has Cobb-Douglas preferences over sectors and
CES preferences over varieties within a sector. As before, each firm faces the following
demand in market n:


pf nt −θ
ϕjnt Ynt
ωf nt
,
Cf nt =
Pjnt
Pjnt
where variables are defined in Section 2, and pf nt is the consumer price of firm f ’s product


in market n.
The baseline model assumes the standard “iceberg” multiplicative cost of delivering one
unit of the good to market n. Suppose instead, following Berman et al. (2012), that the
variable trade cost has two components, one multiplicative and one additive. The consumer
price in market n is then
pf nt = p̃f nt κjndt + ηjndt ,
where p̃f nt is the producer price, κjndt the multiplicative variable trade cost, and ηjndt the
additive variable trade cost.36 Both κjndt and ηjndt are assumed to be the same for all firms
within a sector selling goods to the same destination market.
A per-unit component of variable trade cost implies that, even under CES preferences,
individual markups are not homogeneous across firms. Namely, profit maximization leads
to the following producer price:
p̃f nt =

θ
mf nt af dt cjdt ,
θ−1

where
ηjndt
,
θκjndt af dt cjdt
is the variable component of markups. Importantly, this component is affected by sectoral
mf nt ≡ 1 +

cost movements (changes in cjdt ) as well as changes in variable trade costs (κjndt and ηjndt ).
Moreover, the elasticity of mf nt with respect to sector-destination shocks is heterogeneous
across firms, and depends on the individual productivity level (af dt ). Identical shocks can
thus have different effects on firms sales growth.
Conditional on selling to market n, (f.o.b.) sales by a French firm f (i.e., residing in
country d) to market n in period t are thus given by:
xf nt = p̃f nt Cf nt
= ωf nt

ϕjnt Ynt
(Pjnt )1−θ



θ
κjndt cjdt af dt
θ−1

36

1−θ 

mf nt
κjndt

1−θ 

pf nt
p̃f nt

−θ
.

(F.1)

The additive cost ηjndt can either be thought of as a distribution cost or a per-unit transportation cost.
When thinking of it as a distribution cost, it makes sense to assume this cost is paid using foreign labor.
This does not change the main results, but introduces an additional source of sector-destination shocks since
the optimal markup then depends on the destination market’s wage.

58

If we were to use (F.1) to write a decomposition of firm sales growth as a function of country,
sector-destination and firm-destination shocks as in (4):
γf nt = δnt + δjnt + εf nt ,
the firm-specific component would now be

εf nt = ∆ log ωf nt + (1 − θ)∆ log af dt + (1 − θ)∆ log mf nt − θ∆ log

p̃f nt
pf nt


,

The first two terms are firm-specific by construction, as before. However, the last two terms,


p̃ nt
, depend on sectoral shocks (and on the macro shocks if
(1 − θ)∆ log mf nt − θ∆ log pff nt
the distribution cost is paid in foreign labor). These terms capture firms’ heterogeneous
response to common shocks.
In particular, the impact of a sectoral cost shock on the firm-level sales is


p̃f nt
d
ln
pf nt
d ln xf nt
d ln mf nt
= (1 − θ) + (1 − θ)
−θ
d ln cjdt
d ln cjdt
d ln cjdt
d ln mf nt
−ηjndt
where
=
∈ [−1, 0]
d ln cjdt
θκjndt af nt cjdt + ηjndt


p̃


d ln pff nt
−ηjndt
d ln mf nt
nt
and
=
1+
<0
d ln cjdt
pf nt
d ln cjdt
The first term captures the direct effect of the shock on the firm’s marginal cost, which is
homogeneous across firms and captured in the δjnt term of equation (5). The second term,
which would be captured in εf nt , reflects the response of the firm’s markup to the shock.
When the cost of the input bundle increases, firms reduce their optimal markup, more so
the more productive they are. This markup adjustment tends to attenuate the effect of the
sectoral shock on sales of the more productive firms. Finally, the third term captures the
adjustment in the ratio of the consumer to the producer prices. The combined effect of the
cost shock and the markup adjustment on this ratio further attenuates the direct impact of
the sectoral shock.
From an econometric point of view, endogenous markup adjustments would induce a
negative correlation between the sector-destination fixed effects and the residual term of
equation (5). To control for this bias, we thus implement equation (12) that interacts the
sector-destination effect with a number of measures, many of which can be thought of as
proxies for firm productivity. Following the model laid out in this section, these interaction
terms are intended to capture the larger markup adjustment of the more productive firms
in response to sector-destination shocks.
59

Appendix References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “The
Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, September 2012, 80 (5),
1977–2016.
Andrews, Donald W. K., “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance
Matrix Estimation,” Econometrica, May 1991, 59 (3), 817–858.
Berman, Nicolas, Philippe Martin, and Thierry Mayer, “How do Different Exporters React
to Exchange Rate Changes? Theory, Empirics and Aggregate Implications,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 437–492.
Dehling, Herold and Martin Wendler, “Central Limit Theorem and the Bootstrap for U Statistics of Strongly Mixing Data,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, January 2010, 101
(1), 126–136.
Durrett, Richard, Probability: Theory and Examples, Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole – Thomson
Learning, 2005.
Feenstra, Robert, “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
American Economic Review, March 1994, 84 (1), 157–177.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, May 1987, 55
(3), 703–708.
White, Halbert, Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians, San Diego: Academic Press, 2001.

60

