                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FIRMS AND THE ECONOMICS OF SKILLED IMMIGRATION

                                         Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                          William R. Kerr
                                         William F. Lincoln

                                        Working Paper 20069
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20069


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2014




This paper is a revised version of a review prepared for the Innovation Policy and the Economy Forum,
April 2014. Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. We especially thank Daniel
Goroff and the Sloan Foundation for financial support for this project. We are also grateful to Ed Egan
and Rosana Lee for very helpful comments on the draft. The authors were paid an honorarium by the
NBER for the writing of this review. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Sari Pekkala Kerr, William R. Kerr, and William F. Lincoln. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms and the Economics of Skilled Immigration
Sari Pekkala Kerr, William R. Kerr, and William F. Lincoln
NBER Working Paper No. 20069
April 2014
JEL No. F15,F22,F23,J15,J31,J44,L14,L26,O31,O32,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

Firms play a central role in the selection, sponsorship, and employment of skilled immigrants entering
the United States for work through programs like the H-1B visa. This role has not been widely recognized
in the literature, and the data to better understand it have only recently become available. This chapter
discusses the evidence that has been assembled to date in understanding the impact of high skilled
immigration from the perspective of the firm and the open areas that call for more research. Since
much of the U.S. immigration process for skilled workers rests in the hands of employer firms, a stronger
understanding of these implications is essential for future policy analysis, particularly for issues relating
to fostering innovation.


Sari Pekkala Kerr                                     William F. Lincoln
Wellesley College                                     School of Advanced International Studies
106 Central Street                                    The Johns Hopkins University
Wellesley, MA 02481                                   1717 Massachusetts Ave NW, Suite 708
skerr3@wellesley.edu                                  Washington, DC 20036
                                                      wlincoln@jhu.edu
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

        Listening to the public discourse on skilled immigration, one might reasonably expect
that economists who are studying the issue would be highly focused on the role of firms. For
example, Bill Gates has framed his push for more H-1B worker visas (the largest visa program
for skilled immigration to the United States, described further below) in terms of his experiences
at Microsoft. In 2007 Congressional testimony, he noted “I personally witness the ill effects of
these (H-1B) policies on an almost daily basis at Microsoft.” Gates has further stated that
Microsoft hires four additional employees to support each H-1B worker hired. Policy briefs like
those of the National Foundation for American Policy (2008, 2010) suggest even higher levels of
job creation. Over the last year, Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and other high-tech executives
have strongly advocated for higher admissions of skilled immigrants by arguing that these
workers are essential for the competitiveness, growth, and innovation of their firms. These
advocates have even gone so far as to use the phrase “national suicide” to describe the United
States’ limited admission of skilled migrants.

         Critics of skilled immigration come to a very different policy conclusion, but they also
often present their arguments in the context of firms. Matloff (2003) argues that the principal use
of the H-1B program by high-tech companies is to minimize their internal labor costs. He argues
that these businesses hire skilled immigrants to displace older citizen workers with high salaries
and presents case studies about displacement within individual firms. Hira (2010) decries
instances where Americans are tasked with training the H-1B workers who will be taking over
their own jobs. A popular press commentary from Milton Friedman, winner of the 1976 Nobel
Prize in economics, similarly notes the role of firms: “There is no doubt that the (H-1B) program
is a benefit to their employers, enabling them to get workers at a lower wage, and to that extent,
it is a subsidy” (ComputerWorld 2002).

        To date, economists have paid little attention to the role of firms in understanding the
impacts of skilled immigration. As we describe below, the prior literature has traditionally
studied these issues using frameworks and empirical approaches that were developed for general
migration. These borrowed approaches were conceived, however, for settings quite different
from those of skilled immigration. In particular, firms play a central role in the immigration of
skilled workers to the United States. For firm-sponsored programs like the H-1B visa, it is
essential that we trace through firms’ role in each step: lobbying about the number of visas to be
granted, identifying which firms pursue visas and for what occupations, the employment and
wage conditions of skilled migrants in these firms, how this resource affects other employment
relationships within the firm and the innovation outcomes of firms, and similar questions.

       This chapter reviews the progress that has been made so far on understanding the impacts
of high skilled immigration from the perspective of the firm. The next section reviews some of
                                                    2
the most important programs for these workers that involve firms. The admission of these
workers is of deep importance to the United States, particularly with respect to fostering
innovation. In 2008, immigrants represented 16% of the U.S. workforce with a bachelor's
education and they accounted for 29% of growth of this group during the 1995-2008 period. In
occupations closely linked to innovation and technology commercialization, the share of
immigrants is even higher at almost 24%. At the PhD level, the shares hover at 50%. Firms,
especially large and high-tech firms, have played a central role in this growth through their
sponsorship of visas and effective selection of foreign workers. In fact, the structure of one of the
most important skilled immigration programs is designed to allow firms to select the workers
that they want to hire, rather than having these employees selected by the U.S. government.

       Section 3 discusses in greater detail why an understanding of the economics of the firm is
important. We start by describing how many of the traditional approaches for quantifying
immigration’s consequences (e.g., local area studies) can fail to capture the decision making of
businesses (e.g., Microsoft makes employment decisions over many local areas, and even
countries, at once). We emphasize the important degree to which firms internalize substitutions
and complementarities over different worker groups and occupations. In fact, some of the key
arguments made about skilled immigration cannot be analyzed without departing from traditional
frameworks of labor markets and focusing instead more specifically on firms. We further
describe how the nature of the employer-employee relationship within firms can impact
decisions.

        Section 4 surveys recent academic work about firms and skilled immigration. This
section is unfortunately small relative to its importance. We are able to note several key features
on the work that has been done to date, however. First, growth in the employment of skilled
immigrants is connected with greater overall firm employment. This growth, however, differs
across worker groups in important ways (e.g., favoring younger natives over older natives,
favoring complementary occupations). Technological development increases as the firms employ
more workers undertaking invention. Subsequently, these migrants influence the global
operations of their employers (e.g., shifting foreign direct investment towards their home
countries). Not surprisingly, firms seek to influence these admissions through lobbying efforts.
As discussed below in Section 4, however, entry costs into lobbying mean that the lobbying
firms only imperfectly represent the full preferences of firms.

        Sections 5 and 6 then describe important areas for future research from both
microeconomic and macroeconomic perspectives, respectively. On the micro side, we highlight
the need for greater clarity in understanding the heterogeneity in firm employment choices (e.g.,
team composition, occupational distributions), a more comprehensive depiction of global HR
practices of firms, increased inquiry into the implications of tied employee-employer
relationships (e.g., wages, training, project staffing choices), and a better understanding of how
                                                     3
variation across institutions in visa access influences collaboration (e.g., firm-university, large-
small firm). From a macroeconomic perspective, we describe the need for richer general
equilibrium models that embed firm choices and dynamics. Such models will provide better
guidance on the growth implications of skilled immigration to the United States and the possible
impacts from alternative policies (e.g., adjusting the H-1B cap, auctioning off visas). In addition,
we discuss the need for a better understanding of how immigration affects reallocation across
firms and its related contribution to aggregate productivity growth.

       The final section concludes with a review of the current state of research in this area and
examples of where data development is most needed. We encourage work on several steps—
from the simple merger of public data onto internal government research databases, to the more
complex collection and integration of better data on the H-1B visa program into employer-
employee files. Recent research has made progress on some of these questions, but we have only
begun to develop our understanding of the answers.



2. U.S. Skilled Immigration Programs and Firms

        This section first describes some of the major visa programs that involve firms. We then
discuss the disproportionate influence of large firms in employing these immigrants. We close
with a discussion of foreign firms and their use of the visas.



Overview of H-1B and L-1 Visas and the Role of Firms

        Several programs for skilled immigrants directly involve firms. For much of the chapter
we will focus on the H-1B visa, which is used for most temporary admissions of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workers. It allows companies in the United
States to seek short-term help from employees in “specialty occupations”, that is, positions that
require specialized knowledge like engineering or accounting. Almost all holders of this visa
have a college degree and typically about half have completed a graduate degree. Many also
work in information technology and STEM, which accounted for over 70% of all successful visa
applications in the 2012 fiscal year. India and China accounted for over 70% of recipients for the
2012 fiscal year.1 This share has increased since a decade ago, when the figure was closer to
50%.


        1
          See the publications submitted annually by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
(USCIS) to Congress, “Characteristics of Specialty Occupation Workers”.

                                                        4
        Firms are central to the employment of H-1B workers. They must apply for a particular
individual and these employees are tied to the company for the length of their visa. The initial
length of the visa is for three years and it can be extended for another three years, for a total of
six years altogether. In some cases, an application by the firm for the permanent residency of its
employee further lengthens the time duration. Legal and application fees are substantial; for a
firm with 26 or more full-time employees in 2008 the application fee alone was $2,320. It is
important to note that there is no pricing mechanism that allocates visas over firms, but they are
instead distributed in a first-come-first-served fashion up to the regulated cap or by lottery in
special cases.

        Firms are required by law to pay H-1B workers the higher of two different wage levels:
(i) the “prevailing wage” in the company for the particular job in question or (ii) the prevailing
wage for the occupation in the geographic region where the person is employed. The rationale
often given for these restrictions is that they are intended to help protect domestic worker wages
and discourage employers from abusing their relationships with foreign workers. Additionally, if
a certain proportion of a firm’s workforce is comprised of H-1B visa holders (15% for firms with
50 or more employees), the firm must make a good faith effort to hire a U.S. citizen worker for
the position and must not displace Americans who are similarly employed.

        The H-1B has also been one of the most controversial immigration programs for firms.
There has been an annual limit for the number of H-1B visas that can be allotted to private sector
businesses since the Immigration Act of 1990. Notably, family members of the worker can
immigrate with her or him and do not count against the cap. Visa renewals after three years also
do not count against the cap. Although the policies surrounding the program have not changed
significantly since this time, one thing that has changed is this limit. The cap is fixed through a
political bargaining process and set by the Congress and the President. Visas are allocated until
the cap runs out, and there are neither market prices nor an auction system to determine which
firms get to hire skilled workers under a work visa if demand outstrips supply.

        Figure 1a plots the trajectory of the limit using data from the USCIS. The initial level was
set at 65,000 visas and stayed there for much of the 1990s, when the cap was rarely reached. The
cap was increased by the American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act of 1998
and the American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000, up to a maximum
of 195,000 visas. In the wake of a downturn in the information technology sector in the early
2000s and the events of September 11, 2001, however, these short-term increases were allowed
to expire in 2004. The limit reverted back to its initial level of 65,000 visas. It was subsequently
raised by 20,000 through an advanced degree exemption in 2006 but has not been changed since
despite demand far exceeding supply in many years.



                                                     5
        Figure 1b plots the number of months taken to reach the H-1B cap for fiscal years since
2000. The cap was reached in every fiscal year since 1997 except 2002 and 2003. In some years,
the cap is reached very rapidly once the government begins accepting applications. In other
years, ten or more months pass before the cap is reached. This speed to reaching the cap is the
best proxy for the demand for the visas relative to the regulated supply and the fluctuations in
this balance over time. (Exact demand is otherwise unknown given that applications for the visas
are not accepted after the cap is reached and firms wait for the next fiscal year.)

        The history of legislation behind changes in the cap is informative about the political
economy of skilled immigration and its relationship to that of low-skilled immigration (Kerr,
Lincoln, and Mishra 2014). From the program’s creation in 1990 to the expiration of legislation
in 2004, firms had been quite successful in their prior lobbying efforts. The cap was not binding
until 1997 and within the first year that demand hit this limit it was doubled by legislation that
passed with more than two-thirds support from both Houses of Congress. The next bill to raise
the limit followed two years later and was passed on a 96-1 tally in the Senate and a voice vote in
the House of Representatives. Crucially, however, these pieces of legislation did not significantly
change policy with respect to low-skilled immigration.

        Although advocates of high admissions levels did manage to pass the H-1B Reform Act
in 2004, reform efforts since have not gained significant traction. This has partly been the result
of the fact that leaders in Congress began to bundle legislation on skilled immigration with that
on low-skilled immigration into comprehensive immigration reform. This political situation was
unexpected in 2003 when visa demand failed to reach the cap, but it has caused significant
controversy since. The cap has been binding in every year since 2004. In some recent years
(including the 2014 and 2015 Fiscal Years), the visa demand exceeded the annual supply in the
first week that the visas were available. In these cases, a lottery system is used to allocate the
visas to firms.

        While its provisions about the maximum number of visas allotted have expired, one
important provision of the American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000
that has remained in effect is that it exempted universities, government research labs, and certain
non-profits from the cap altogether. This exemption has been a significant piece of innovation
policy and has only become more important since 2004 as the overall cap has been reached
regularly. Recent policy proposals have followed in this vein. For example, the immigration
reform proposal unveiled by the Obama administration in 2013 called for “stapling” green cards
to the diplomas of foreign students graduating with master’s and Ph.D. degrees from American
universities. This type of reform has been a part of other policy proposals as well.

      Although arguably not as important, a few other visas are used by firms to hire skilled
immigrants as well. One is the L-1 visa, which is used by multinationals to transfer their

                                                    6
employees to the United States from foreign divisions. Holders of this visa must have worked for
the firm abroad for at least one year and typically hold a college degree or the equivalent.
Canadian and Mexican citizens may come to the United States on the TN visa, which was
created under the North American Free Trade Agreement. These workers must have a job offer
with a firm in the United States before applying and are restricted to working in a certain set of
occupations that typically require a bachelor’s degree. The O visa for workers of extraordinary
ability is used even less often than either of these visas, but given its nature also likely has had
significant impacts on firm performance and technological development. Hunt (2011) provides a
useful extended discussion of the different kinds of visa categories and their characteristics.

        Firms play a significant role in sponsoring permanent residency in the United States for
their employees once they have come on a temporary visa. The H-1B, L-1, and O visas are all
“dual intent” in that workers can use them both as a means of obtaining short-term employment
in the United States while also intending to ultimately immigrate permanently. This feature
accounts for part of the significant attractiveness of these visas, particularly the H-1B. The TN
visa is not a dual intent visa, meaning that holders must show at the time of initial application
and at each visa renewal that they do not intend to immigrate to the United States.



Large Firms and Their Disproportionate Share of Skilled Immigration

        While the figures released by the USCIS on the employment of skilled immigrants by
particular firms are very limited, we do have some sense of the role of particular firms in
employing H-1B workers. The Department of Labor (DOL) makes micro-records on all Labor
Condition Applications (LCAs) publicly available starting in 2001. These applications are a first
step towards obtaining an H-1B and are intended to show that the potential worker will be
employed in a manner following U.S. law. If this application is approved the final step is to file a
petition with the USCIS, which makes the ultimate determination on the application. Micro-
records on LCAs received by the DOL include fields such as firm name and proposed location of
employment.

        One of the most notable features of these data is the large skewness in the demand for
visas across firms. A large and growing literature has focused on the skewness of the firm size
distribution and its consequences for business cycle fluctuations and the international
transmission of shocks (e.g., Axtell 2001, Gabaix 2011, di Giovanni and Levchenko 2012).
Analyses of the distribution of demand for skilled immigrants across firms, however, have
largely been lacking in the literature. This skewness has the potential to be of significant
importance in how fluctuations in the stock of skilled immigrants affect firms and aggregate
outcomes. It is also the case that shocks to a relatively small subset of firms could

                                                     7
disproportionately affect visa demand. Indeed, this is what happened in the early 2000s when the
information technology sector went through difficult times and demand for H-1B visas did not
reach the cap.

         One of the challenges in working with the LCA data is that there are no consistent firm
identifiers in the records; information must be paired with other firm outcomes using name
matching approaches. In order to make some progress in understanding these issues, we
developed a panel of 171 firms over 2001-2006. Our criteria for including firms includes being
publicly traded, appearing in the Compustat database in all six years, being headquartered in the
United States, and accounting for at least 0.05% of all U.S. patents developed domestically.
Consistent with the literature on firm size distribution, this panel accounts for more than $3
trillion in annual revenues. Kerr, Lincoln, and Mishra (2014) provide greater details on the
construction of this sample.

        Table 1 lists the top twelve firms in the sample in terms of the sum of their LCAs in
2001-2006 as well as the same list in terms of H-1B approvals for 2012, obtained from
ComputerWorld magazine. High-tech firms dominate the first list, with Microsoft, IBM, and
Oracle accounting for the largest number of applications. Microsoft’s large role mirrors that
found in Kerr, Lincoln, and Mishra (2014) in terms of the skewness of lobbying expenditures
across firms. Some firms outside of the information technology sector also appear on the list,
including General Electric and Motorola. These twelve firms accounted for 56% of all LCA
applications in our sample of 171 firms. Looking at this list across years, there is some shuffling
but there is generally stability in the set of top firms. Considering the within-firm correlation in
LCAs across years for the whole sample, the correlation is 88%. The second list also exhibits
skewness in visa demand. The shift towards companies from India is immediately apparent,
while the information technology sector still clearly plays an important role.

        In order to get a larger picture of firm visa demand, in Figure 2 we plot the entire
distribution of LCAs applied for over 2001-2006 across the firms in our sample. The skewness of
the distribution is immediately apparent. This is true even despite the fact that our sample is
concentrated amongst some of the largest firms in the U.S. economy in terms of sales, suggesting
that the larger distribution across all firms is even more skewed than that depicted here. Each
observation represents the total applications over the sample period for a given firm, which is
indicated on the vertical axis. Firms in the first column of Table 1 account for the top end of the
distribution and there is a long tail of firms that have relatively little visa demand.

         A natural question is how this skewness in the distribution of demand for skilled workers
relates to the firm size distribution. Although there is significant variation in this relationship, we
find a close association between the demand for foreign workers and firm size. In Figure 3 we
plot the logarithm of total LCA applications against the logarithm of firm average sales over

                                                      8
2001-2006. Each point represents an observation for each firm LCA-sales pair. For the two firms
in the sample with no LCAs, we add one to the total, so that the logarithm is zero. There is a
clear positive relationship between the two measures; a simple regression yields a slope
coefficient of 0.43 with a standard error of 0.05.



Indian Firms and the H-1B Visa

         One of the most notable differences between the two lists in Table 1 is the increasing
importance in recent years of firms from India such as Tata, Infosys, and Wipro. Although based
in New Jersey, Cognizant also has strong ties to India. Citizens from India account for more H-
1B visas than any other country by a significant margin (64% of new issuances in fiscal year
2012) and this share has grown in recent years. Several high profile Indian firms have used it to
facilitate their work in outsourcing. This has led to significant criticism of the program in the
public debate, especially since it was not tied to the original intent of the program.

        Clemens (2013) studies the wages of workers who obtain H-1B visas within one
particular large Indian multinational in the software industry. He exploits the lottery system that
was established by the USCIS to allocate visas to workers when the number of applications
rapidly exceeds the cap. The study then follows the winners and losers of the visa lottery in the
personnel records of the firm. The setting is attractive in that there are very low barriers to trade
and technology transfer across countries in the sector that the firm belongs to. The results are
striking, indicating that moving to the United States leads to a six-fold increase in wages for
workers who received the visa relative to those who did not.

        The phenomenon of foreign firms and their use of immigration visas is worthy of further
research and policy consideration given how the U.S. immigration process allows foreign firms
to use access to visas as a business model, and we hope that work continues in this vein. The
core issues that we discuss in the remaining sections, however, are focused exclusively on U.S.
firms and their relationships to the skilled immigration process. Independent of policy
considerations with respect to foreign firms, the central role of U.S. firms in skilled immigration
deserves direct attention.



3. Introducing the Firm

        As explained above, this chapter focuses on how the hiring of skilled immigrants affects
firms, and what role the firms have in determining who will migrate into the United States. This
focus on individual producers, while rare, is very important as there are many reasons why the
                                                     9
economics of the firm could (and do) matter in the case of skilled immigration. Moreover, the
efficiency of firms in production is a central element of social welfare calculations. Here we
contrast the firm-based research approach with the existing academic literature and point out
areas where further knowledge on the role of firms would be crucial in deriving novel
conclusions.

        In the academic literature there is very little tradition for considering the role of firms in
analyses of immigration. Instead, economists have approached the study of the issue through the
framework of shifts in the supply of workers to a labor market. Firms provide the underlying
demand for workers in traditional labor supply and demand analysis, but the approach abstracts
from the role of firms in the selection of immigrants. The most important question in the
traditional approach is typically related to what constitutes the appropriate labor market. Below
we explain the common approaches that prior empirical work has taken for defining the labor
market, highlight certain skilled immigration studies that follow each approach, and describe
how the perspective of a firm may be captured or not.

        Many seminal studies defined labor markets as local areas such as cities or states (e.g.,
Card 2001). The idea is that immigrants enter a local labor market and compete with natives and
prior immigrants for job opportunities. Firms may react to the potentially increased labor supply
by adjusting wages and/or employment levels. Empirical research then seeks to measure the
average effects across all workers or some specific population groups like the native workers.
Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), and Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2013)
are recent examples of this approach with respect to skilled immigration. To the extent that a
firm makes employment choices within a single local area, either because the firm is relatively
small or because its local units are operating autonomously, then the behavior of the city at large
may be reflective of the underlying firms. The fact that large firms typically extend across
multiple geographic areas and that firms operating in a labor market are usually rather
heterogeneous are complications that the local area studies cannot address. The global nature of
the employment decisions for the large firms exacerbates the issue.

        Another approach uses a national labor market among workers with similar education and
age/experience profiles, and implicitly assumes that firms may recruit workers from a broader
area (e.g., Borjas 2003). This approach would suggest that the employment opportunities for a
25-year old American with a bachelor’s degree in Boston depend most upon immigration of
other 25-year olds with bachelor’s degrees, regardless of where they are located in the United
States, rather than other age or education groups within Boston itself. While it is plausible that
the labor market for skilled workers is national in spatial scope, this approach has not been used
for analyzing skilled immigration. The reason is that the highest education group in the age-
education framework is typically a bachelor's degree or greater—a level that most skilled
immigration studies would take as the minimum requirement for defining skilled workers. The
                                                     10
age-education framework also does not capture elements of firm-level hiring decisions given that
firms optimize over their entire wage bill, internalizing any potential complementarities across
worker groups.

        A related approach, which is more specific to a particular institutional setting but also
important for the analysis of skilled immigration, considers labor markets to be highly
specialized fields of study or expertise (e.g., Friedberg 2001). Recent examples related to skilled
immigration include Borjas and Doran’s (2012) study of the migration of Russian
mathematicians following the Soviet Union’s collapse and Moser, Voena and Waldinger’s
(2014) study of Jewish scientists expelled from Nazi Germany. While these studies partially
capture some elements of the economics of firms, there are also important differences with firm
level analyses. For example, the Borjas and Doran (2012) study takes place within the math
departments of U.S. universities that have more limited scope for overall personnel growth
(unlike firms) and mostly lack complementary inputs. Large U.S. firms engaged in global
competition frequently suggest that the skilled immigrants they seek to hire are a necessary input
required to grow the firm. This view suggests that skilled immigrants possess complementarities
with domestic workers that can unlock greater growth opportunities. Moreover, firms tend to
have greater flexibility than public or other institutions in the speed with which they can adjust
their scale of operation and their worker composition, suggesting that their responses to the
increased supply of skilled labor may be very different from those observed across typical
university departments.

        While the approach based upon labor markets and labor supply is a useful framework for
low-skilled immigration, it seems rather incomplete for skilled immigration. First, the structure
of many skilled immigrant admissions (e.g., the H-1B visa) is designed in part to allow
companies to select the skilled workers that they wish to hire, rather than migrants being selected
by the U.S. government based on a points system or similar approach. Indeed, in order to hire a
worker with an H-1B visa, a firm has to first locate that worker (abroad or already in the United
States on another visa), file the LCA with the DOL, file for the actual H-1B visa with the USCIS,
pay for associated filing and legal fees, and similar tasks.

        Thus, firms play a central role when the annual admissions of skilled immigrants into the
United States are determined. Without firm-level data it is impossible to disentangle the role of
firms in determining these admissions or the effect of the admissions on the businesses
themselves. A firm-level analysis also allows us to account for other kinds of heterogeneity that
are not captured with other approaches. This is especially important since firms hold specific
assets that are often instrumental in determining employment outcomes and their organizational
structures more generally. When there are complementary inputs (as might be the case with, for
example, skilled and low-skilled labor), firms will be able to internalize these complementarities


                                                    11
and capture opportunities for enhanced productivity, learning, and the development of entirely
new capabilities.

        The U.S. visa system for skilled immigrants also possesses certain non-market features
that make a firm-level analysis more interesting and appropriate. Examples noted above are the
non-priced nature of the visas, the allocation on a first-come-first-served basis, and the regulated
cap. Second, immigrant workers sponsored on an H-1B visa are effectively tied to the firm that
employs them. The visa is granted for employment by a specific worker at a particular company
and location. This structure provides some compensation to the firm for having identified and
recruited the worker. The structure additionally creates an asymmetry in the bargaining power
between the company and the worker, as the employee cannot easily leave the firm during the
3+3 year duration of the visa. Firms can also sponsor permanent residency (a green card) for
their H-1B workers, which can further tie employees and firms together. The green card process
can take up to ten years depending on the person’s country of origin, although there have been
recent legislative efforts to reduce this imbalance across worker nationalities. It has often been
argued that firms may utilize this asymmetry by employing the H-1B workers at a lower wage
than they would pay comparable native workers. We discuss empirical work on this issue below.

       The outcome of these and other features of the visa system is to place firms in the center
of the skilled immigration process. At many points, the economics of firms can dramatically
shape the structure of U.S. immigration (and indeed the system is partly designed to have this
characteristic). As an example, the bullets below provide some assembled data on the share of
new H-1B visa issuances going to workers from India or computer related occupations (India
accounts for the lion’s share of this type of worker):

              1995: India ~20%, Computer 25%
              1998: India ~45%, Computer 57%
              2002: India 28%, Computer 28%
              2008: India 57%, Computer 53%
              2012: India 64%, Computer 70+%

There is an exceptional set of fluctuations in terms of the H-1B program’s composition. These
shares for computer-related occupations increased during the information technology boom of
the 1990s, only to retract during the tech recession in 2002. The shares then expanded back in
2008 and have further strengthened in recent years. This flexibility has its advantages and
potential drawbacks that we discuss later, but the key point to make here is its dependency on
firm demand. Temporal shifts in firm and industry demands affected over 25%-30% of the visa
allocation in terms of countries of origin and occupation. A system of allocating visas on a first-


                                                    12
come-first-served basis without restrictions regarding the composition of visas to be distributed
will always possess these characteristics.



4. Existing Literature

       This section describes some of the recent empirical work regarding firms and skilled
immigration. Most of the focus is on the United States, although some complementary work
outside of the United States is mentioned. These studies represent only the beginning of what we
think has the potential to be a fruitful line of research.



Employment Structures of Firms

        The introduction to this chapter describes several arguments that have been made about
how firms utilize skilled immigration. One recent study that looks at the role of specific firms
and evaluates the effects of skilled immigration on those firms is the study of Kerr, Kerr, and
Lincoln (2013). This paper uses quarterly employee-level data from the largest U.S. employers
and patenting firms derived from a large administrative government database (the Longitudinal
Employer Household Database, or LEHD). The study finds rising overall employment of all
skilled workers with increased skilled immigrant employment by the firm. In other words,
increasing the number of skilled immigrants appears to lead to an increase in the overall size of
the firm, even after accounting for endogeneity and other concerns.

        Beyond this general increase, the empirical results show substantial differences across
different types of workers. Employment expansion following young skilled immigration into the
firm is greater for young natives than their older counterparts. Employment of older natives does
not decline in absolute number, but the associated growth of this group is substantially smaller
compared to other employment categories. The study also looks at employee departures from
firms to evaluate whether there is evidence for worker displacement. It finds that departure rates
for older workers relative to younger workers are the highest for those in STEM occupations.
The study argues that these occupations are especially prone to this age-related effect due to the
higher rates of substitution over age categories possible in these professions. That is, it is easier
for firms to switch between computer programmers of different ages than among managers of
different ages. This can be due to diverse factors ranging from types of education to occupational
structures (e.g., occupations with strong union membership have lower substitution capacity over
ages). Kerr and Kerr (2013) further examine what happens to the STEM workers that leave firms
when the skilled immigrant worker pool is expanding and show that these domestic workers

                                                     13
leaving tend to fare worse in terms of their future employment and earnings than do those who
leave under different conditions.

        A recent set of papers have begun to focus on the employee characteristics of firms and
where immigrants tend to work. Using the LEHD employer-employee data from the U.S.
Census, Andersson et al. (2010) find that, relative to natives, immigrants are more likely to have
coworkers that are immigrants. This is particularly true in terms of having coworkers from their
countries of origin, and language considerations seem to play a large role. Using data from
Sweden, Åslund, Hensvik, and Skans (2013) similarly find that managers who are immigrants
tend to hire immigrants more relative to native managers.



Wage Rates Paid to Immigrants

        Beyond employment outcomes, wages conditions are also of central concern. This is true
for the immigrants themselves given the tied employer-employee relationship under the H-1B
visa. The worry here is that the wages of migrants will be squeezed due to the asymmetric
bargaining power of the firm compared to the worker. Concern also exists about guarding against
the hiring of immigrants being used to suppress the wages paid to American workers. The H-1B
program in particular features the “prevailing wage requirement” discussed above. The efficacy
of this requirement is often debated (e.g., firms could classify a superstar programmer as a
“Software Programmer” and thereby pay a lower effective wage), but the intent behind it is clear.

        Several studies estimate the potential H-1B pay differential by comparing the wages of
H-1B workers to comparable natives and attempting to control for the traits of the workers.2
These studies provide a range of estimates from a 20% underpayment of H-1B workers to an
overpayment of several percentage points. It is quite hard to rationalize why H-1B workers
would be compensated more than comparable natives, but one could also view these latter
studies as finding no wage gaps. A rough reading of this work might suggest a 5% differential is
the central tendency of the estimates. Regardless, these comparisons across groups face a range
of difficult econometric concerns: differing sample compositions, unobserved attributes of
workers such as non-cognitive skills, incomplete compensation information, and similar. As
such, they are informative, especially taken as a whole to observe the range of outcomes
estimated, but not conclusive.



        2
         Studies of the impact of H-1Bs on wages include Lowell (2001), Zavodny (2003), Matloff (2003, 2004),
Kirkegaard (2005), Miano (2005), Tambe and Hitt (2009), Mithas and Lucas (2010), Hunt (2011), and Lofstrom and
Hayes (2011).

                                                         14
        A related approach attempts to estimate pay differentials by comparing the wages of
immigrant workers with and without permanent residency. If permanent residency affords
migrants unrestricted job mobility and removes asymmetric bargaining power, wage adjustments
around the event can quantify any underpayment for the migrants. As a recent example,
Mukhopadhyay and Oxborrow (2012) use the New Immigrant Survey and compare immigrants
who arrive with a green card to those who upon arrival were waiting to have their status adjusted
to permanent residency. Using a differences-in-differences matching approach, they find a wage
increase of about 25% (or just under $12,000 per year) attributable to arriving with a green card.
The small sample size of the survey makes these conclusions tentative, but they are stronger than
cross-sectional comparisons. This paper additionally provides references to earlier work in this
vein. Chi and Drewianka (2014) also compare immigrants from Mexico and Puerto Rico who
marry a U.S. citizen born on the mainland to measure the change in their earnings when they
become eligible for a green card. They find green card earnings premiums of 30%-100%,
depending on the time since arrival. While interesting in its approach, it is unclear how well
these results extrapolate to countries that send the largest numbers of skilled immigrants into the
United States, such as China and India.

        These analyses get us closer to the conceptually best experiment of randomly providing
permanent residency to immigrant workers and observing wage changes. Analysis of wage
changes as workers obtain permanent residency is slightly less attractive, as it mainly reveals
potential underpayment for workers at this margin compared to the overall skilled immigrant
population on a temporary visa, but these estimates are nevertheless very useful. Studies utilizing
larger administrative data sets and richer comparison pools will continue to strengthen our
quantitative understanding of these issues.

       A third approach considers wage adjustments in local areas as immigration fluctuations
occur. Empirical evidence on this issue has been mixed and, given the unique institutional
aspects of the program such as the prevailing wage requirement, it is unclear that the same
conclusions would hold here as in the literature on general immigration. Kerr and Lincoln (2010)
and Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2013) find limited or positive effects on wages from higher levels of
H-1B admissions, consistent with positive productivity effects on firms. Bound, Braga, Golden,
and Khanna (2013) on the other hand find negative effects on wages in a calibrated model
discussed later. These studies do not consider firm-level data but attempt to inform this debate.

        Also using the LEHD, Rho (2013) studies the earnings assimilation of immigrants in the
United States. She finds that skilled immigrants do not experience relative increases in their
earnings as they live longer in the United States. Unskilled immigrants, in contrast, have lower
earnings relative to comparable natives when they arrive in the United States. Over the course of
her sample period, however, these individuals see significant gains, with increases in job tenure
being the most important factor.
                                                    15
Innovation Outcomes of Firms

       The recent literature has also begun to focus on the impact that skilled immigration has
on firm innovation and productivity. This link may initially seem tenuous, but immigrant STEM
workers play a significant role in technological development and commercialization in the
United States. We earlier noted the high shares of immigrants in STEM fields. This pattern is
growing, with Kerr and Lincoln (2010) finding that 67% of the total increases in STEM workers
1995-2008 were accounted for by immigrants.

        Much of the work around innovation has considered institutions other than firms. We
begin by discussing some of this background. Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Hunt and Gauthier-
Loiselle (2010), Peri (2012), and Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2013) provide evidence of the positive
connections between skilled immigration in a local area (either a city or state) and the
innovation/productivity outcomes of those regions. Chellaraj, Maskus, and Mattoo (2007), Stuen,
Mobarak, and Maskus (2012), and Gaulé and Piacentini (2013) document the disproportionate
contributions of foreign graduate students on innovation in the United States by field. Moser,
Voena, and Waldinger (2014) similarly find that the large inflow of Jewish German scientists
who fled the Nazi regime around 1933 had significant impacts on U.S. patenting in chemistry,
and they discuss how many of these scientists that were employed in U.S. firms.

        Turning to studies using firm-level data, Kerr and Lincoln (2010) find that firms that
employ many H-1B workers show higher rates of innovation when the program is expanded and
lower rates when it is contracted. Their estimates suggest that a 10% increase in H-1B
admissions is associated with a 3% higher growth in firm invention for each standard deviation
increase in dependency on H-1B workers. The effects are found to be especially large in the
computer sector, which accounts for a large portion of all H-1B admissions. This study utilizes
indirect inference in that it connects firm innovation outcomes and patenting to H-1B
dependency, but it does not observe the quantities of immigrants employed in the firm.

        In ongoing work Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln (2014) use the LEHD to further investigate this
relationship. They focus on a sample of 129 top patenting firms that are most affected by
immigration policy. They find that a 10% growth of firm employment of skilled immigrants is
associated with a 1-2% increase in total firm patenting. This growth is consistent with ethnic
innovation—for example, firms undergoing large increases in employment of Chinese
immigrants exhibit disproportionate growth in U.S. patenting by inventors with Chinese ethnic
names. There is little evidence of crowding out of domestic inventors, and the estimates point to
the fact that the increases in patenting are primarily driven by the immigrants themselves. These
findings are consistent with those of Kerr and Lincoln (2010), who did not have as detailed data

                                                  16
on employee characteristics. In both of these studies, the margin of impact is on the quantity of
innovation work conducted, rather than quality differences between immigrants and natives.
Hunt (2011, 2013) and Kerr (2013) further discuss this distinction.3



Global Connections of Firms

        The academic literature on global business exchanges has long noted the role of ethnic
networks in trade patterns (e.g., Rauch and Trindade 2002). Rauch (2001) and Keller (2004)
provide important reviews of this work. Migrants often retain an affinity for their home countries
and possess skills and knowledge that can be useful for conducting business in these places.
Recent research traces out how migrants can shape the economic activity of their employer firms
as part of this process.

        Saxenian, Motoyama, and Quan (2002) provide an influential survey of immigrant
scientists and engineers living in Silicon Valley, the majority of whom were employed in large
firms. These surveys, while not representative for all immigrants (or even for STEM immigrants
in Silicon Valley), offer some sense of the relative forms of these contributions. Over 80% of
Chinese and Indian immigrant STEM workers report exchanging technical information with their
respective nations, about 50% of immigrants in this survey report aiding the development of
contracts or business relationships between the United States and their home countries, and 18%
report investing in overseas business partnerships. These connections happen both within and
outside of firms. This study likely overstates the home-country exchanges of all immigrants, but
subsequent work has more systematically documented the qualitative findings with respect to
technology transfer (e.g., Kerr 2008, Agrawal et al. 2011, Oettl and Agrawal 2008).4

       Perhaps the best-documented evidence regarding within-firm effects pertains to how
immigrants shape the foreign direct investments (FDI) activities of their employer firms. Foley
and Kerr (2013) document this pattern with respect to ethnic inventors using firm-level data from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Their work emphasizes the role of ethnic inventors in the
United States for helping their employers develop R&D-based work abroad and enter into
foreign countries without the support of local joint venture partners. This is perhaps due to better

        3
           Related work has been done outside of the United States. Similar conclusions are drawn for Netherlands
(Parrotta, Pozzoli, and Pytlikova 2014, Ozgen, Nijkamp, and Poot 2011) and the United Kingdom (Nathan 2013).
Studies using cross-country variations in diversity and innovation include Alesina, Harnoss, and Rapoport (2013)
and Ashraf and Galor (2011).

        4
          Hovhannisyan and Keller (2010) look at specific business-related travel, and Docquier and Rapoport
(2012) provide a broad review of these issues.

                                                           17
knowledge of the home country. Foley and Kerr (2013) also provide a more extensive literature
set on both the trade and FDI channels. Kugler and Rapoport (2011) discuss the joint margins of
trade and FDI, and Saxenian (2006) provides case studies.

        Beyond trade and FDI, additional work considers the role of immigrants in the
outsourcing of work. One way that diasporas are thought to connect with their home country is
by facilitating these activities (with special emphasis often given to India). It is argued, for
example, that the U.S.-based members of an ethnic group can provide knowledge about
opportunities to their home countries, serve as reputational intermediaries, facilitate contracts,
and the like. Hira (2010) argues that this relationship is true, and moreover that the H-1B visa is
particularly used as a vehicle for outsourcing by bringing immigrants to the United States for
training in the jobs to be conducted overseas. There appears to be some truth to this claim, as the
top three H-1B applicants in 2013 for H-1B visas were Indian outsourcing firms, with Infosys
(#1) applying for three times more visas than Microsoft (#6). Beyond this high-profile approach
of dedicated outsourcing firms, the relationship becomes less clear. Using data from oDesk, the
world’s largest on-line platform for outsourcing, Ghani, Kerr, and Stanton (2013) find evidence
of ethnic Indians being more likely to send work to India when outsourcing jobs. These authors
also suggest, however, that the Indian diaspora’s role was likely modest in the overall rise of
India as the top outsourcing destination on oDesk.



Firm Lobbying for Immigration Policy

        While there is a significant literature on the political economy of immigration, there has
been little empirical work on the role of firms in lobbying for immigration. Direct measures of
political involvement by firms used to be primarily confined to information on firm or sector
contributions to Political Action Committees (PACs). These groups could be organized by firms
but they necessarily had to raise their funds from voluntary donations from individuals. It is often
difficult to identify the issues these organizations tried to promote. Until recently contributions
to PACs were also an order of magnitude smaller than the amounts that firms spent on lobbying.

        With the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1996, however, researchers now have had access to
direct measures of annual firm lobbying expenses and information on the issues for which they
lobbied. Kerr, Lincoln, and Mishra (2014) use these data to investigate the role of barriers to
entry in shaping firms’ lobbying efforts over time. After developing and estimating a model of
firm lobbying behavior that indicates the importance of barriers to entry in determining the
dynamics of firms’ lobbying efforts, they turn to analyzing a particular episode in immigration
policy—the 2004 expiration of legislation that dramatically decreased the number of available H-
1B visas to firms.

                                                    18
        They begin by documenting a positive relationship between whether the firm lobbied for
H-1B legislation and two key firm traits: (i) the number of a firm’s patents that were developed
by Chinese or Indian inventors and (ii) the number of LCAs that the firm applied for. The
authors find that lobbying activity is concentrated only amongst a relatively small set of very
large firms. Lobbying for skilled immigration is even rarer, being driven by a handful of key
players such as Microsoft. The study then finds a large shift towards lobbying for immigration
once the cap falls significantly in 2004. Crucially, however, this shift occurs almost entirely
amongst firms that were previously lobbying rather than new firms that entered the political
process. The work argues that barriers to entry in the political process explain why so few firms
lobby, and why the mix of firms lobbying with regard to skilled immigration does not fully
reflect all of the firms impacted by the issue.

        Facchini, Mayda, and Mishra (2011) have also investigated firms’ efforts to affect
immigration policies through lobbying. Combining sectoral information on expenditures on
lobbying for immigration with information on the number of temporary work visas awarded by
the U.S. government, they find that firms both favoring and opposing high levels of admissions
shape U.S. immigration policy. In sectors where business groups favoring immigration incur
greater lobbying expenditures, barriers to immigration are lower. The opposite turns out to be
true where labor unions play a larger role. While these two studies represent a start on studying
the political economy of firms and skilled immigration, much more could be done to deepen our
understanding of these issues.



Skilled Immigration and Entrepreneurship

        With respect to entrepreneurship, the contributions of immigrants are similarly large,
although exact estimates remain elusive. Saxenian (1999) finds that 24% of ventures in Silicon
Valley during the 1980s and 1990s were run by Chinese or Indian bosses. In a follow-up piece,
Wadhwa et al. (2007) find that immigrants started 25% of new high-tech companies with more
than one million dollars in sales in 2006. Some of the survey methodologies in these studies have
been criticized, but their results should remain roughly correct. A more important fact to bear in
mind is that these figures are calculated across companies where at least one immigrant played a
key role. Thus, by definition, the total contribution of immigrants is less than 25%. These
contributions are particularly strong in high-tech fields. In an advocacy piece, Anderson and
Platzer (2006) similarly find that immigrants represent 25% of founders of recent publicly-listed,
venture-capital-backed companies in the United States.

       These studies shine the spotlight on high-growth entrepreneurship. For many, this focus
is appropriate given the policy concern around fostering these entrepreneurs in particular. An

                                                   19
example of this is the Start-Up Visa Act currently being discussed in the United States to provide
easier admissions to immigrant entrepreneurs who are starting companies with high growth
potential. By contrast, adjustments in the H-1B program would likely have their greatest impact
on entrepreneurship in the medium-run as immigrants obtain permanent residency and leave
sponsoring firms to start their own companies. The extensive sample selection for these studies,
however, makes it harder to gauge the overall contributions of immigrants. Fairlee (2008)
considers a broader landscape by returning to nationally representative survey databases like the
Current Population Survey and the decennial Census. Fairlee finds that immigrants are about
30% more likely to start a business than non-immigrants, and their share of current business
ownership is on par with their population shares at 12%-13%. Equally important, Fairlee’s work
describes the extensive range of immigrant contributions. They play equally important roles in
low and high skill sectors, reflective of the great range of immigrants admitted to the United
States. More generally, many of the questions surrounding how skilled immigration affects
entrepreneurship can only be addressed using the lens of the firm.


5. Open Areas of Inquiry – Microeconomic Effects

       There are many open questions in this field of research, so we provide in this section
some thoughts about issues worthy of attention. We begin by focusing on microeconomic
analyses before turning to macroeconomic perspectives.



Heterogeneity in Firm Employment Choices

        The study of Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln (2013) provides some initial comparisons across
worker groups (young vs. old, immigrant vs. native) but it is fairly coarse in its distinctions.
Moreover, their study does not have access to occupational-level data for many workers. This
could be improved upon in two complementary ways. First, ongoing data development by the
U.S. Census Bureau is linking the decennial Census of Populations into the LEHD records. This
will provide a substantially richer set of information on worker traits for perhaps 15% of the
sample, enabling many new analyses. Second, some firms are beginning to open up their
employment records for researchers. Such information may provide a wealth of data that will
never be available with administrative records (e.g., reporting relationships). We hope that
several such studies emerge to let us see both the internal pictures of individual companies and
the larger patterns across the firms.

       Several issues are important for further study. First, Peri and Sparber (2011) consider the
potential shift of native educated workers across occupations in response to immigration inflows.
The authors find that immigrants with graduate degrees specialize in occupations demanding
                                                    20
quantitative and analytical skills, while native workers move into occupations requiring
interactive and communication skills. When the foreign-born proportion of highly educated
employment within an occupation rises, native employees with graduate degrees choose new
occupations with less analytical and more communicative content. In a quite different context,
Borjas and Doran (2013) also consider native mobility across mathematical sub-fields in
response to the Soviet influx. They demonstrate how native mathematicians shifted into fields
where the Soviet mathematicians were less active before the influx, especially those
mathematicians that were not superstars.

         Tracing out these potential complementarities and shifts across occupations within and
across firms is important for understanding the consequences of skilled immigration. Likewise, it
is intriguing to consider differences across skill levels and ethnic groups. For example, does an
influx of Hispanic skilled immigrants into a firm help low-skilled Hispanic immigrants already
in the firm? Does it lead to greater future hiring of low-skilled Hispanics?

        Given that the largest employers of skilled immigrants have multiple facilities, future
work on the expansion and contraction over locations within a firm is important. Several studies
particularly note the role of immigration in smoothing spatial differences or needs (e.g., Borjas
2001, Kerr 2010, Ruiz, Wilson, and Choudhury 2012). One line of work could consider the role
of skilled immigration in firm staffing versus drawing from local areas. Are they complements or
substitutes? A second line could consider the firm’s activities over locations—for example, in
periods of strong visa access, do firms systematically shift activity towards locations that
immigrants find most attractive for work?



Global HR Practices

       The above observations segue into a broader and important area of future inquiry. Many
immigrants are employed by large multinational organizations that have operations in many
countries. For these firms, the domestic and local considerations noted above are just one part of
the overall staffing choices made. It is essential that we begin to understand better the degree to
which the labor choices made by these global companies connect across countries. Such inquiries
could evaluate first whether the hiring of immigrants inside the United States is connected to
changes in foreign employment levels (and vice versa). Second, it would be beneficial to
understand better the internal labor markets within these firms across countries (e.g., Choudhury
2014). Programs like the H-1B and L-1 visas are used for intra-company transfers; thus, how
these decisions are embedded within the firm’s organization is important.

       A second area of interest relates to firm incentives to discover talent. Tervio (2009)
describes a dynamic inefficiency in the discovery of talent that can occur when competition for
                                                  21
workers reduces the benefits that firms can receive from new employment relationships. These
lower benefits in turn lead to less investment in finding new talent than what is socially optimal.
Guaranteed contract length in professional sports is one example of an effort to address this
issue. The tied employer-employee relationships embedded in the H-1B program can also be
seen in this light, as compensating firms for the costs incurred in the identification of a foreign
worker to bring to the United States by allowing a protected employment spell. This feature can
be controversial, however, and legislators have modified the rules governing visa portability over
time. By looking inside of firms, progress can be made towards understanding how important
these incentives for talent discovery are. Understanding this saliency would help guide policy
makers contemplating adjustments of this feature.



Implications of Tied Employer Relationships

        The previous section described research on whether tied employer-employee
relationships influence wages paid to immigrants by firms. Future work needs to consider other
outcomes that lock-in effects might influence. A first example is project selection for
immigrants. Many firms struggle when workers quit during the middle of an important project,
disrupting the workflow and developed tacit knowledge base of the project team. The tied
employer-employee relationship makes it far more difficult for a worker on an H-1B visa to
switch firms. This greater worker stability can be very valuable to the firm, perhaps leading to
the use of certain immigrant groups on long duration projects where this stability is an asset. This
issue could be ideally studied using project-level data with information on the success of the
project and the turnover of the team.

        A second example is training and worker investment. The literature on firm-sponsored
on-the-job training emphasizes that greater mobility of workers reduces the incentives of firms to
invest in their skills due to a lower expected return. Tied employer-employee relationships again
provide some stronger assurances to firms of the time horizons over which they could benefit
from trained workers. If it is also true that wages for immigrants on temporary visas adjust
imperfectly, the productivity gains to firms could easily outpace wage growth. Information on
firm-sponsored training across worker groups would allow investigation of this proposition.

        Within these and related questions, the way that the United States grants permanent
residency for employment-based applications provides a particularly advantageous way to
quantify effects. Limits exist for the number of employment-based green cards that go to a single
country in a given year. Most countries are well below these limits, while they are binding for
large countries like China, India, and the Philippines. As a consequence, the time required for a
temporary immigrant to obtain permanent residency can be several years longer for immigrants

                                                    22
from these large countries than for those from smaller countries. Recent legislation intends to
correct this imbalance going forward, but the past variation could be very useful for teasing out
these lock-in effects on various margins as long as information on country-of-origin is available.



Variation across Institutions in Visa Access

         A final area of microeconomic interest is to consider whether the differential access of
various institutions to immigration visas impacts the types of collaborations in the economy and
related industrial organization. The most prominent candidate is university-firm collaboration.
Since the H-1B visa reforms circa 2000, universities and non-profits have been exempt from the
H-1B visa cap on new issuances, unlike firms. It is an open question whether this differential
access has a material effect on the rate and types of collaborations formed when visa access is
restricted for firms (e.g., life sciences firms sponsoring post-doctoral research in nearby
universities).5 Likewise, several features of the immigration process lead to larger firms
employing disproportionate shares of temporary immigrants (e.g., returns to scale in visa
applications, greater stability in the employer-employee relationship). It is possible that such
features influence the local industrial organization and large-small firm dynamics.



6. Open Areas of Inquiry – Macroeconomic Effects

       Beyond these analyses, we need to increasingly develop a better understanding of the
general equilibrium effects of skilled immigration, with firms as a central element in this model.
We describe here a few particular potential research areas, amongst many other possibilities.



Visa Structure and Economic Outcomes

       Bound et al. (2013) provide a rare example of an equilibrium model of the skilled
immigration process. They use their calibrated model to analyze the employment and wage
adjustments of computer scientists across two tech booms. Their results suggest that the
substantial increase in immigration during the period of growth of the late 1990s, which was

        5
            On a similar note, Massachusetts Governor Deval Patrick recently announced a plan to use this
differential to create avenues for bringing H-1B workers to the state, “Massachusetts’ Clever Immigration Reform
Workaround”, http://management.fortune.cnn.com/2014/04/14/massachusetts-visas-immigration/, accessed April
15, 2014.

                                                          23
much larger in magnitude compared to the 1980s boom, led to less wage growth than what
would have otherwise occurred. This study provides one of the first integrated models to
consider the impact of skilled immigration on the economy. As the results of these types of
calibrated frameworks depend significantly upon the specified structure of the model, future
researchers may naturally want to adjust some aspects of their framework.

        In particular, we hope that future researchers build equilibrium models that include the
choices of firms. What appears especially relevant is the endogenous visa demand by different
types of businesses and the first-come-first-served basis of the program. A fleshed-out model
could provide a basis for understanding such diverse facts as the heavy uptake of the visa by
high-tech companies for STEM occupations, the differences across worker ages and occupations
in terms of impacts, and similar. Such a model could also allow for a comparison of alternative
allocation schemes (e.g., quotas on occupations or countries of origin, a pricing mechanism for
visas). These models would also begin to show the micro-macro connections of firm growth and
aggregate growth with, for example, potential emphasis on understanding innovation channels.



Competition over Countries for Skilled Immigrants

        The above model could just consider the United States economy by specifying for
simplicity an outside supply of immigrant workers for hire. The international competition for
talent would be beyond the scope of such a framework. Freeman (2006) discusses the worldwide
nature of these labor flows, and Stephan, Franzoni, and Scellato (2013) provide recent evidence
on academic location choices. We hope macroeconomic work begins in this global direction too,
although such a model would be very complicated (e.g., including game theoretic considerations
for firms). One potential element for such a model would be the choices by multinationals of
where to locate facilities. The developing micro-economic literature can provide some
foundation for an accurate portrayal of this dimension.



Immigration and Firm Reallocation

        One of the central ways in which the literature on international trade has benefitted from
a closer examination of the role of firms is in looking at how exports and imports affect
reallocation within an economy. This work was given theoretical foundations by the pioneering
models of Melitz (2003) and Bernard et al. (2003). For example, Pavcnik (2002) finds evidence
of gains in aggregate productivity from reallocation in response to greater exposure to import
competition that came from trade liberalization in Chile. The existing literature on skilled
immigration discussed above has made some progress in understanding how immigration affects
                                                    24
innovation and productivity at the city and state levels or for a select group of firms. With more
comprehensive information on firms in an economy, a fruitful line of research would be to better
understand how greater inflows of skilled immigrants affect firm market shares and aggregate
productivity. This could be through the entry of new firms or the exit of lower productivity firms
(e.g., Acemoglu et al. 2013). If skilled immigration does indeed have impacts on firm innovation
and the largest and most productive firms in the economy gain disproportionately from these
inflows (as would be suggested by the evidence above), this selection effect in particular has the
potential to be large. This would be another way in which skilled immigration could affect
aggregate productivity. That is, it could have an impact not only on within-firm outcomes but
also on aggregate outcomes due to reallocation effects. An investigation of such issues is only
possible with an approach that focuses squarely on the firm.



7. Conclusions

        Economists tend to pay close attention to the quantitative tools and empirical approaches
that they use for studying the economic impacts of policy choices. Over the last three decades an
important literature has developed a toolkit for considering the economic consequences of
immigration. Conflict and disagreements remain about which methodology should be applied for
studying a given circumstance or policy, but it is clear that these disagreements are conducted
with a well-developed understanding of the potential pitfalls and advantages of each approach. A
common language and frame of reference has been developed for these discussions, with most of
the disagreement focused on discerning the traits of the problem at hand as a guide to selecting
the right tool.

         As research on skilled immigration grew over the last decade, a natural starting point was
to utilize the existing methodologies that were developed for general immigration studies. The
major theme of this chapter is that this borrowed approach should not be the end point. Unlike
the study of migration more broadly, firms play an essential and active role in the skilled
immigration process. In fact, the structure of the most important skilled immigration program
allows firms to first choose the worker that they want to hire. The same is true for universities
and students, who often become the workers later hired by firms (e.g., Stephan and Levin 2001,
Stephan 2010). Given this policy framework, it will be particularly valuable to understand
exactly how these institutions choose to be a part of the immigration process, the role of the
immigrants in their sponsoring institutions, how these initial conditions persist for future
assimilation of the immigrant, and so on.

       Over the past decade, the academic literature on international trade has benefited deeply
from a greater consideration of the role of the firm—for example, understanding the role of fixed

                                                    25
costs and productivity thresholds for the firms choosing to engage in foreign exports (e.g., Melitz
2003), evaluating the link of internal resources and personnel for the firm to the export
destinations selected, and similar. These developments have enabled stronger economic
evaluations and policy counsel. Our hope is that the literature on skilled immigration can take a
similar step forward. Indeed, our conclusion is that greater adoption of recent tools from other
literatures that have considered firms in greater depth would be more valuable as a step forward
for the literature than further refinements of the toolkit used for broader migration studies.

        To facilitate this work, a great deal of firm-level information is essential—the appropriate
data and computing power needed to study these issues are orders of magnitude more complex
than those required to conduct a local area study. The development of new employer-employee
data offers great promise for expanding our understanding of the impacts of immigration from
both empirical and theoretical perspectives. Data sets like the LEHD from the U.S. Census
Bureau that indicate the immigration status of workers constitute powerful new platforms.
Access to these data sets is important for continued research, especially as we consider whether
and how to reform the U.S. immigration system. It is especially crucial that the existing
citizenship and country-of-origin information in these data sets are maintained and that links to
the decennial Census data on occupations and family structures are improved.

        Enormous investments have been placed into the development of these resources, and we
are just starting to see the returns from an academic perspective, with hopefully greater returns
with respect to policy to follow shortly. But we hope too that these current data development
efforts are expanded upon. Some important progress can be made with appropriate
authorizations. For example, linking LEHD employees to inventor records in the United States
Patent and Trademark database would provide a stronger foundation for studies of skilled
immigration and innovation.

         Another item that would be useful for empirical work involves linking existing data
together across government entities, which is admittedly difficult. For example, pilot studies
have shown the capabilities of linking the Census Bureau’s family of data sets with the foreign
affiliate records of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Such a link would provide a better picture
of aggregate firms and employment decisions. Multinational companies are the leading
employers of skilled migrants, and these firms often have a majority of their employees and
operations outside of the United States. To better understand the economics of the firm, we need
to understand this global footprint. This goes to such fundamental questions as whether greater
visa access leads multinational firms to keep more jobs in the United States. Recent high profile
cases have suggested that this may indeed be an important consequence of restricting skilled
immigration flows, such as the founding of a new Microsoft R&D center in Vancouver, Canada.
Using resources like Compustat to obtain worldwide sales on public firms offers a less-than-ideal


                                                    26
alternative in the short-term. As we have already collected much of the needed information to do
a comprehensive analysis, the fact that this has remained unfinished is a disappointment.

        The frontier for future research is the collection and integration of new sources of
information for research purposes, some of which is being currently collected for non-research
needs. These have the potential to be informative for important policy considerations, but we are
very far from this point today. For example, many policy makers want to know what the impact
of the H-1B visa program is on various aspects of the economy—the cap on H-1B issuances is a
specific policy variable that is frequently debated. It is difficult, however, to get information on
present and past H-1B holders. Multiple studies, including our own, would have benefited from
this type of information. As in the movie Field of Dreams, “if you build it, they will come.” A
coordinated effort to link past H-1B data to workers in the LEHD would be extremely valuable
and may serve to attract new economists to the study of these issues going forward. Further
inclusion of information on other visas (e.g., F-1, L), permanent residency, citizenship changes,
and so on would continue to expand and enrich the potential for research in this area. These
improvements would not simply be improvements in degree, but would constitute large steps
forward in what is possible. For example, using the lottery feature of the H-1B visa allocation in
recent years for causal inference would be a major step forward.

         With this call for additional research, we would like to close on a note of optimism.
Economists have made tremendous strides over the past decade in identifying important
unanswered questions about the impacts of skilled immigration, assembling and utilizing existing
data resources, and making early traction on empirical work. This research area is exciting,
productive, and becoming ever more so. It is also an area where policy choices are being actively
made, and economists can provide important inputs into these decisions. Existing studies provide
some guidance in current policy choices, and introducing this conceptual framework into the
literature in moving forward may be even more important.




                                                    27
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Nick Bloom, and William Kerr, “Innovation, Reallocation, and
         Growth”, NBER Working Paper (2013).
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, “Brain Drain or Brain Bank? The
         Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation”, Journal of Urban Economics 69
         (2011), 43-55.
Anderson, Stuart, and Machaela Platzer, “American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs and
         Professionals on U.S. Competitiveness”, National Venture Capital Associate Report (2006).
Andersson, Fredrik, Monica Garcia-Perez, John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin McCue, and Seth Sanders,
         “Workplace Concentration of Immigrants”, Working Paper 2010.
Åslund, Olof, Lena Hensvik, and Oskar Skans. “Seeking Similarity: How Immigrants and Natives
         Manage in the Labor Market”, Working Paper (2012).
Axtell, Robert, “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes”, Science 293 (2001), 1818-1820.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, “Plants and Productivity in
         International Trade”, American Economic Review 93:4 (2003), 1268-1290.
Borjas, George, “Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?”, Brookings Papers on
         Economic Activity 2001:1 (2001), 69-119.
Borjas, George, “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
         Immigration on the Labor Market”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:4 (2003), 1335-1374.
Borjas, George, and Kirk Doran, “The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity of American
         Mathematicians”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127:3 (2012), 1143-1203.
Borjas, George, and Kirk Doran, “Intellectual Mobility: Native Responses to Supply Shocks in the Space
         of Ideas”, Journal of Labor Economics (2013), forthcoming.
Bound, John, Breno Braga, Joseph Golden, and Gaurav Khanna, “Recruitment of Foreigners in the
         Market for Computer Scientists in the US”, Journal of Labor Economics (2013), forthcoming.
Card, David, “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
         Immigration”, Journal of Labor Economics 19:1 (2001), 22-64.
Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith Maskus, and Aaditya Mattoo, “The Contribution of Skilled Immigrations and
         International Graduate Students to U.S. Innovation”, Review of International Economics 16:3
         (2008), 444-462.
Chi, Miao, and Scott Drewianka, “How Much is a Green Card Worth? Evidence from Mexican and
         Puerto Rican Men Who Marry Women Born in the U.S.”, Working Paper (2014).
Choudhury, Prithwiraj, “Return Migration and Distributed R&D in Multinationals–A Study Using Micro
         Data”, Working Paper (2014).
Clemens, Michael, “Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston than Hyderabad? Evidence from
         Randomized Processing of U.S. Visas”, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings
         103:3 (2013), 198-202.
Docquier, Frederic, and Hillel Rapoport, “Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development”, Journal of
         Economic Literature 50:3 (2012), 681-730.
Facchini, Giovanni, Anna Maria Mayda, and Prachi Mishra, “Do Interest Groups Affect Immigration
         Policy?”, Journal of International Economics 85:1 (2011), 114–128.
Fairlee, Robert, “Estimating the Contribution of Immigrant Business Owners to the U.S. Economy”,
         Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy Report (2008).
Foley, Fritz, and William Kerr, “Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity”, Management
         Science 59:7 (2013), 1529-1544.
                                                     28
Freeman, Richard, “People Flows in Globalization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2 (2006), 145-
        170.
Friedberg, Rachel, “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market”, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 116:4 (2001), 1373-1408.
Gabaix, Xavier, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations”, Econometrica 79:3 (2011), 733-772.
Gaule, Patrick, and Mario Piacentini, “Chinese Graduate Students and U.S. Scientific Productivity”,
        Review of Economics and Statistics 95:2 (2013), 698-701.
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Christopher Stanton, “Diasporas and Outsourcing: Evidence from oDesk
        and India”, Management Science (2013), forthcoming.
di Giovanni, Julian, and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate
        Fluctuations in Granular Economies”, Journal of Political Economy 120:6 (2012), 1083-1132.
Hira, Ron, “The H-1B and L-1 Visa programs: Out of Control”, EPI Policy Paper (2010).
Hovhannisyan, Nune, and Wolfgang Keller, “International Business Travel: An Engine of Innovation?”,
        Working Paper (2010).
Hunt, Jennifer, “Which Immigrants are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions by Entry
        Visa”, Journal of Labor Economics 29:3 (2011), 417-457.
Hunt, Jennifer, “Does the United States Admit the Best and Brightest Computer and Engineering
        Workers”, Journal of Labor Economics (2013), forthcoming.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, “How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?”,
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2:2 (2010), 31-56.
Keller, Wolfgang, “International Technology Diffusion”, Journal of Economic Literature 42:3 (2004),
        752-782.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr, “Immigration and Employer Transitions for STEM Workers”,
        American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103:3 (2013), 193-197.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, and William Lincoln, “Skilled Immigration and the Employment
        Structures of U.S. Firms”, Journal of Labor Economics (2013), forthcoming.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, and William Lincoln, “Skilled Immigration and the Innovation of U.S.
        Firms”, Working Paper (2014).
Kerr, William, “U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Empirical Approaches
        and Evidence”, NBER Working Paper 19377 (2013).
Kerr, William, “Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology Diffusion”, Review of
        Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
Kerr, William, “Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation”, Journal of Urban
        Economics 67:1 (2010), 46-60.
Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and U.S.
        Ethnic Invention”, Journal of Labor Economics 28:3 (2010), 473-508.
Kerr, William, William Lincoln, and Prachi Mishra, “The Dynamics of Firm Lobbying”, American
        Economic Journal: Economic Policy (2014), forthcoming.
Kirkegaard, Jacob, “Outsourcing and Skill Imports: Foreign High-Skilled Workers on H-1B and L-1
        Visas in the United States”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper 05-15,
        (2005).
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, “Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade”, Working Paper
        (2011).
Lofstrom, Magnus, and Joseph Hayes, “H-1Bs: How Do They Stack Up to US Born Workers”, IZA
        Working Paper 6259 (2011).

                                                      29
Lowell, B. Lindsay, “Skilled Temporary and Permanent Immigrants in the United States”, Population
        Research and Policy Review 20:1-2 (2001).
Lowell, B. Lindsay, and Hal Salzman, “Into the Eye of the Storm: Assessing the Evidence on Science and
        Engineering Education, Quality, and Workforce Demand”, Working Paper (2007).
Matloff, Norman, “On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-Immigrant Work Visa in Computer-Related
        Occupations”, University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 36:4 (2003), 815-914.
Matloff, Norman, “Needed Reform for the H-1B and L-1 Work Visas (and Relation to Offshoring)”,
        Working Paper (2004).
Melitz, Marc, “The Impact of Trade on Intra‐ Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
        Productivity”, Econometrica 71:6 (2003), 1695-1725.
Miano, John, “The Bottom of the Pay Scale: Wages for H-1B Computer Programmers”, CIS
        Backgrounder (2005).
Mithas, Sunil, and Henry Lucas, “Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? U.S. Visa Policies and
        Compensation of Information Technology Professionals”, Management Science 56 (2010), 745-
        765.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, “German Jewish Émigrés and U.S. Invention”,
        American Economic Review (2014), forthcoming.
Mukhopadhyay, Sankar, and David Oxborrow, “The Value of an Employment-Based Green Card”.
        Demography 49 (2012), 219-237.
Nathan, Max, “Ethnic Inventors, Diversity and Innovation in the UK: Evidence from Patents Microdata”,
        Journal of Economic Geography (2014), forthcoming.
National Foundation for American Policy, H-1B Visas and Job Creation. Policy Brief (2008).
National Foundation for American Policy. H-1B Visas by the Numbers: 2010 and Beyond. Policy Brief
        (2010).
Oettl, Alexander, and Ajay Agrawal, “International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow Externalities”,
        Journal of International Business Studies 39:8 (2008), 1242-1260.
Ozgen, Ceren, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot, “Immigration and Innovation in European Regions”,
        IZA Working Paper 5676 (2011).
Parrotta, Pierpaolo, Dario Pozzoli, and Mariola Pytlikova, “The Nexus between Labor Diversity and
        Firm’s Innovation”, Journal of Population Economics 27:2 (2014), 303-364.
Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from Chilean
        Plants”, Review of Economic Studies 69:1 (2002), 245-276.
Peri, Giovanni, “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from U.S. States”, Review of
        Economics and Statistics 94:1 (2012), 348-358.
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber, “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity in US
        Cities”, Working Paper (2013).
Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber, “Highly-Educated Immigrants and Native Occupational Choice”,
        Industrial Relations 50:3 (2011), 385-411.
Rauch, James, “Business and Social Networks in International Trade”, Journal of Economic Literature
        39:4 (2001), 1177-1203.
Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade”, Review of
        Economics and Statistics 84:1 (2002), 116-130.
Rho, Deborah, “Immigrant Earnings Assimilation: The Role of the Firm”, Working Paper (2013).
Ruiz, Neil, Jill Wilson, and Shyamali Choudhury, “Geography of H-1B Workers: Demand for High-
        Skilled Foreign Labor in U.S. Metropolitan Areas”, Brookings Report (2012).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, The New Argonauts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
                                                     30
Saxenian, AnnaLee, Silicon Valley's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy
        Institute of California, 1999).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Networks of
        Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of
        California, 2002).
Stephan, Paula, “The I's Have It: Immigration and Innovation, the Perspective from Academe”, in Josh
        Lerner and Scott Stern (eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
        2010).
Stephan, Paula, Chiara Franzoni, and Giuseppe Scellato, “The Comings of the Foreign-born for PhD and
        Postdoctoral Study: A Sixteen Country Perspective”, Working Paper (2013).
Stephan, Paula, and Sharon Levin, “Exceptional Contributions to US Science by the Foreign-Born and
        Foreign-Educated”, Population Research and Policy Review 20:1 (2001), 59-79.
Stuen, Eric, Ahmed Mobarak, and Keith Maskus, “Skilled Immigration and Innovation: Evidence from
        Enrollment Fluctuations in U.S. Doctoral Programs”, Economic Journal 122:565 (2012), 1143-
        1176.
Tambe, Prassana, and Lorin Hitt, “H-1B Visas, Offshoring, and the Wage of US Information Technology
        Workers”, Working Paper (2009).
Tervio, Marko, “Superstars and Mediocrities: Market Failure in the Discovery of Talent”, Review of
        Economic Studies 76:2 (2009), 829-850.
Thibodeau, Patrick, and Sharon Machlis, “The Data Shows: Top H-1B Users Are Offshore Outsourcers”,
        ComputerWorld (2013).
Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gereffi, “America’s New Immigrant
        Entrepreneurs”, Kauffman Foundation Report (2007).
Zavodny, Madeline, “The H-1B Program and its Effects on Information Technology Workers”, Federal
        Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review (2003).




                                                    31
                   Fig. 1a: Evolution of H-1B Visa Cap
           Notes: Figure plots the cap on the
200,000    number of H-1B visa that can be
           issued by fiscal year. The cap
           was reached in every fiscal year
           since 1997 except 2002 and 2003.

150,000



100,000



 50,000



     0
          1990    1993       1996      1999     2002   2005   2008   2011   2014
            Fig. 1b: Months to Reach H-1B Visa Cap
14

12

10

 8

 6

 4
     Notes: Figure plots the number of
 2   months taken to reach the H-1B cap.
     The cap was reached in every fiscal
     year since 1997 except 2002 and 2003.
 0
     2000      2002       2004        2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
              Fig. 2: Distribution of Firm LCAs
                          Notes: Figure plots each firm's total number Labor
14,000                    Condition Applications 2001-2006 (y axis) against its
                          rank in terms of LCAs (x axis). Firms are ordered by
                          their LCA demand, with lower numbers on the
12,000                    horizontal axis being the largest users of the program.

10,000

 8,000

 6,000

 4,000

 2,000

    0
         20        50          80              110              140                 170
                   Fig. 3: Firm LCAs Relative To Sales
10
         Notes: Figure plots the logarithm of each firm's
         total LCA applications 2001-2006 (y axis)
         against the logarithm its average level of sales
         over the time period (x axis).
 8



 6



 4



 2



 0
     0              2            4            6             8   10   12   14
                         Table 1: Top Firms By H-1B Demand
                                 Total LCA Applications                                    2012 H-1B
Rank Company Name                                              Company Name
                                        2001-2006                                        Visa Approvals

   1    Microsoft                          13523               Cognizant                       9281
   2    IBM                                 7594               Tata                            7469
   3    Oracle                              6755               Infosys                         5600
   4    Intel                               3995               Wipro                           4304
   5    Motorola                            3747               Accenture                       4037
   6    General Electric                    3593               HCL America                     2070
   7    Cisco Systems                       3344               Mahindra Group                  1963
   8    Sun Microsystems                    2552               IBM                             1846
   9    Hewlett Packard                     2492               Larsen & Toubro                 1832
  10    Qualcomm                            2362               Deloitte                        1668
  11    Sprint                              2280               Microsoft                       1497
  12    Schlumberger                        1937               Patni Americas                  1260
Notes: The left columns list the top twelve firms in our sample of 171 firms in terms of their Labor
Condition Applications (LCAs) over 2001-2006. This sample is restricted to public companies with
headquarters in the United States. LCAs are a first step towards obtaining an H-1B visa for a worker. The
right columns list the top twelve companies in 2012 in terms of H-1B visa approvals. This list comes from
ComputerWorld magazine and includes non-U.S. companies that use the H-1B visa.
