NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DECLINING MIGRATION WITHIN THE U.S.:
THE ROLE OF THE LABOR MARKET
Raven Molloy
Christopher L. Smith
Abigail Wozniak
Working Paper 20065
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20065

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

Wozniak would especially like to thank Frank Limehouse and the team at the Chicago Census Research
Data Center for assistance with the restricted National Longitudinal Surveys. Ning Jia (University
of Notre Dame) and Adam Scherling (Federal Reserve Board) also provided invaluable research assistance.
The authors would like to thank Moshe Buchinsky and James Spletzer as well as seminar participants
at Temple University, the University of Notre Dame, UW-Madison, University of Illinois-Chicago,
UC-Santa Barbara, and conference participants at the Federal Reserve System conference on Regional
Analysis, the 2012 Census Research Data Center Researcher conference, and the Society of Labor
Economists. Any errors are our own. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not indicate concurrence with other members of the research staff of the Federal Reserve,
the Board of Governors, the U.S. Census Bureau, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
results have been reviewed to insure that no confidential information is disclosed.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20065.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Raven Molloy, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Declining Migration within the U.S.: The Role of the Labor Market
Raven Molloy, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak
NBER Working Paper No. 20065
April 2014
JEL No. J0,J11,J6,N3
ABSTRACT
Interstate migration has decreased steadily since the 1980s. We show that this trend is not primarily
related to demographic and socioeconomic factors, but instead appears to be connected to a concurrent
secular decline in labor market transitions. We explore a number of reasons for the declines in geographic
and labor market transitions, and find the strongest support for explanations related to a decrease in
the net benefit to changing employers. Our preferred interpretation is that the distribution of relevant
outside offers has shifted in a way that has made labor market transitions, and thus geographic transitions,
less desirable to workers.

Raven Molloy
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th and C Streets NW
Washington, DC 20551
raven.s.molloy@frb.gov
Christopher L. Smith
Federal Reserve Board
Research Division
Stop # 80
20th & C Sts., NW
Washington, DC 20551-0001
Christopher.L.Smith@frb.gov

Abigail Wozniak
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
441 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
a_wozniak@nd.edu

I. Introduction
The decline in internal migration since the mid-2000s has attracted the attention of
researchers and the public because it coincided with a dramatic housing market contraction and deep
economic recession (Batini et. al. 2010, Frey 2009, Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl 2012). In earlier
work, we demonstrated that the decline is in fact the continuation of a longer-run trend rather than
solely a cyclical phenomenon (Molloy, Smith and Wozniak 2011). Specifically, internal migration
within the United States has fallen continuously since the 1980s, reversing the upward trend that
occurred earlier in the 20th century. Falling migration may be troubling if it is symptomatic of a
broader decline in dynamism within the United States. Some have noted a secular downtrend in the
amount of “labor market churning” (Davis, Faberman, Haltiwanger 2012; Hyatt and Spletzer 2013),
and declining internal migration may be another product of the same underlying phenomenon.
Perhaps less troubling, declining internal migration could simply be an expected outcome of
demographic trends such as the aging of the population. The decline in migration might even
warrant optimism rather than concern if it signals a diminished need for migration. For example,
improved matching between individuals and their jobs and locations may have led to a more
efficient allocation of workers across the US.
In this paper, we assess explanations for the secular decline in migration, focusing on factors
that may have played a role throughout the entire thirty year period.1 We begin by examining the
correlation of migration with a number of demographic and socioeconomic factors in a simple OLS
regression framework. For within-county migration, the decline in migration since the 1980s is
reduced by half once we control for the age distribution of the population and homeownership. By
contrast, the decline in interstate migration is mostly invariant to controlling for these factors, as well
as to controlling for many other demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Thus, the results
point to a substantial drop in the probability of interstate migration that is common among all
demographic and socioeconomic groups.
We then proceed to investigate other explanations for the decline in long distance moves.
Several pieces of evidence suggest that the labor market has played a key role in the migration
decline. First, survey respondents report that interstate moves tend to be related to labor market
reasons rather than other reasons, such as life-cycle events or housing-related factors. Second, other
We use the terms “secular” and “long-term” trend to emphasize that the decline in migration is not cyclical and has
lasted for a considerable period of time. Of course, thirty years is still a relatively short period in the context of US
economic history. Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (2004) document an increase in internal migration in the US from 1900
to 1970, which they attribute to rising educational attainment.

1

1

measures of churning in the labor market—specifically employer changes and industry and
occupational mobility—have also trended down during this period and these declines are also not
explained by changes in demographics. Third, we present evidence that labor market transitions,
particularly employer-switching, and geographic mobility are strongly correlated at both the
individual and state level. Finally, we show that adjusting for the downward trend in labor market
transitions reduces the downward trend in interstate migration in a way that the demographic and
socioeconomic factors do not.
In sum, the descriptive evidence suggests that an explanation for the long-run decline in
migration should be related to the labor market—in particular, the decline in labor market
transitions—rather than to increased costs of migration or to compositional changes within the
population.2 Because the decline in labor market transitions is apparent for workers who remain in
the same state as well as for workers who change states, the most plausible explanations for the dual
declines in labor market and geographic transitions are ones that are rooted in the labor market.3
Consequently, we examine a number of potential causes related to the labor market including
changes in the distribution of employment across different types of occupations, a rise in the
proportion of dual-earner households, and job-lock associated with rising health care costs. We find
little empirical support for these hypotheses, leading to a more general theory that some costs or
benefits of making a labor market transition have changed over time.
In order to bring some evidence to bear on changes over time in the cost and
benefits of making a transition in the labor market, we turn to data from three cohorts of the
National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS) spanning the late 1960s to late 2000s. We find a
decline in the wage gain associated with changing employers, but no change in the wage gain
associated with staying at the same employer (i.e. the return to firm-specific tenure). We find
qualitatively similar results in the Current Population Survey (CPS) and Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID). Although our evidence is only descriptive, it suggests that the
distribution of the relevant set of outside offers has shifted in a way that makes labor market
transitions—and hence geographic transitions—less desirable to workers.
We push further on this idea by examining the relationship between wages and
external labor market conditions, as in Beaudry and DiNardo (1991). Whereas the
Interstate migration has declined even for individuals where no one in the household is in the labor force, suggesting
that some explanations unrelated to the labor market may also matter. However, this group is a small proportion of all
migrants.
3 Moreover, migration flows are too small to account for the decrease in labor market transitions.
2

2

conditions that mattered most for wages in the 1980s and 1990s were the best conditions
since a worker was hired, the conditions that mattered most for wages in the 2000s were
those in the year of hire. This result suggests that the implicit contracts between workers
and firms are renegotiated less frequently in recent cohorts. We lean towards an
interpretation that relevant outside offers are less abundant for workers, reducing the
frequency of job transitions. We can only speculate about the reasons for this change:
perhaps workers’ shares of profits have become smaller or firms have become more
homogeneous in their pay policies. It is also possible that assortative matching between
workers and firms has risen, causing workers and firms to search for matches among a
smaller set of possibilities. Regardless of the exact source, we conclude that he resulting
decrease in job changing may have brought about a decline in long-distance migration as
fewer people move to take a new job.
In short, the most plausible reasons for the dual declines in geographic mobility and
labor market transitions are ones that indicate a diminished benefit to making such
transitions, not a higher cost of doing so. However, at this stage we view our evidence as
intriguing, but speculative. As these trends seem to have become an enduring feature of the
US economy, further research is needed to shed light on the mechanisms driving these
declines.
II. Is the decline in migration related to demographic and socio-economic trends?
The long-run decline in migration can be seen clearly in Figure 1, which plots statistics from
the Current Population Survey (CPS).4 Prior to the 1970s, annual migration rates fluctuated around
a stable mean, with longer-distance moves less common than shorter-distance moves. During the
1970s, however, rates of moving across any distance began to decrease and declines since then have
been dramatic. The rate of moving across a long distance has fallen by a larger percentage than the
migration rate for short distances: the interstate migration rate in 2013 was 51 percent below its

The CPS provides the longest possible annual time series on migration rates for the post-war US. Details on the
construction of this series can be found in Saks and Wozniak (2011). The CPS may overstate the decline in interstate
migration since the 1990s due to a change in imputation procedures (Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl 2012, Koerber 2007).
However, in this paper we exclude all imputed values of migration, and we show elsewhere that other data sources also
show pronounced declines in migration over the last three decades (Molloy, Smith and Wozniak 2011).
4

3

1948-1971 average, while the rates of moving between counties within the same state and of moving
within the same county fell 31 and 38 percent, respectively, over the same period.5
A natural explanation for the observed decline in migration is changing demographic or
socio-economic trends, as they have slowly been shifting in favor of groups with lower mobility
rates. For instance, the share of the population between the ages of 20 and 34 fell considerably from
the 1980s to the 2000s, and these individuals tend to move more frequently than average across both
short and long distances (see Table 1). However, migration rates for all age groups fell noticeably,
suggesting that the age distribution of the population alone cannot explain the entire decline in
migration. Another trend that has received much attention is the rise in homeownership, which
could depress migration since homeowners are less mobile than renters. But the migration rates of
both homeowners and renters fell from the 1980s to the 2000s (Table 1), suggesting that this trend
cannot account for the aggregate decline either.6
We can more formally assess the importance of age and homeownership in accounting for
the trend in aggregate migration by estimating an individual-level regression that pools data from all
years and includes year fixed effects. The fixed effects reflect average migration in each year after
controlling for the other variables in the regression. To illustrate, the upper panel of Figure 2 shows
the coefficients of the year fixed effects from regressions of within-county migration including no
controls (the solid line) and including controls for age and homeownership (the dashed line). The
slope of the dashed line is noticeably flatter than that of the solid line; the solid line falls by 1.7
percentage points from the 1980s to the 2000s, while the dashed line falls by 0.8 percentage points. 7
Thus, declining shares of young people and renters can account for about half of the decrease in
migration within counties over this period.
The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows the same exercise where the dependent variable is
interstate migration. In this case, the trends in the year coefficients are very similar. The solid line
falls by about 0.9 percentage points from the 1980s to the 2000s, and the dashed line falls by 0.8
percentage points. Consequently, it seems that the trends in age and homeownership are less
Casual observation suggests that interstate migration may have flattened out from 2007 to 2013. However, migration
in 2012 and 2013 was likely boosted by moves that otherwise would have occurred during the recession. In fact, the
level of migration in 2013 is only slightly above that which would be predicted by a linear trend from 1991 to 2006.
6 One concern with these statistics is that the CPS does not record homeownership status in the previous year.
However, using the PSID Bachmann and Cooper (2012) document declines in mobility among all four possible
combinations of tenure: renter-renter, homeowner-homeowner, renter-homeowner and homeowner-renter.
7 The CPS did not include the migration question in 1985 or 1995. Prior to 1981, the CPS only asked migration
questions in 1964-1971 and 1975. The data also contain far fewer relevant covariates in that time period; for example
housing tenure was first asked in 1976. Therefore, it is not possible to extend the analysis of this section back to periods
before the 1980s.
5

4

successful at accounting for migration over long distances than they are at accounting for migration
over short distances. Intuition for this result can be seen in Table 1. Differences in migration rates
across groups are greater for within county migration than for interstate migration, so the same
demographic trends account for a larger share of the aggregate decline in within county migration.
Of course, a number of other demographic and socioeconomic factors could be responsible
for the decline in aggregate interstate migration. Ganong and Shoag (2012) find that a slowdown of
low-skilled workers migrating to areas with high house prices can help to explain geographic wage
convergence from 1980 to 2010. While the interstate migration rate of workers without a high
school degree has slowed substantially, so have the migration rates of workers at all levels of
education (see Table 1). Thus, including education in the regressions described above does not
noticeably change the estimated year coefficients. A related possibility is that the decline in
interstate migration could reflect a slowing in population flows across different regions of the
country as many metropolitan areas in the South and West have become relatively more expensive.
Indeed, Table 2 shows that net migration in the Pacific Census division (which comprises California,
Oregon and Washington) switched from net inflows in the 1980s to net outflows in the 2000s.
However, net migration patterns into other Census divisions have not changed much. Rather, in
most divisions both inflows and outflows have decreased.
To pursue the role of demographic and socioeconomic trends a little further, we include a
large number of covariates in the regression described above: gender, educational attainment, race,
marital status, presence of children, real income, and indicators for divorced heads with children,
employment status, self-employment status, metropolitan area status, and Census division.8 As
shown in Figure 2, these variables do not explain any additional portion of the declines in withincounty or interstate migration. A rise in immigration is another important demographic trend over
the last several decades, and immigrants are often thought to arbitrage wage and employment
differences across local markets (Borjas 2001, Cadena and Kovak 2013). It is possible that the
growing immigrant population has reduced the need for U.S. residents to respond to geographic
labor market disparities by moving long distances. However, we think this possibility is unlikely
because migration has declined even among native groups that do not typically compete in the same

8 Specifically, we control for real income with indicators for quintiles of the distribution across all years of household
income relative to the consumer price index. Thus, shifts in the distribution of real income over time are allowed to
affect aggregate migration rates. The regressions do not include nativity because this information is not available in the
CPS until 1994. In earlier work, we found the declines in migration since 1994 were similar for natives and the foreign
born (Molloy, Smith and Wozniak 2011).

5

labor market as immigrants, like the more educated. Moreover, in unreported analysis we have
found that states with larger increases in new immigrants from 1980 to 2000 did not have larger
declines in the fraction of in-migrants from other U.S. states.
Of course, because these estimates are based on simple correlations and not on exogenous
variation, one should be wary of making a strongly causal interpretation. To the extent that the
coefficient for a given variable might be smaller than its true causal effect, our estimates will
understate the role of observables in declining migration. (If for some reason the coefficient were
larger than its true causal effect, our estimates – which are already small – would overstate the role
of observables.) It is difficult to think of reasons the coefficients on observable characteristics in the
migration regression would be biased downward by a large amount. For example, being young
would have to be correlated with an unobservable characteristic that lowers migration. We therefore
think these results suggest strongly that compositional changes among the variables in the regression
are not the main causes of the trend in migration. Cooke (2011) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl
(2013) also find that demographics and other observable characteristics can account for little of the
decrease in interstate migration from the 1990s to the 2000s.
In sum, a sizable portion of the downward trend in within-county migration is related to the
aging of the population and the rise in homeownership whereas the trend in interstate migration is
not related to these, or any other demographic and socioeconomic factors that we observe in the
CPS. Consequently, we turn to other explanations for the decrease in long-distance migration over
the past thirty years.
III. Connections between migration and the labor market
Migration is often linked to transitions in the labor market such as starting a new job or
retiring from the labor force. This connection is particularly clear for migration over longer
distances, which generally entails a change of local labor markets. Consistent with this notion, Figure
3 shows that CPS respondents most commonly cite job-related reasons as the explanation for an
inter-state move, whereas these reasons are much less important among respondents who moved
over shorter distances. Interestingly, job-related inter-state migration has trended down from 2000
to 2010 more noticeably than the other reasons. The reason for moving was not asked in years prior
to 1999, so it is difficult to say whether the decrease in employment-related mobility since 1999 is
part of a longer-run trend.

6

Over the same period that long-distance migration has trended down, many measures of
labor market transitions have also been falling. In Figure 4, we plot the fraction of the population
16 and older that changed employers, changed industry, or changed occupation from the previous
year.9 These statistics are all from the March supplement to the CPS.10 All three flows trended
down from the early 1980s to the late 2000s.11 These trends are consistent with statistics compiled
by Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2012), who document downward trends in hires, layoffs and
quits from 1990 to 2010 based on the Business Employment Dynamics (BED) database and the Job
Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS); with Moscarini and Thomsson (2007) who
document a decline in occupation switching in the CPS since the mid-1990s; and with Hyatt and
Spletzer (2013), who document declines in job creation and destruction, hiring and separation rates,
and monthly job-to-job transitions since at least the mid-1990s in numerous sources (BED,
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics program, CPS, and JOLTS).
Declining job transition rates may seem surprising given the popular perception that the
firm-worker connection has become more tenuous and that the era of the “one employer career”
has ended. Nevertheless, the decline in job transitions appears to be an empirical fact. For one
thing, as noted above, it has been documented in multiple ways and in numerous datasets.
Moreover, we have verified that the decline in job transitions in the CPS is consistent with data on
tenure from the tenure supplement to the CPS (results available upon request). In particular, when
we divide the sample into six age groups, for each group the fraction of workers with one year of

We estimate these transition rates using March CPS microdata as provided by the Unicon Research Corporation. The
sample that we use drops individuals who have imputed values for occupation, industry, occupation last year, industry
last year, or number of employers in the previous year. For 1988 and later, we also drop individuals who have any
imputed responses for the March supplement as indicated by the “suprec” variable. We have found that this sample
selection criteria corrects for discrete jumps in transition rates that appear in some years as well as for changes in the
imputation of migration. Because the March CPS microdata provided by IPUMS do not allow users to correct for this
form of imputation, we favor estimates derived from Unicon data. Occupations and industries are defined at the 3-digit
level.
10 Similar to Stewart (2007), we measure job-to-job transitions based on the reported number of employers in the
previous year. The exact question asked to the CPS respondent is “How many employers did you work for in the
previous calendar year?” The CPS question further instructs that if the respondent worked for more than one employer
at the same time, it should only count as one employer. Hence, respondents who report working for 2 or more
employers in the previous year have likely transitioned across jobs at some point in the year. We also find a downward
trend in job-to-job transitions when using the response to the question whether an individual is working for the same
employer as in the previous month, which is available in the monthly CPS from 1994 onwards.
11 Although the rates of changing occupation and industry are quite similar, the workers who change industry are not
necessarily the same as those who change occupation: from 1980-2010, about 15 percent of workers who change
industry do not change occupation, and also about 15 percent of workers who change occupation do not change
industry.
9

7

tenure or less has been falling since the mid-1990s—consistent with the notion that job transitions
have become less frequent.12
We suspect that the simultaneous declines in migration and many measures of labor market
transitions may be more than coincidental, so we perform several tests to better understand just how
closely the two trends are connected. We begin by calculating the contribution of changing
demographic and socioeconomic factors to the decline in labor market transitions. This exercise is
similar to the one described in the previous section, except that the dependent variable is one of the
three labor market transitions shown in Figure 4. If the observables were to explain the decline in
labor market transitions, the trends in migration and labor market transitions would not likely be
related since we reject an important role for these same observables in the migration decline. The
results are shown in the three panels of Figure 5. Just as with interstate migration rates, demographic
and socioeconomic characteristics are unable to explain much of the decrease in these labor market
transitions.
To demonstrate the link between migration and job transitions more concretely, Figure 6a
shows a scatter plot of the change in the fraction of individuals in a state who changed firms from
the 1980s to the 2000s against the change in the rate of migration into that state over the same
period. The graph shows a very strong positive correlation: states like Florida and Texas that
experienced very large drops in the fraction of workers who changed firms also experienced the
largest decreases in in-migration. One might be concerned that some of this relationship is
mechanical because most geographic moves are accompanied by job changes. However, Figure 6b
re-calculates the fraction changing firms in each state conditional on not having moved in the past
year. The positive relationship remains, with virtually the same slope.
To explore further, we regress annual migration rates for a state on a variety of variables
measuring labor market transitions as well as other variables related to the labor market, state and
year fixed effects, and other demographic controls. All control variables are calculated from the
March supplement to the CPS, but we use both the CPS and IRS data, which are computed from
changes in the address of tax filers, to compute migration rates for the dependent variable.13 The
results are shown in Table 3. As shown in columns 1 and 3, we find a statistically significant, positive
The popular perception that the era of the “one employer career” has ended is not incorrect. In fact, the fraction of
workers with large amounts of tenure (8 or more years) has fallen over time, leading to a decrease in average tenure within
age groups (excluding the most recent recession) even as the fraction of workers with very short tenures has also
declined.
13Additional controls are: the fraction of the state unemployed, the log of average annual income for the state, and the
fraction of the state that is young (under 21) and of prime working age (21-64).
12

8

relationship between the fraction of a state’s population that changed firms in the previous year
(unconditional on mobility status) and fraction that moved into the state. We also find a positive
relationship between migration and both occupation and industry changing, although these estimates
are not as precise. As shown by the last row of the table, the labor market transition variables
combined explain about 0.5 percentage point of the 1.1 percentage point decline in interstate
migration from the 1980s to the 2000s. The only other significant variable in the table—the
homeownership rate—accounts for only about 0.1 percentage point of the decline in migration.
Results are roughly similar using statistics from the IRS to measure migration rather than the CPS—
job transition variables explain about one half of the decline in migration—thus, the importance of
declining job transition rates is apparent regardless of whether migration is measured in CPS or IRS
data.
In columns 2 and 4, we re-define the job changing variables for each state to be conditional
on having remained in the state in the previous year, similar with Figure 6b, addressing the concern
that there may be a mechanical link between job changing and mobility. The coefficient on firmchanging remains positive and significant, although a little smaller than in the first set of regressions,
whereas the coefficients on industry and occupation changing become small and statistically
insignificant. As shown in the rows at the bottom of the table, conditioning the job changing
variables in this way reduces their contribution to the decline in cross-state mobility over this period.
However, while we hesitate to interpret any of these implied contributions as causal, conditioning the
job change variable on no state mobility will underestimate the effect of job changing on mobility as
long as some cross-state moves are motivated by the desire to change jobs. The statistics in Figure 3
suggest that job-related reasons are, indeed, the primary reason for many cross-state moves. Hence,
it is not surprising that the contribution from job changing variables is smaller in the second set of
regressions, and the contribution of job changing to the decline in mobility is likely larger than that
implied by columns 2 and 4.
We can get a different perspective on the connection between migration and labor-market
transitions by including labor market transitions in the migration regressions described above.14 As
shown in Figure 7, controlling for changes in employer, industry and occupation makes the
downtrend in interstate migration a little less steep. Whereas the average migration rate with no
controls falls by 1 percentage point from the 1980s to the 2000s, adding these three controls reduces
The sample used in this regression is a little smaller because industry, occupation, and firm changes are only defined
for individuals who were employed in the previous year.
14

9

this drop to 0.8 percentage points. Taken literally, these results suggest that decreases in job
transition rates account for about one fifth of the decline in interstate migration. Although this
estimate suggests a smaller role for labor market transitions than implied by the cross-state
regressions of Table 3, Moscarini and Thomsson (2007) show that typical measures of occupation
and job switching suffer from high degrees of measurement error, which could attenuate their
estimated contribution in the individual-level regressions. Because the cross-state regressions are
based on average labor market transitions at the state level, they may smooth through some of the
noise that is present at the individual level. Regardless of the exact magnitudes, we find a strong
connection between the decline in interstate migration and the decline in labor market transitions
over the past thirty years using a variety of approaches.
IV. Possible causes of the secular decline in migration and labor market transitions
The fact that labor market transitions and geographic migration are correlated does not
explain why these flows have been falling. In this section, we discuss four mechanisms that could be
behind both trends. We focus on common explanations for the two trends both because a simple
explanation is intuitively appealing and also because the evidence in the previous section suggests
that these two trends are linked.
One explanation for declining migration has been suggested by Kaplan and SchulhoferWohl (2013). They propose a model built on the assumption that the range of occupations and
industries has become more similar across metropolitan areas, causing fewer people to migrate to a
different area to find employment in a specific industry or occupation. They also argue that the
incidence of “experimental” migration for amenity reasons has declined, perhaps because people
now better understand an area prior to moving due to improvements in communication technology
such as the internet and lower travel costs. In support of the first argument, they show that
occupations and industries have become less concentrated by state over the past 20 years and that
the variance across areas in the average wage for an industry or occupation has fallen. Although this
theory may explain the decline in migration, it does not have a clear prediction for changes in labor
market transitions over time. On one hand, a greater variety of local job opportunities would seem
to lead to higher rates of employer, industry, and occupation changes, because switching jobs is less
costly if it does not also require a change of location. On the other hand, a wider variety of job
opportunities in various industries and occupations could improve the match between a worker and
firm, reducing the need for further job transitions down the road. We conclude that the Kaplan and
10

Schulhofer-Wohl explanation may account for a portion of the observed decline in migration, but it
is not clear that it can also account for the simultaneous decline in migration and labor market
transitions. Given the strong relationship between geographic migration and these transitions, it
seems worthwhile to search for a single factor that can explain the trends in both variables. This is
particularly true for young workers for whom the return to experimentation with sectors and
locations is high. We will focus on young workers in the next section and provide further analysis
related to this hypothesis.
A second hypothesis for the dual declines in migration and labor market transitions is related
to the long-run structural shift in the distribution of occupations. Specifically, the share of adults in
lower-skill/lower-paying jobs (e.g. food service, personal care services, cleaning services) and higherskill/higher-paying jobs (e.g. professional, managerial, and design jobs) have both grown, while the
share of adults in middle-skill/middle-paying jobs (e.g. administrative, manufacturing, and sales jobs)
has fallen.15 This “hollowing out” or polarization of the occupational distribution is thought to be
due to the expanded use of computers and greater ease of automation and off-shoring, which raises
demand for higher-skill jobs, reduces demand for the middle-skill jobs, and may displace some
workers formerly employed in middle-skill jobs into lower-skilled ones (Autor, Katz and Kearney
2008). This shift might have reduced migration if, in the past, less educated workers were likely to
move to a different labor market to take middle-skill jobs. The elimination of large shares of these
jobs could then lower migration rates by reducing the set of “migration worthy” jobs for less
educated workers. However, we find no empirical support for this idea. While it is true that the
percent of workers in middle-skill (defined as office administration and production jobs)
occupations and manufacturing jobs are positively associated with migration (Table 3), the observed
shifts in the distributions of occupation and industry are not large enough to explain much of the
decline in migration. In addition, as shown in Table 1, the average inter-state migration rate of
people with a high-school degree (who were the group presumably most likely to engage in
migration to switch from low- to middle-skill jobs) was not higher than that for individuals with
more education in the 1980s, nor did it fall by more than for workers at other education levels.
This classification is commonly used by those who research labor market polarization, e.g. Figure 3 of Autor 2010. In
this classification, “high-skill” jobs tend to offer higher wages and require higher education, and include manager,
professional, and technician occupations. “Middle-skill” occupations are less likely to require a college degree than are
high skill jobs, but also offer higher wages on average than “low-skill” jobs; they include sales jobs, office and
administration jobs, production, craft, and repair jobs, and operator, fabricator, and laborer jobs. “Low-skill”
occupations are service sector jobs, and include protective services, food preparation, building and grounds cleaning, and
personal services.
15

11

Additionally, job turnover rates tend to be higher for lower-skill, service and retail sector jobs,16 so
rising employment shares in the lower tail of the skill distribution should all else equal push up
average rates of labor market transitions, and possibly also push up average migration rates if people
in these sectors who experience job turnover are more likely to change locations in search of a new
job.
A third possible explanation for the secular declines in migration and job transitions is a
rising share of dual-earner households. When both spouses are employed, it can be more difficult to
move long distances because both people must find a suitable job in the new location. Indeed,
Costa and Kahn (2000) argue that the colocation problem of couples who both have a college
degree has caused the college-education population to be concentrated in large cities. To assess this
idea, Table 4 shows the fraction of individuals in households where both spouses are employed and
their interstate migration rates. The fraction of individuals in dual-earner households did not
increase from the 1980s to the 2000s, making this reason an unlikely candidate to explain the trend
in migration. However, it is possible that only individuals who are invested in particular careers have
joint-location issues with a spouse.17 As a proxy for two-career households, we create an indicator
for households where both spouses are employed in a professional or technical occupation. For
individuals in these households, the probability of moving is, indeed, slightly lower than that of
other employed individuals in this occupational category (Table 4). But the fraction of individuals in
these households only rose from 2 percent in the 1980s to 3 percent in the 2000s, so this segment of
the population is too small to affect aggregate migration in any meaningful way. The same is true
for individuals in a household where both spouses work and have earnings in the top quintile of the
earnings distribution. A larger fraction of individuals are in a household where both spouses work
and have at least a college degree. But even in that case, the increase in the population share is not
large enough to move aggregate migration by very much.18 Moreover, the migration rates of

16 For instance, from 2003-2010, on average 5 percent of CPS respondents who were employed in service or retail
occupations in one month were not employed in the subsequent month, whereas for other occupations only 3 percent
were subsequently not employed.
17 For example, it is possible that many dual-earner households in the 1980s had one spouse who was not particularly
attached to a career and who could therefore easily move to follow their spouse’s job (Benson 2012). But as more and
more women have developed true careers, changing locations may have become harder for more households.
18 When we include this measure of dual-career households in the OLS regressions described above, the trend in the
estimated coefficients on the year indicators does not noticeably change.

12

individuals who are not in a dual-career household, however defined, also declined considerably over
this 30-year period indicating that the decline is not limited to dual-career households.19
A fourth possibility is the rise in health care costs over the same period, which could prevent
workers with employer-provided health insurance from taking a new job because it would require
changing health insurance companies.20 Table 4 shows that the fraction of individuals in a household
where at least one person has an employer that paid for a group health plan did not change from the
1980s to the 2000s. And again, the migration rates of individuals in households without employerprovided health insurance also fell substantially.
V. Examining returns to employer tenure and labor market transitions over time
The shortcomings of the theories considered above lead us to consider two more general
explanations: that the benefits to staying with one’s employer have risen, or that the benefits to
changing employers have fallen. Either trend would lead to declines in job transitions, which is likely
in turn to depress migration. In this section, we present empirical evidence on the benefits to staying
with one’s employer and the benefits to changing employers using a panel of young workers
assembled from three cohorts of the National Longitudinal Surveys.
After introducing our data, we look for evidence that returns to staying with one’s employer
have risen in the form of an increase in the return to firm-specific human capital relative to forms of
human capital that are more portable across firms and geography (like occupation and industry). 21

19 Another way to look for evidence of this effect is to examine spouses’ earnings relative to one another. The more
unequal their earnings, the easier it should be for the household to move in pursuit of only one spouse’s career. While
we do find that income differentials between spouses have narrowed over time, the correlation with migration seems to
be too small to account for much of the decline in aggregate migration—in our OLS regressions we find that controlling
for earnings inequality between the head and the spouse (defined as the absolute value of the difference between head
and spouse earnings divided by the sum of head and spouse earnings), does not noticeably change the trend in the
coefficients on the year indicators.
20 A rather extensive literature presents mixed findings on the extent to which healthcare-related “job lock” depresses
job transition rates, though Gruber and Madrian (2002) argue that the most convincing evidence supports the job lock
hypothesis. More recently, Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo (2013) find evidence of health insurance related job lock
among low skill workers in the 2000s. At the same time, there is more consistent evidence that the availability of
employer-provided health insurance delays transitions to retirement and affects labor supply decisions of secondary
earners (see also Madrian 2004).
21 We are not aware of any studies that have documented how returns to different types of human capital have changed
over the last three decades. The literature on firm-specific, industry-specific, or occupation-specific human capital has
focused mainly on identifying, differentiating, and understanding these forms of specific human capital at a particular
point in time (or on average over many years), rather than estimating changes in the returns over time. Neal (1995) and
Parent (2000) both argue that observed returns to job SHC are in fact driven by industry SHC. Recently, Kambourov
and Manovskii (2009) find an important role for occupation SHC, echoing earlier arguments in Shaw (1984, 1987).
Importantly, they find large returns to occupation SHC once the data have been corrected for a high degree of
measurement error, on the order of a 20 percent return to 5 years of occupational experience.

13

For example, changes in the matching process between workers and firms may have caused workers
to be matched earlier in their careers with an employer who offers them the best return on
experience, thereby raising the average return to firm-specific human capital. Such improvements in
matching technology might arise if the set of local employment opportunities becomes more diverse,
as hypothesized by Kaplan and Shulhofer-Wohl (2013), or if there have been improvements in
information that workers and firms possess during search. Improved worker-firm matches would
imply that we should observe increased returns to firm-specific experience compared with earlier
periods in which more workers labored at jobs with poorer match quality (Jovanovic 1979).
We then turn to the question of whether the net benefits (i.e. benefits minus costs) to
transitioning across employers have declined. Even if the returns to firm-specific human capital have
not changed, other aspects of the labor market may have led to a decline in job changing or other
labor market transitions. For example, informational asymmetries between a worker’s current
employer and other potential employers may have become more pronounced over time as skills that
are difficult to measure have become more important in determining a worker’s performance. Also,
technology may have become more firm-specific, implying that workers have more to lose when
moving to a different firm. Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2009) document that investment in “firmspecific” resources such as employer-provided worker training rose appreciably from the 1970s to
the early 2000s. If the returns to training do not accrue smoothly over time, then wage returns to
firm-specific training could show up primarily as wage differences across old and new jobs, rather
than as a smooth increase in returns to job- or firm-specific experience.22 Furthermore, some costs
associated with changing jobs may have risen over time. Fujita (2012) proposes a model in which
there is a secular increase in the risk of experience depreciation during an unemployment spell for all
workers in an economy. Workers therefore become increasingly reluctant to separate from their
firms and risk the loss of skill that would result from a failed transition to a new job. He argues that
such a model can reconcile declining labor market turnover with stagnant wages and rising public
anxiety about job security.23
V.1 Background on the National Longitudinal Survey

This is consistent with evidence that employer-provided training has no more than modest impacts on wage growth
(Krueger and Rouse 1998, Hellerstein and Neumark 1995).
23 In his model, firms have bargaining power and early career match quality is unchanging over time, so there is no clear
prediction for the returns to experience. Nevertheless, it implies diminishing job transitions, and consequently lower
long-distance migration.
22

14

To explore the benefits to staying with and changing employers, we assemble a panel of
three cohorts from restricted-use versions of the National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS). Two
important advantages of this data source are that it spans a very long time period—over four
decades—and that it includes information on four types of individual work experience, or tenure:
industry-specific, occupation-specific, employer-specific, and location-specific.
Our sample includes data on young men from three NLS surveys: the NLS-Young Men
(NLS-YM); the NLS-Youth 1979 (NLSY79), and the NLS-Youth 1997 (NLSY97).24 We focus on
results for men because the labor force participation of women changed markedly over these three
decades and we are concerned that female labor force participants in the late 2000s are different in
many unobservable ways from their counterparts in the late 1970s, which complicates cross-cohort
comparisons. Because respondents in the latest waves of the NLSY97 are still young, we restrict
each sample to respondents aged 22 to 29 to maintain comparability across the samples. Roughly
speaking, our cohorts represent the labor market experiences of young workers during the 1970s
(the NLS-YM), the 1980s and early 1990s (NLSY79) and the 2000s (NLSY97).
Although the details of data collection varied from survey to survey, all respondents were
asked to provide complete job information (including the name of their employer) in each year of
the survey. In addition, each survey provides identifiers for state and county of residence. We can
therefore calculate years of tenure beginning with the first job reported in the survey for industry (3digit), occupation (3-digit), employer, and state. We use the terms employer, job, and firm
interchangeably. More detail on the construction of our experience variables is available in the
Online Data Appendix, which also describes the cleaning procedures we followed to minimize false
industry and occupation switches resulting from disparities in how responses to those questions
were coded from year to year in earlier survey waves.
Because our respondents are young, some may still be in school or not otherwise strongly
attached to the labor market. Therefore we further restrict our sample to those with at least
moderate labor force attachment, defined as having worked at least half the previous calendar year.25
We also restrict the sample to those with complete data in a survey year for all variables of interest.

24Results for young women are available upon request. There are three other NLS data sets that we do not use: the NLSOlder Men, the NLS-Mature Women, and the Children of the NLSY-79. The Mature Men were already older than our
target age group of 22-29 when that survey began. The Children of the NLSY79 survey is small. It also became biannual
as that cohort entered the labor market, limiting comparability with the cohorts with annual data.
25 In the 1997 cohort, we use weeks worked in the current year, which allows us to retain more of the sample.

15

Many respondents who report employment are nevertheless missing industry and occupation
information, so this is a substantive restriction.
Table 5 shows basic summary statistics of the NLS samples. There are roughly 3000 unique
respondents in the NLS-YM spanning 1966 to 1981, 4700 respondents in the NLSY79 spanning
1979 to 1994, and 2700 respondents in the NLSY97 spanning 2002 to 2011. The top rows of the
table show that tenure in state rises a bit over the three cohorts while the fraction of the sample
changing states in the previous year falls, illustrating the decline in geographic mobility. Similarly,
the fraction of individuals who changed employers in the previous year declined over time, while
average employer tenure rose slightly. By contrast, the fraction of people changing industry and
occupation was roughly flat, as was industry and occupation tenure.
V.2. Changes in the Benefit to Staying with the Same Employer in the NLS
Before turning to our estimates of the return to staying with the same employer, we first
assess whether some forms of human capital are less geographically portable than others. If all were
equally portable across locations, then changes in the returns to these types of human capital would
have no implication for migration. Table 6 presents descriptive evidence on this question by
reporting the fraction of interstate movers that also changed industry, occupation or firm. In the
oldest cohort, 77 percent of interstate movers also changed employers. It may be somewhat
surprising that not all interstate movers changed employers. We have verified that this result is not
driven by respondents who live in metropolitan areas that span state lines, but it is possible that it
reflects workers in large firms with establishments in multiple states. More pertinent for our
purpose is that fewer workers in this cohort—only about 60 percent—changed industry or
occupation when they moved across states. In other words, individuals who moved across state
lines were more likely to change jobs than to change occupation or industry, suggesting that firmspecific human capital is less portable across space than other forms of human capital. By and large,
this result also holds for the two other cohorts, albeit to a smaller degree.26 In unreported results,
we also find that interstate movers change industry and occupation less often than they change
employer in the CPS.27 The statistics in Table 6 are also helpful because they illustrate that there is

26 The only exception to this statement is that the NLSY-79 tabulation shows a slightly higher rate of occupation
changing than employer changing.
27 In the CPS, less than half of interstate movers change firms—a number that suggests an even lower rate of employer
changing with an interstate move than the NLS. However, details of CPS data collection could contribute to this higher
rate. The migration question in the CPS measures a change in residence from March to March, while the employer

16

enough variation in employer changes, occupation changes, industry changes and geographic
changes to identify the effects of each of these changes separately.
To examine the benefit to staying with one’s employer, we estimate the following wage
equation:

yijt = b0 + b1j indtenijt + b2j indtenijt2 + b3jocctenijt + b4jocctenijt2
+b5j jobtenijt + b6j jobtenijt2 + b7jloctenijt + b8jloctenijt2 + Xijt b9j + Qtj + Qi + eijt

(1)

The dependent variable is log hourly wages for respondent i on the main job in survey year t, which
we deflate using the Consumer Price Index. The hourly wage is the “hourly rate of pay” variable
constructed for each reported job by NLS administrators.28 The j subscripts on the data and
superscripts on the coefficients indicate the NLS data sets or subsamples: NLS-YM, NLSY79,
NLSY97. Xijt is a set of additional background controls that includes age, age squared, and four
educational attainment dummies (dropout, high school graduate, 1-3 years of college, 4+ years of
college). Θt is a set of survey year dummies. Θi is as set of person fixed effects, which are included to
mitigate the concern that higher-quality workers may stay longer with an employer, biasing up the
estimated return to tenure.
Table 7 presents estimates of the returns to a third year of tenure (experience) in our four
categories of interest for men in the NLS samples. We focus on the third year of experience because
average tenure in each sample is between two and three years. While there is some variation in the
returns to different types of experience across the three cohorts, we see little evidence of trends that
would have led to reductions in employer transitions over time. Specifically, returns to employer
experience are economically small and insignificant for all three cohorts, implying that rising returns
to staying with one’s employer cannot account for the simultaneous declines in employer transitions
and migration.
The return to a third year of industry experience is more-or-less stable across the three
cohorts at about 1 percent, although the standard error on this estimate is fairly large in the
NLSY97. Returns to a third year of occupation experience are also about 1 percent in the 1970s and
1980s cohorts, then decline sharply for the NLSY97. It is important to note that our small estimates
of the returns to employer tenure are due to the fact that the regression controls for occupation and
change question refers to the number of employers in the previous calendar year (i.e. January to December).
Consequently, individuals who in January or February move and change firms will count as migrants but not employer
switchers.
28 For more detail, see the “Wages” sections of the NLS User’s Guide for each cohort.

17

industry tenure.29 When we exclude those other forms of tenure, we find returns to employer tenure
of roughly 5 percent in all three cohorts. Our results for returns to employer tenure in the NLS-YM
and NLSY79 are therefore broadly similar to those in Neal (1995) and Parent (2000), both of whom
examine workers from similar time periods to our two earlier cohorts and find that the addition of
industry tenure greatly reduces returns to job tenure. The results for the NLSY79 are qualitatively
similar but smaller in magnitude than those in Kambourov and Manovskii (2009) who find that
returns to occupation tenure are highest when all three forms (industry, occupation, and job) are
included.
The last row of Table 7 shows that the wage gain associated with an additional year of
residence in the same state is negative, although generally not significant. In other words, the benefit
to staying in the same geographic location is negligible after accounting for the average benefit from
staying in the same firm, industry and occupation.
Overall, we view Table 7 as showing little evidence that changes in the returns to different
types of human capital can explain the concurrent declines in general labor market transitions and
long-distance migration. Results are qualitatively similar when we exclude post-2007 data from the
NLSY97 sample to avoid any potentially confounding factors related to the severe recession and
weak labor market conditions that followed.
V.3 Changes in the Benefit to Changing Employers in the NLS
We next consider how returns to labor market transitions may have changed across cohorts,
which we view as a way of describing whether the benefits to making a labor market transition have
changed over time. We are particularly interested in the return to changing employers, as reduced
employer transitions have the potential to explain both declines in labor market transitions generally
and declining migration. To this end, we estimate first-differenced analogs of Equation (1).30 The
dependent variable is the change in the log wage and the key independent variable of interest is
whether the individual changed employer in the last year. We also report coefficients on returns to
the other three transitions: industry, occupation, and state.
The inclusion of individual fixed effects also contributes to lower estimates than appear elsewhere in the literature.
Taking the first difference of equation (1) suggests that we should also control for changes in age and each type of
tenure, as well as the quadratic terms of each of these variables. In addition to the changes in these variables, we include
levels controls for education, race, and ethnicity. We also control for year effects. Our specification is similar to that in
the classic Topel and Ward (1992) paper on returns to job transitions. When we include person fixed effects in the first
differenced equation, results are qualitatively similar, although the point estimate on returns to an employer transition is
insignificant in the NLSY79.
29
30

18

The results are shown in Table 8. In the first cohort, changing employers was associated
with approximately a 7 percent wage gain. This estimate is similar to that in the canonical Topel and
Ward (1992) paper, which uses a sample that is quite different but dates from roughly the same time
period. We estimate that the gain from changing employers is only half as large in the second and
third cohorts, although the standard errors are large enough that it is difficult to reject that they are
as large as 7 percent.31 When the NLSY97 cohort is limited to pre-2007, the return to changing
employers falls to 1 percent, albeit with an even larger standard error. The higher point estimate on
returns to an employer transition in the full NLSY97 sample is driven by the inclusion of the 20102011 data, not the recession years. It is therefore possible that the full sample estimate is somewhat
inflated by reorganization following an abnormally high level of mismatch during the recession
(Kahn 2010). Overall, these results suggest that the return to changing employers may have declined
over time, which would imply reductions in aggregate job changing and could in turn lead to
declines in migration. Although it is difficult to rule out an alternative interpretation that the type of
worker who changes employers now is of lower unobserved quality than in the past, this
interpretation is made less likely by the fact that this is a first difference equation as well as by the
inclusion of observed measures of quality such as education.32 When we include person fixed effects
to futher account for the possibility of selection bias, results are qualitatively similar in that the
return to changing employers is smaller in the NLSY79 and NLSY97 than in the NLS-YM, although
the standard errors are too large to find a statistically significant decline.
In contrast to the wage gains associated with changing employers, the wage gains from
changing occupations are substantially larger in the NLSY97 than in the earlier two cohorts, rising
from essentially zero in the earlier two cohorts to 7 percent for the NLSY97. To the extent that
changing occupation is correlated with interstate migration (Table 6), the increase in the return to
changing occupations should raise migration, working against the secular decline in the aggregate

Our estimates for the NLSY79 are reasonably close to those obtained by Light (2005) in a more parsimonious
specification and broader sample.
32 One might also wonder whether the cross-cohort changes documented in Table 9 apply similarly to all job changers.
To assess this, we defined two classifications of workers: those who made a job transition that (likely) involved an
intervening spell of non-work versus those who did not, and those who made an involuntary job transition versus those
who did not. While we found suggestive evidence of some differences in returns to job changes for those whose switch
was involuntary between the 1979 and 1997 cohorts (but not for those who changed through a spell of non-work), these
are difficult to interpret – in part because of changes in the way NLSY respondents were asked about reasons for their
job change over time. The composition of the pool of such job changers is also changing over time, as involuntary job
changes have declined in parallel with the overall decline in job transitions. We leave the question of the role for reasons
for job changing in these trends as an area for future research.
31

19

data. Returns to changing industry and state are generally small and insignificantly different from
zero.
V.4 Robustness of results from the NLS
A concern with the NLS results is that they are based on a very young age group and so
might not be representative of the general trends in the returns to tenure and labor market
transitions. In the NLS-YM and the NLSY79, we can examine individuals up to age 37. Because
returns to tenure tend to decline with tenure and older workers usually have more tenure, we find
smaller returns to tenure for this group than we did for the younger group. Nevertheless, results are
broadly similar in that we find no noticeable increases in returns to employer tenure from the 1980s
to the 2000s. We also find qualitatively similar returns to labor market transitions in these two
cohorts when we include workers up to age 37.
We can also use other datasets to examine the returns to tenure for older age groups.
Specifically, the PSID, CPS tenure supplement, and Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP) all have information on employer tenure in various years. In each survey, the information
comes from a direct question concerning the length of time the respondent has been working for
their current employer or the start date at their current employer, so they might have more
measurement error than the measures of tenure that we calculate in the NLS.33 In addition, none of
these datasets have information about industry or location tenure, and only the SIPP has
information about occupation tenure.34 If these forms of tenure are correlated with one another and
if the trends in the returns to these forms of tenure are different, then excluding the other forms of
tenure may bias the estimates on return to employer tenure.35 Nevertheless, we use PSID and CPS
data to see whether the trends in the return to employer tenure are similar for different age groups
and whether the NLSY results are comparable to changes found in other data. We tried a similar
comparison with SIPP data but limitations on the survey years for which we had appropriate
questions led us to drop that analysis.
In the PSID we are able to assess the effect of measurement error in tenure by restricting the sample to individuals
where reported tenure is consistent across observations. Roughly 40 percent of the sample is excluded by making this
restriction, yet the results are unchanged.
34While the job tenure and occupational mobility supplement asks respondents about their tenure at their current job, it
does not specifically ask about tenure in an occupation or industry. However, the supplement does ask respondents
whether they were working in the same occupation one year ago.
35 For example, suppose that returns to firm-specific tenure are rising over time, returns to occupation-specific tenure
are falling and firm-specific tenure is positively correlated with occupation-specific tenure. If we are unable to control
for occupation-specific tenure, then the uptrend in firm-specific tenure will be biased downward.
33

20

Table 9 shows estimates of the return to employer tenure in the PSID and CPS for the same
time periods of the NLSY79 and NLSY97, as well as the intervening time period for completeness.
We also report returns to employer tenure from a comparable specification in our three NLS
samples. In the PSID and CPS, we find similar trends over time in the return to employer tenure
for older age groups as we find for young workers: estimates for the 2000s are either the same or
lower than estimates for earlier time periods, providing no support for a decline in job transitions or
migration on the basis of changing returns to tenure. When occupation, industry and location tenure
are omitted from the NLSY, we obtain estimates of return to employer tenure that are quite similar
to the PSID and CPS, further suggesting that the NLSY results are not unique to that data set.
It is worth noting that our estimates of the returns to tenure in the PSID are lower than
those of Buchinsky, Fougere, Kramarz and Tchernis (2010), who identify this return from a
combination of exclusion restrictions and functional form assumptions using the same dataset. To
the extent that selection (even despite the use of fixed effects in our specification) is more likely to
bias our estimates up rather than down, this comparison reassures us that any upward bias in our
estimates is probably not large.36
Turning to the wage gain associated with changing employers, we can obtain estimates for
older workers in the PSID. We use a specification similar to that in the NLS except that we cannot
include indicators for occupation, industry, or location switching, nor can we control for occupation,
industry, or location tenure. Also, we look at two-year wage changes because after 1997 the PSID
was only collected every other year. As reported in Table 10, the most striking result is that the
return to changing employers is larger in the 1995 to 2001 period than it was in either the earlier or
later periods. Even so, there does appear to be a modest decline in the wage gain associated with
changing employers from the 1980s to the 2000s for all but the 50-64 age group.37 In that sense,
these results are consistent with those found in the NLS.
VI. What is behind declining returns to job transitions?
To recap, we find that returns to firm-specific human capital have not changed appreciably
since the 1970s, suggesting that the benefits that accrue from staying with one’s employer have not
We tried using the same instruments for tenure as Buchinsky, Fougere, Kramarz and Tchernis, but these variables
(marital status, number of children and household non-labor income) were not strong predictors of tenure in our
sample. It is possible that these instruments are less useful in our context because we split our sample by age, and these
variables may be better predictors of tenure over a wider age range. The differing results also may partly owe to the
functional form imposed by Buchinsky, Fougere, Kramarz and Tchernis.
37 This result is robust to excluding the 2007-2009 recession and post-recession years.
36

21

changed over time. At the same time, the wage gains associated with changing employers have
become smaller, consistent with the idea that the distribution of wage offers has shifted in a way that
has made labor market transitions less desirable to workers. One possible explanation for this type
of change in the distribution of wages offers is the argument made by Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl
(2013) that wage offers have become more similar across local labor markets. However, the
distribution of wage offers appears to have changed even for offers within the same geographic area.
For example, job transitions have declined among individuals that did not change their state of
residence (Figure 8).38 Moreover, in unreported analysis of NLSY respondents who did not make a
cross-state move during their time in the survey, we find a decline in the return to changing
employers that is identical to the return estimated from the full sample. This result suggests that
workers may be facing a relatively less desirable set of outside options (compared to their current job
or job offer) both across and within local labor markets.
One factor that could give rise to a narrowing in the distribution of wage offers (regardless
of geographic location) relative to one’s current offer is an increase in initial match quality over time.
In this case, fewer outside options would be desirable (from a social welfare perspective) and
achieving a large wage gain by changing employers would be difficult, thus reducing the fraction of
people who change employers. However, the only way that one could interpret our results as
supportive of higher match quality is if match quality is only reflected in the initial wage and not in
changes in wages over time with an employer.. Although it is possible to imagine such a scenario, we
would find rising match quality coupled with flat returns to employer tenure something of a puzzle.
An alternate hypothesis is that the broader U.S. labor market may have changed in a way that
narrows the distribution of offers that can be made to or received by workers irrespective of
whether the offer arrives from the same local labor market or not. We can obtain some insight into
the influence of the outside market on worker wages using a test developed by Beaudry and
DiNardo (1991). They argue that in a spot market for labor, wages should be related to
contemporaneous labor market conditions. If wages are primarily determined by long-term implicit
contracts between workers and firms and workers are tied to the firm for the length of their
employment spell, then wages should reflect labor market conditions at the time the worker was
hired. Finally, if wages are determined by implicit contracts but workers are free to move between
firms, then wages should be related to the best labor market conditions since the worker was hired.
This is true at least since the mid-1990s and perhaps farther back, depending on how the trend line is drawn to adjust
for the strongly cyclical nature of job transitions.
38

22

Using data from the PSID and CPS in the late 1970s and early 1980s, they find the strongest support
for the implicit contract model with costless worker mobility. Grant (2003) finds similar results
using the original cohorts of the National Longitudinal Surveys and the NLSY79.
Following these studies, we estimate a log wage equation that includes labor market
conditions at three points in time: contemporaneous conditions, conditions at the time a worker
started her current job, and the most favorable conditions that obtained from the time the job
started to the present. We use the annual national unemployment rate for all individuals aged 16 and
older as our measure of labor market conditions.39 Other controls include age, age squared,
employer tenure, and employer tenure squared. The PSID and NLSY specifications also include
individual fixed effects, while the CPS tenure supplement specification includes educational
attainment, indicators for non-white and ever-married, and industry and region fixed effects. The
one notable difference between our specification and that in Beaudry and Dinardo (1991) is that our
samples are long enough to include a quadratic time trend, so that our results are not driven by
trends in unemployment and wages. Our main innovation over the earlier two papers is to examine
whether the importance of external labor market conditions has changed over time.
We find evidence that it has, at least since the 1990s. As shown in Table 11, like the earlier
two papers, we find that the minimum unemployment rate since a worker was hired had a large
impact on wages in the 1980s and into the 1990s. This is true in all three datasets, regardless of the
age range included. Grant (2003) also finds a significant and statistically similar relationship in the
1970s and 1980s using the NLS original cohorts. However, in the 2000s the connection between
wages and the minimum unemployment rate is much weaker, particularly for younger workers.40 At
the same time, initial conditions seem to have become more important for wages, with magnitudes
that are comparable to the correlation with the minimum unemployment rate in earlier decades.
Although the PSID and CPS show a significant correlation of the contemporaneous unemployment
rate with wages in the 1980s and 1990s, its sign does not make sense; in the NLSY this coefficient is
insignificant but has the expected sign.41
39 Results are similar if we use state-level labor market conditions, allowing us to include year fixed-effects in the
regression. However, we prefer the specification that uses national conditions because wage offers can come from
outside of one’s state of residence.
40 In the PSID, when the 2007-2009 recession and post-recession years are excluded, the coefficient on the minimum
unemployment rate in the 2000s falls to -0.017 and is insignificantly different from zero. Otherwise, all estimates in
Table 11 are robust to excluding that recession, as well as to omitting individuals whose current job has lasted less than
one year (for whom initial conditions, best conditions and contemporaneous conditions are all the same).
41 We find similar estimates in the CPS and PSID when excluding the other two measures of labor market conditions, so
this result is not driven by a high degree of colinearity with the other two measures. We also find similar estimates when

23

What do these results imply about the role of the employer-employee relationship in
declining labor market and geographic transitions? One possibility is that the shift in implicit
contracts (initial conditions mattering more than best conditions over the worker’s tenure) is simply
a symptom of declining geographic mobility. If workers are less able to move across markets, then
initial labor market conditions should become more important than best labor market conditions.
But this interpretation cannot explain why labor market transitions have fallen even for workers who
remain in the same labor market.
Another explanation for the results shown in Table 11 is that the distribution of outside
options open to a worker has changed. For example, an increase in firms’ bargaining power may
have decreased workers’ share of profits, reducing the incentive to change firms based on variation
in this component of wages, and thereby causing implicit contracts to continue for longer periods of
time. Possible factors that may have reduced worker bargaining power include the decline of
unionization; the diffusion of formal human resources practices or monitoring technology, which
could homogenize pay across firms; and intensified product market competition (perhaps related to
globalization), which could reduce the rents available for firms to share with workers.42 Another
possibility, and one to which we return in the next section, is that job search has changed in
response to a rise in inequality in average pay across firms.
We can gain some insight into whether the change in implicit contracting is related to a
change in migration costs or to a change in the distribution of workers’ outside options by
examining individuals who moved across state lines. We would not expect a change in migration
costs to have first-order effects on the firm-worker arrangement for individuals who have
demonstrated an ability to move. By contrast, a shift in the distribution of outside options is more
likely to affect workers similarly, regardless of their mobility. Since the CPS is a cross section, we
can only examine groups of mobile workers in the PSID and NLSY. Results (available upon
request) for those who migrate in the NLSY are consistent with those for the entire sample, in that
the negative correlation between wages and the minimum unemployment rate diminishes from the
1979 to 1997 cohort, while the negative correlation between wages and the initial unemployment
using state-level unemployment rates to measure labor market conditions and including year fixed effects, so the positive
correlation between contemporaneous conditions and wages is estimated from cross-sectional rather than time series
variation. Thus, we leave this result in the CPS and PSID as something of a puzzle. In the NLSY79, the
contemporaneous unemployment rate has a negative and significant relationship with the wage when other
unemployment rates are excluded. In the NLSY97, the coefficient on current unemployment alone is negative but not
significant.
42 For an example of how technology has allowed firms to monitor worker productivity in minute detail, see Mas and
Moretti (2009).

24

rate becomes larger.43 By contrast, the PSID shows no clear changes in implicit contracting over
time for those who migrate.
We conclude that the evidence is somewhat more supportive of the interpretation that
changes in the distribution of outside options, rather than changes in migration costs, are the factor
underlying the shift in the correlation between wages and labor market conditions. Moreover,
because the decline in job transitions for non-migrants begins a little later than the decline in
interstate migration (as shown in Figure 8), and because the change in implicit contracting seems to
have begun in the 2000s, we surmise that any changes in the distribution of outside options have
been more pronounced in the last half of our period. Additional support for this idea can be found
in Partridge et al. (2012). They find that after 2000, US workers are less likely to migrate to arbitrage
demand shocks than they were in 1990. Instead, demand shocks are more likely to be met by
changes in the local participation rate or decreasing local unemployment. One possible explanation,
based on our analysis, is that such demand shocks may no longer generate the types of wage gains
they had in the past, making them a less likely to motivate a long-distance move.44 These ideas, as
well as other potential explanations for the change in implicit contracting, are clearly an important
avenue of further research.
VII. Conclusion
In this paper, we examine explanations for the secular decline in interstate migration
since the 1980s. Demographic and socioeconomic factors can account for little of this
decrease. By contrast, there is a strong empirical relationship between the downtrend in
migration and downward trends in a variety of labor market transitions—i.e. a decline in the
fraction of workers moving from job to job, changing industry, and changing occupation—
that occurred over the same period. We explore a number of reasons why both types of
flows might have diminished over time, including changes in the distribution of job
opportunities across space, polarization in the labor market, and concerns of dual-career
households. We find little empirical support for any of these hypotheses. Because labor
market transitions occur much more frequently than long-distance migration and because

We also found similar results for individuals who resided outside of their birth state at the onset of the survey, a group
which likely faces lower migration costs than average.
44 Partridge et al. (2012) also find “preliminary evidence that geographical mobility is increasingly tied to occupationallybased demand shocks.” This echoes our finding that occupation change appears to have become an important driver of
wage growth since the 1990s.
43

25

labor market transitions have been declining even for workers that remain in the same state,
it seems unlikely that an increase in the cost of migration would be able to explain the
decrease in labor market transitions. Rather, the decline in labor market transitions–
particularly transitions across employers– has likely led to the associated decline in longdistance migration.
To gain further insight into the cause of the decline in labor market transitions, we
take a reduced-form approach to estimating the wage-related net benefits of changing firms.
We find that the return to firm-specific human capital, a proxy for the cost of changing
firms, has not changed appreciably since the 1970s. By contrast, the wage gains associated
with changing employers have declined over time. We establish these results using data
from young workers in three cohorts of the NLS spanning the 1970s to the 2000s.
Although the NLS provides the longest time period and richest set of control variables, we
find similar results in the CPS and PSID.
We conclude that the decline in job transitions appears to be related to a decline in the
return to job changing over this period. Because wage growth that accrues while a worker remains
within the same firm has been roughly constant over time, it appears that the average quality of the
worker-firm match has not changed (unless match quality does not affect a worker’s wage profile).
Instead, the interaction of workers with the external labor market—and the effects of this
interaction on wage setting behavior within a firm—must now be somehow different than it was in
earlier decades. In support of this interpretation, in the spirit of Beaudry and Dinardo (1991) we
find that the connection between wages and labor market conditions at the time the worker was
hired has strengthened, while the connection between wages and the best labor market conditions
since hire has become weaker. We interpret these results as suggesting that the distribution of wage
offers that workers consider at a point in time has either shifted or narrowed in a way that makes
transitions across employers less advantageous.
These findings may relate to recent studies that find growing dispersion of establishment
wage premia in the U.S. (Barth et al. 2013; Dunne, Foster, Haltiwanger and Troske 2004) and
Germany (Card et al. 2013) in the last several decades. In particular, a wider distribution of
establishment wage premia should increase the option value to continued search, thereby raising
reservation wages (Rogerson, Shimer and Wright 2005). With higher reservation wages, workers
should wait longer before accepting a new offer, decreasing the frequency of transitions between

26

jobs. Thus, it is possible that rising inequality in pay across establishments has limited job-to-job
mobility for workers.
At first blush, it might seem that rising dispersion in establishment premia would raise the
wage gains to transitioning across firms, a prediction that contrasts with our findings in Table 8.
However, it is possible that assortative matching of workers and firms has increased alongside rising
dispersion in establishment premia.45 If high quality workers are more likely to be at high quality
firms, then wage changes upon employer switching could decline even as establishment wage premia
rise. Card et al. find that sorting of workers by ability across establishments has indeed risen in
Germany. Similarly, Crane (2013) finds evidence that the US labor market exhibits strong assortative
matching in the 2000-2008 period.46 Clearly, an important direction of future research should be to
examine the relationships between establishment wage premia, assortative matching, and wage
changes when workers change jobs in more detail using both theoretical and empirical approaches.
Importantly, our analysis does not necessarily indicate that economic activity in the U.S. has
become less dynamic. In fact, although we cannot definitively rule out a role for higher migration
costs or other constraints on geographic and labor market transitions, our results point more
towards the idea that fewer location and job changes are needed in today’s economy. At this stage,
we view our evidence on the reasons for the dual declines in geographic mobility and labor market
transitions as intriguing, but speculative. As these trends seem to have become an enduring feature
of the U.S. economy, further research is needed to shed light on the mechanisms driving these
declines.
References
Autor, David. 2010. “The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications
for Employment and Earnings.” Center for American Progress and The Hamilton Project.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. “Trends in Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing
the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 90(2): 300-323.
Bachmann, Rudiger and Daniel H. Cooper. 2012. “Cyclical and Sectoral Transitions in the U.S.
Housing Market.” FRB Boston Working Papers Series 12-17.
This relationship could be coincidental or causal. If workers spend more time searching as a result of rising
establishment premia, one might expect grreater sorting of workers across firms by ability. It is beyond the scope of this
paper for us to even speculate as to whether that has occurred.
46 Although Barth et al. (2013) do not find evidence of an increase in assortative matching in the US, Crane (2013) argues
that by not controlling for firm characteristics, the method in Barth et al. (2013) and in other papers is biased against
finding assortative matching.
45

27

Batini, Nicoletta, Oya Celasun, Thomas Dowling, Marcello Estevao, Geoffrey Keim, Martin
Sommer and Evridiki Tsounta. 2010. “United States: Selected Issues Paper.” International Monetary
Fund Country Report 10/248.
Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C. Davis and Richard B. Freeman. 2014. “It’s Where You Work:
Increases in Earnings Dispersion across Establishments and Individuals in the U.S.” Manuscript.
Paper presented at the 2013 Journal of Labor Economics conference in honor of Edward Lazear,
Stanford Graduate School of Business.
Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo. 1991. “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of
Wages over the Business Cycle.” Journal of Political Economy. 99(4): 655-688.
Benson, Alan. 2012. “Re-Thinking the Two-Body Problem: The Segregation of Women into
Geographically Flexible Occupations.” Manuscript, MIT.
Borjas, George J. 2001. Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?" Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity. 2001 (1), 69-119.
Buchinsky, Moshe, Denis Fougere, Francis Kramarz, and Rusty Tchernis. 2008. “Interfirm Mobility,
Wages, and the Returns to Seniority and Experience in the U.S.” Center for Applied Economics and
Policy Research Working Paper 2008-006.
Cadena, Brian and Brian Kovak. 2013. “Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets: Evidence
from the Great Recession.” Manuscript. UC-Boulder.
Card, David, Jorg Heinig, and Patrick Kline. 2013. “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West
German Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 128(3): 967-1015.
Cooke, Thomas J. 2011. “It is not Just the Economy: Declining Migration and the Rise of Secular
Rootedness.” Population, Space and Place. 17: 193-203.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. “Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic
Growth.” The Review of Income and Wealth. 55(3): 661-685.
Costa, Dora and Matthew Kahn. 2000. “Power Couples: Changes in the Locational Choice of the
College Educated.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 115(4): 1287-1315.
Crane, Leland. 2013. “Firm Dynamics and Assortative Matching.” Manuscript. University of
Maryland.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger. 2012. “Labor Market Flows in the Cross
Section and Over Time.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 25(1): 1-18.
Dunne, Timothy, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and Kenneth R. Troske. 2004. “Wage and
Productivity Dispersion in United States Manunfacturing: The Role of Computer Investment.”
Journal of Labor Economics. 22(2): 397-429.
28

Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger. 2012. “Labor Market Flows in the Cross
Section and Over Time.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 59(1): 1-18.
Frey, William H. 2009. “The Great American Migration Slowdown: Regional and Metropolitan
Dimensions.” http://www.brookings.edu/reports/2009/1209_migration_frey.aspx
Fujita, Shigeru. 2012. “Declining Labor Turnover and Turbulence.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, Working Paper No. 11-44/R.
Ganong, Peter and Daniel Shoag. 2013. “Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
Declined?” Harvard Kennedy School Working Paper No. RWP12-028.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross and Matthew Notowidigdo. 2013. “Public Health Insurance, Labor
Supply, and Employment Lock.” NBER Working Paper #19220.
Grant, Darren. 2003. “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over the
Business Cycle.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 56(3): 393-408.
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2002. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job Mobility:
A Critical Review of the Literature.” NBER Working Paper 8817.
Hellerstein, Julie and Neumark, David. 1995. “Are Earnings Profiles Steeper than Productivity
Profiles? Evidence from Israeli Firm-Level Data.” Journal of Human Resources. 30(1): 89-112.
Hyatt, Henry R. and James R. Spletzer. 2013. “The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics.”
Center for Economic Studies research paper 13-03 (U.S. Census Bureau).
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover.” Journal of Political
Economy.87(5):972-990.
Kambourov, Gueorgui. and Manovskii, Iourii. 2009. “Occupational Specificity of Human Capital.”
International Economic Review. 50(1): 63-115.
Kahn, Lisa. 2010. “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a
Bad Economy.” Labour Economics. 17(2): 303-316.
Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2012. “Inter-state Migration Has Fallen by Less Than You
Think.” Demography. DOI 10.1007/s13524-12-0110-3.
Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2013. “Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate
Migration.” Working paper 697, The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Koerber, Kin. 2007. “Comparison of ACS and ASEC Data on Geographic Mobility: 2004.”
Manuscript, U.S. Census Bureau. Available at
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/library/by_year/2007/2007_Koerber_01.pdf.

29

Kreuger, Alan and Rouse, Cecilia. 1998. “The Effect of Workplace Education on Earnings,
Turnover and Job Performance.” Journal of Labor Economics. 16(1): 61-94.
Light, Audrey. 2005. “Job Mobility and Wage Growth: Evidence from the NLSY79.” Monthly Labor
Review. 128 (February 2005): 33-39.
Madrian, Brigitte C. 2004. “Health Insurance Portability, Labor Supply and Job Mobility.” InterAmerican Conference on Social Security Working Paper 04012.
Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti. 2009. “Peers at Work.” American Economic Review. 99(1): 112-45.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. 2011. “Internal Migration in the US.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 25(3): 173-196.
Moscarini, Giuseppe and Kaj Thomsson. 2007. “Occupational and Job Mobility in the US.”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics. 109(4): 807-836.
Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers.” Journal of
Labor Economics. 13(4): 653-677.
Parent, Daniel. 2000. “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” 18(2): 306-323.
Partridge, Mark D., Dan S. Rickman, M. Rose Olfert, and Kamar Ali. 2012. “Dwindling U.S.
Internal Migration: Evidence of Spatial Equilibrium or Structural Shifts in U.S. Labor Markets.”
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42(2012): 375-388.
Rogerson, Richard, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright. 2005. “Search-Theoretic Models of the
Labor Market: A Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature. 43(4): 959-988.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L. and William A. Sundstrom. 2004. “The Decline and Rise of Interstate
Migration in the United States: Evidence from the IPUMS, 1850-1990.” In Research in Economic
History Vol. 22, ed. Alexander Field, 289-325. Amsterdam and San Diego: Elsevier, JAI.
Saks, Raven and Abigail Wozniak. 2011. “Labor Reallocation over the Business Cycle: New
Evidence from Internal Migration.” Journal of Labor Economics. 29(4): 697-739.
Shaw, Kathryn L. 1984. “A Formulation of the Earnings Function Using the Concept of
Occupational Investment.” Journal of Human Resources. 19(3): 319-340.
Shaw, Kathryn L. 1987. “Occupational Change, Employer Change, and the Transferability of Skills.”
Southern Economic Journal. 53(3): 702-719.
Stewart, Jay (2007). “Using March Cps Data to Analyze Labor Market Transitions” Journal of
Economic and Social Measurement 32: 177-97.
Topel, Robert H. and Michael P. Ward. 1992. “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107(2): 439-479.
30

Table 1: Population Shares and Migration Rates by
Selected Demographic and Socioeconomic Group
Population Share
Within County
Interstate Migration
Migration Rate
Rate
1981-89 2002-12
1981-89 2002-12
1981-89
2002-12
Age
Age 20-24
Age 25-34
Age 35-44
Age 45-54
Age 55+

12.2
25.0
19.3
27.5
16.5

9.4
18.6
22.7
34.8
14.9

22.2
16.8
8.7
4.6
2.8

19.1
15.2
6.6
3.8
2.2

5.7
4.3
2.6
1.5
0.9

3.3
3.0
1.5
0.9
0.6

Homeownership
Renter
Homeowner

29.6
70.4

27.4
72.6

22.3
5.1

16.9
3.4

6.4
1.5

3.6
0.9

Educational attainment
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College+

26.8
38.1
16.3
18.8

13.9
30.6
26.5
29.0

7.7
8.3
9.9
8.9

7.2
6.3
6.4
5.3

1.5
2.2
3.1
4.2

0.9
1.1
1.5
2.1

Note. Authors’ calculations based on data from the March CPS. Sample includes all individuals age 20 and up that do
not have imputed migration data. Educational attainment is only available for individuals age 25 and up.

Table 2: In-Migration, Out-Migration and Net Migration by Census Division
In-Migration
Out-Migration
Net In-Migration
1981-89 2000-10
1981-89 2002-10
1981-89 2002-10
New England
2.7
2.3
2.8
2.6
-0.1
-0.3
Mid Atlantic
1.6
1.7
2.2
2.2
-0.5
-0.5
East North Central
1.7
1.6
2.4
1.9
-0.6
-0.3
West North Central
2.7
2.4
3.1
2.5
-0.4
-0.1
South Atlantic
4.1
3.4
3.2
2.9
0.9
0.5
East South Central
3.0
2.8
3.0
2.5
0.0
0.3
West South Central
3.3
2.4
3.1
2.2
0.2
0.3
Mountain
5.6
4.3
5.0
3.6
0.6
0.7
Pacific
2.6
1.7
2.3
2.0
0.3
-0.3
Note. Authors’ calculations based on interstate migration data from the Internal Revenue Service.

Table 3: State-level relationship between job transition and migration rates

% changing firms

CPS

CPS

IRS

IRS

(1)
0.06
(0.01)

(2)

(3)
0.03
(0.01)

(4)

% changing firms (in-state stayers)
% changing occupations

0.04
(0.01)
0.04
(0.04)

% changing occupations (in-state stayers)
% changing industries

% 65 years old or older
% with no more than a high school degree
% homeowner
log(median wage)-log(25th pctile wage)
log(75th pctile wage)-log(median wage)
% employed in middle-skill jobs
% employed in manufacturing
% living in HH with emp.-provided health care
% living in a HH where both spouses work
Change in cross-state migration (1981-1990 to 2001-2010)
Change due to job transition variables
Change due to other RHS variables except trends

0.00
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.04)

0.06
(0.04)

% changing industries (in-state stayers)
% less than 24 years old

0.03
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)

-4.11
(3.64)
-1.10
(3.34)
-2.52
(1.52)
-5.63
(1.22)
-0.54
(0.58)
-0.66
(0.78)
0.03
(0.02)
0.02
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.03
(0.03)
-5.46
(3.88)
-3.05
(3.67)
-2.73
(1.51)
-6.24
(1.21)
-0.65
(0.60)
-0.79
(0.82)
0.03
(0.02)
0.02
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

-8.79
(1.84)
-8.42
(1.90)
0.71
(0.84)
0.09
(0.75)
0.11
(0.21)
-0.27
(0.27)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.00)
0.00
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)
-9.21
(2.00)
-8.89
(2.08)
0.66
(0.87)
-0.08
(0.74)
0.10
(0.20)
-0.32
(0.27)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.00)
0.00
(0.01)

-1.15
-0.51
-0.04

-1.15
-0.15
-0.05

-0.43
-0.23
0.10

-0.43
-0.16
0.10

Note: Coefficients are from state-year level regressions of the percent living in a different state in the previous year on
the listed variables, state and year fixed effects, state time trends, and the following additional variables: percent of the
state that is male, white, or black; percent employed and unemployed; percent married; and percent living in a household
with children. Included years are 1981-2010. Standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses.
Contribution to change in the fraction moving states from all RHS variables is calculated by: 1) predicting migration for
each state in each year based on all RHS variables, excluding job transition variables, state and year fixed effects and state
time trends; 2) taking the weighted average across states for each year; 3) calculating the average for 1981-89 and 200210; 4) taking the difference over the periods. For the contribution due to the job transition variables, the same exercise
is carried out using the first three variables in the table. For columns 1 and 2, N=1428 (51 states and 28 years). For the
columns 3 and 4, N=1344 (48 states and 28 years--data are not available for AK and HI).

Table 4: Population Shares and Migration Rates by Household Type
Population Share
Both spouses employed
All other

1981-89
30.5
69.5

2002-12
30.3
69.7

Interstate Migration
Rate
1981-89
2002-12
1.9
0.9
3.1
1.9

Both spouses employed and prof./tech. occ.
Other employed and prof/tech.
All other

2.1
13.5
83.1

2.9
16.7
78.8

3.2
3.8
2.6

1.5
2.2
1.4

Both spouses employed and in top quintile of
earnings distribution
Other employed and in top quintile of earnings
All other

1.2
18.5
79.5

2.4
16.3
79.9

1.8
2.5
2.9

1.0
1.6
1.6

Both spouses employed and college degree or more
Other employed and college degree+
All other

4.6
14.2
78.9

7.8
18.1
70.7

2.7
4.1
2.6

1.4
2.3
1.5

Employer-provided health insurance in household
All other

64.8
35.2

64.7
35.3

2.7
3.0

1.5
1.8

Note. Authors’ calculations based on data from the March CPS. Sample includes all individuals age 20 and up.

Table 5: Descriptive Statistics for the Samples of NLS and NLSY Men
NLSY97
NLS-YM
NLSY79
2002-2007
Unique respondents
Tenure in state
State change last year
Log real wage
Black
Hispanic
Age
Highest grade completed=12
Highest grade completed=13 to
15
Highest grade completed=16+
Employer tenure
Industry tenure
Occupation tenure
Industry change last year
Occupation change last year
Change employer last year

NLSY97
2002-2011

3000a

4784

2503

2735

5.61
(3.74)
0.057
(0.232)
2.13
(0.38)
0.22
(0.41)
0.055
(0.228)
25.4
(2.21)
0.363
(0.481)
0.194
(0.395)
0.209
(0.407)
2.50
(2.39)
2.81
(2.41)
2.77
(2.40)
0.274
(0.446)
0.292
(0.455)
0.443
(0.497)

6.642
(3.66)
0.056
(0.23)
1.86
(0.422)
0.229
(0.421)
0.164
(0.37)
25.444
(2.24)
0.452
(0.498)
0.202
(0.402)
0.165
(0.371)
2.581
(2.41)
2.688
(2.395)
2.684
(2.394)
0.316
(0.465)
0.319
(0.466)
0.376
(0.484)

6.23
(3.236)
0.053
(0.224)
1.782
(0.412)
0.217
(0.412)
0.22
(0.415)
23.436
(1.332)
0.325
(0.468)
0.276
(0.447)
0.234
(0.423)
2.157
(2.067)
2.308
(2.065)
2.253
(2.065)
0.344
(0.475)
0.365
(0.481)
0.426
(0.494)

7.178
(4.037)
0.045
(0.208)
1.848
(0.432)
0.215
(0.411)
0.218
(0.413)
24.955
(2.108)
0.304
(0.46)
0.27
(0.444)
0.27
(0.444)
2.692
(2.467)
2.839
(2.449)
2.793
(2.454)
0.278
(0.448)
0.295
(0.456)
0.35
(0.477)

Notes: Sample from each data set is 22-29 year old high attachment individuals with non-missing data for wage
equations in subsequent tables. High attachment defined as working 26 or more weeks in the previous calendar year.
Cells show unweighted means. Standard deviations are in parentheses. All tenure variables represent continuous years of
tenure in current position. Industry and occupation tenure defined in part based on edited industry/occupation change
measures per discussion in Data Appendix. Log wages are in constant dollars using the 1982-1984 CPI average. a
indicates number rounded for confidentiality purposes.

Table 6
Fraction of Interstate Movers that Changed Employer, Industry or Occupation
NLS-YM

NLSY79

NLSY97
2002-2007

NLSY97
2002-2011

Employer

0.77

0.74

0.78

0.72

Occupation

0.62

0.78

0.75

0.67

Industry

0.57

0.70

0.64

0.59

Notes: Sample from each data set is 22-29 year old high attachment men with non-missing data on employer,
occupation, industry, and state transitions as defined in Table 7. High attachment defined as working 26 or more weeks
in the previous calendar year. Cells show unweighted means.

Table 7: Implied Returns to a Third Year of Tenure for Men Ages 22-29
NLS Cohort:

NLS-YM

NLSY79

NLSY97

Industry tenure

0.0113**
(0.005)

0.0080*
(0.0040)

0.0071
(0.0075)

Occupation
tenure

0.0129**
(0.005)

0.0166***
(0.0040)

0.0010
(0.0071)

Employer
tenure

-0.0064
(0.006)

0.0047
(0.0041)

0.0034
(0.0079)

State tenure

-0.0045
(0.005)

-0.0109
(0.0032)***

-0.0029
(0.0033)

Observation
years

1966/71, 73,
75, 76, 78, 80,
81

1979-1994

2002-2011

Notes: Cells show implied returns to three years of tenure in designated category,
holding other characteristics constant. Returns are calculated from estimates of
Equation 1, as discussed in text, using the NLS sample indicated in the column
heading. *** indicates significance of level coefficient at the .1% level, ** at the 1%
level, and * at the 5% level.

Table 8: Wage Equation Returns to Labor Market and Geographic Transitions
NLS Cohort:

NLS-YM

NLSY79

NLSY97
2002-2007

NLSY97
2002-2011

Industry change

-0.004
(0.0227)
-0.0183
(0.0213)
0.0716***
(0.0203)
0.0109
(0.0494)

0.0177
(0.0159)
-0.0014
(0.0149)
0.034*
(0.0157)
-0.0546
(0.0292)

-0.0151
(0.0380)
0.0908*
(0.0396)
0.0094
(0.0325)
0.0538
(0.0434)

-0.0372
(0.0237)
0.0661**
(0.0240)
0.0372
(0.0203)
-0.0086
(0.028)

5533

17323

3448

9021

Occupation change
Employer change
State change
N obs

Notes: Male, 22-29 high attachment sample from NLS-YM, NLSY79 and NLSY97 as described in text.
Dependent variable is annual change in log hourly wage. Covariates include black, Hispanic, 4 education
dummies, aged-squared, the change in age squared, the change in all four tenure variables, the change in
the squares of all four tenure variables, and year dummies.

Table 9: Returns to Employer Tenure by Age in the PSID, CPS and NLSY
PSID
CPS
NLSY
1982199520031983, 1996, 2002, 1979- 20021994
2001
2011
1987, 1998, 2004, 1994 2011
1991 2000 2006,
2008,
2010
Men
22-29
30-39
40-49
50-64

0.030
0.014
0.010
0.013

0.016
0.006
0.008
0.011

0.021
0.006
0.006
0.011

0.050
0.035
0.026
0.024

0.025
0.018
0.027
0.026

0.037
0.019
0.016
0.019

0.048
0.053

0.042
-

Notes: Cells report implied returns to a third year of tenure from log wage equations that include employer tenure and
its square, but omitting variables related to industry, occupation and state tenure (since these are not available in all
datasets). PSID and NLSY regressions include individual fixed effects. Each cell is a separate regression using the
indicated age group, data set, and data period. Standard errors are available upon request.

Table 10: Returns to Changing Employer by Age in the PSID
19831994

19952001

20032011

0.039*
(0.019)

0.102**
(0.031)

0.024
(0.030)

30-39

0.035*
(0.014)

0.046*
(0.020)

0.017
(0.020)

40-49

0.051**
(0.018)

0.110**
(0.019)

-0.032
(0.020)

50-64

-0.052**
(0.019)

0.093**
(0.033)

-0.034
(0.024)

Men
22-29

Notes: Each cell reports the coefficient estimate on an indicator for whether an individual changed employer in the
previous two years, where the dependent variable is the change in the individual’s log wage over the previous two years.
Other controls include age, age squared, tenure squared, indicators for educational attainment and race, and the 2-year
changes in tenure, tenure squared, and age squared. Regressions estimated separately for each age group and time
period, and the sample is restricted to men.

Table 11: Nested Tests of Contracting Models
Data

PSID

PSID

CPS

CPS

NLSY79

NLSY97

Age

21-64
1981-2011

22-29
19812011

21-64
19792010

22-29
19792010

22-29
19791994

22-29
20022011

1980s

0.014**
(0.002)

0.010
(0.006)

0.008**
(0.002)

0.022**
(0.006)

1990s

0.011**
(0.003)

0.025**
(0.009)

0.028**
(0.009)

-0.060*
(0.025)

2000s

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.023**
(0.007)

0.007*
(0.003)

0.000
(0.008)

0.009
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.020**
(0.005)

0.000
(0.009)
-0.027*
(0.011)
-0.035**
(0.016)

0.001
(0.003)
0.008
(0.006)
-0.010**
(0.003)

0.006
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.013)
-0.041*
(0.016)

-0.041**
(0.007)
-0.057**
(0.007)

-0.022
(0.013)
-0.055**
(0.016)

-0.008
(0.005)
-0.049**
(0.011)

-0.038**
(0.013)
0.040
(0.025)

0.003
(0.007)
35803

0.030
(0.017)
8947

-0.004
(0.007)
69042

0.024
(0.020)
15827

Years
UR[current]

UR[began]
1980s
1990s
2000s

-0.001
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.005)
-0.026
(0.018)

UR[min]
1980s
1990s
2000s
Obs

-0.032**
(0.006)

24824

0.12
(0.021)
7371

Note. UR[current] is national unemployment rate for all workers 16 and up in current survey year in NLSY. In PSID
and CPS, UR[current] is national unemployment rate in previous calendar year. UR[min] is minimum of national
unemployment rates from year job began to current survey year (in NLSY) and to past calendar year (in PSID and CPS).
UR[began] is national unemployment rate in calendar year that job began (NLSY, CPS and PSID). All PSID and NLSY
regressions include a quadric time trend, individual fixed effects, employer tenure, employer tenure squared, age and age
squared. CPS regressions include a quadratic time trend, employer tenure and tenure squared, age and age squared, a
dummy for having been married, for being non-white, dummies for educational status, industry, and region. In PSID
and CPS, estimates by decade are estimated from a single regression with decade dummies and interactions of decade
dummies with labor market conditions. NLSY79 results are shown in between the rows for the 1980s and 1990s
because this sample spans both decades. Standard errors are clustered by individual in PSID and NLSY; standard errors
in CPS are robust standard errors. ** indicates significance at the 1% level and * at the 5% level.

.16
.06

.01

.015

.08

.02

.1

.025

.12

.03

.14

.035

.04

Figure 1

1950

1960

1970

Inter-state (left)
Intra-county (right)

1980
Year

1990

2000

2010

Inter-county, same state (left)

Note. Migration rates of the civilian population age 16 and up from the Current Population
Survey. Post-1989 migration rates are calculated from microdata and exclude imputed values.
Sample details are given in Molloy, Smith and Wozniak (2011) and Saks and Wozniak (2011).

-2 -1.5

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

Figure 2
Within County Migration

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
No Controls
Many Controls

Control for Age and Homeownership

-1.5 -1.2

-.9

-.6

-.3

0

.3

.6

Interstate Migration

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
No Controls
Many Controls

Control for Age and Homeownership

Note. Each line shows the coefficients of year indicators from regressing whether an
individual moved on year indicators and other controls using the March CPS. All
observations with imputed values of migration are excluded. Controls are age,
homeownership, sex, education, race, marital status, presence of kids, presence of kids
interacted with a divorce indicator, indicators for quintiles of the real income distribution,
labor force status, self-employed status, Census region, and metropolitan status.

0

Fraction of the population
.003
.006
.009

.012

Figure 3
Reasons for Migration
Interstate Migration

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Year
Family related
Job related

Housing related
Other reasons

0

Fraction of the population
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05

.06

Within County Migration

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Year
Family related
Job related

Housing related
Other reasons

Note. Authors’ calculations from the March CPS. All observations with imputed values of
migration are excluded.

3

6

Percent
9

12

15

Figure 4
Employer, Occupation and Industry Transitions

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
Occupation Change

Industry Change

Employer Change

Note. Authors’ calculations from the March CPS. All observations with imputed values of
industry, occupation, or employer change are excluded. Occupations and industries are
defined at the 3-digit level.

-3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5

0

.5

1

1.5

Figure 5
Occupation Changes

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
No Controls

Many Controls

-3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5

0

.5

1

1.5

Industry Changes

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
No Controls

Many Controls

-3.6 -3 -2.4 -1.8 -1.2 -.6

0

.6 1.2 1.8 2.4

Employer Changes

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
No Controls

See notes to Figures 2 and 4.

Many Controls

Figure 6
Changes in Job Changing and Changes in In-Migration by State
0

Change in interstate mobility rate, 1981/90 to 2001/10

PA
NY
IA
MI
WI ME
OH NE
ILAL
WV
NJCN
TN
IN
KY
MS
MN
RI
KS
SD
ND VT
MD HI SC MO
DC

NC
MA
CA

-2

LA
GA

OROK AR
ID

TX

WY

VA
WA
DE
CO NM
FL

MT
UT

NH

-4

AZ

NV
Change in mobility rate = -.67(.19) + .35(.04)*(change in pct. changing firms)
-6
-9

-7

-5

-3

-1

1

3

Change (1981/90 to 2001/10) in pct. changing firms in last year

Job Changes Conditional on Not Changing States
and Changes in In-Migration
0

Change in interstate mobility rate, 1981/90 to 2001/10

PA
NY
IA
MI
WI ME
NE
OH
ILAL
WVTN
NJ CN
IN
KY
MS
MN
KSRI

NC
MA
LA

CA

-2

GA
OR

AR
OK

MD HISC

ID

TX

SD
NDMOVT

DC

MT
UT

WY

VA
WA

DE
CO NM
FL

NH

-4

AZ

NV
Change in mobility rate = -.83(.19) + .35(.05)*(change in pct. changing firms)
-6
-9

-7

-5

-3

-1

1

Change (1981/90 to 2001/10) in pct. changing firms in last year, cond on not moving states

Note. Authors’ calculations based on CPS microdata. Imputed values of migration and
employer changes are excluded.

3

-1.2

-.9

-.6

-.3

0

.3

.6

.9

Figure 7
Interstate Migration

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
No Controls
Many Controls

Control for Job Transitions

Note. Each line shows the coefficients of year indicators from regressing whether an individual
moved on year indicators and other controls using the March CPS. All observations with
imputed values of migration or job transitions are excluded. Job transition controls are whether
the individual changed occupation, industry, or employer. See notes to Figure 2 for other
controls.

6

.4

8

.8

10

1.2

12

1.6

2

14

16

2.4

Figure 8
Interstate Migration and Labor Market Transitions

1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011
year
Labor market transition, state transition (left)
No labor market transition, state transition (left)
Labor market transition, no state transition (right)
Note. Authors’ calculations from the March CPS. All observations with imputed values of
migration or job transitions are excluded. Labor market transitions are defined as either a
change in employer, a change in industry, or a change in occupation. State transitions are
defined as a change in the individual’s state of residence.

