                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE EVOLUTION OF BANK BOARDS OF DIRECTORS IN NEW YORK, 1840-1950

                                         Howard Bodenhorn
                                          Eugene N. White

                                        Working Paper 20078
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20078


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2014




The authors would like to thank Pam Bodenhorn, Juliana Carattini and Ghanshyam Sharma for exceptional
research assistance. We extend special thanks to the archivists at the New York State Archives for
their assistance. We also thank Jeremy Atack, William Collins, Brad Hansen, Matt Jaremski, Robert
Margo, Larry Neal and the participants at the December 14, 2013 Enterprising America: Businesses,
Banks and Credit Markets in Historical Perspective held at Vanderbilt University conference for their
comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Howard Bodenhorn and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Bank Boards of Directors in New York, 1840-1950
Howard Bodenhorn and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 20078
April 2014
JEL No. G21,G30,N21

                                             ABSTRACT

Contemporary bank governance is criticized for manager-dominated (insider) boards of directors,
but from the beginning of the nineteenth century, bank presidents appear also to have operated as chairmen
of the boards of directors. However, the managers were constrained by a variety of rules that tended
to align the interests of management, shareholders and other stakeholders until the mid-twentieth century.
We trace this development through New York banking law and new data on banks chartered by the
State of New York.


Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com

Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu
        In December 1826 the board of the Franklin Bank of New York City asked Samuel
Leggett, a former president of the bank, to reassume his previous position. The bank was in
trouble and the board was hopeful that his experience and oversight might help in its recovery.
By his own account, Leggett accepted the task reluctantly, and his worse fears were soon
realized. During his first week back, he pored over the bank’s records, which revealed
“mismanagement, improvident loans, irregular transactions, false books … [the] total disregard
to the fundamental rules of Banking … was frightfully apparent every where [sic]” (Leggett
1831, 10). When he pieced the puzzle together, what Leggett found was a bank undercapitalized
by directors having borrowed against surrendered shareholdings, insufficient specie reserves due
to an ill-advised banknote redemption agreement with the New Jersey Manufacturing and
Banking Company, and a massively overdrawn account of the Hoboken Bank. Leggett proposed
a restructuring of the board, a recapitalization effort, and closing the accounts of the New Jersey
banks. The board refused to adopt any of his recommendations. Shortly thereafter New York’s
other banks refused to accept and redeem the Franklin Bank’s notes. When he was told that local
merchants no longer accepted the bank’s notes, Leggett personally appeared before Chancellor
Kent, requested an injunction closing the bank, and handed the Chancellor the keys to the bank.1
        The magnitude of the losses following from the failure of the Franklin Bank pale in
comparison to the losses incurred in the 2008 crisis. But the basic features are much the same. A
speculative period in the mid-1820s was followed by the Wall Street crash of 1826. The resulting
liquidity scramble revealed uncovered counterparty risks, financial innovations undertaken
without a full understanding of the downside risks, tunneling, fraud, interlocking directorates,
and a near complete breakdown of effective corporate governance. Hilt (2009) documents
populist anger at the “swindles” perpetrated by “scoundrels,” and the press’s characterization of
the episode as a “bold, well-combined, and far reaching system of deception.” Criminal
indictments were brought against directors and shareholders brought civil suits, but current law
provided little relief.
        In the next session the legislature enacted a number of reforms designed to improve
corporate governance. The new law introduced financial reporting rules and requirements,

1
  There is some confusion in Leggett’s discussion. The text claims that he appeared before Chancellor William
Kent, but William Kent was never Chancellor, and his father retired from that position in 1823. William Kent was
James Kent’s son and a New York circuit court judge. Under colonial law New York established both courts of law
and courts of equity (or chancery). The Chancellor was the highest judicial officer of equity and would be (roughly)
equivalent to the state’s chief justice.

                                                         3
changed the rules governing the election of directors, regulated capital contributions, and created
new legal responsibilities for directors (Hilt 2008). Although the 1828 revisions were amended
and modified over time, they laid out a set of basic rules for corporate governance over the long
term. Banks chartered under New York’s Safety Fund system (1829-1837) were subject to it, as
were banks organized during the Free Banking era (1838-1863).
        Despite the centrality of corporate governance in capitalist finance and the growth of
enterprise in America, relatively little is known about the development of corporate governance
in the early stages of economic modernity despite the fundamental contributions of several recent
studies (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2006; Lamoreaux 2009; Hilt 2008; and Hilt 2015). In this
article, we examine several aspects of the development of corporate governance in the century
following New York’s establishment of a new regime in 1828 . We situate our discussion of the
evolution of banking law within the context of the modern economic literature on corporate
governance. Much of our attention is focused on New York State, given its long history as a
financial center and wealth of archival materials and published records. Using newly collected
data, we provide a sketch of how the banks’ boards of directors changed over time and analyze
how they may have affected bank performance. We find that from the early charters of the
nineteenth century to first decades of the twentieth century, there was considerable continuity in
the corporate governance of banks. At the outset the basic rules were set down, and over the
course of a century, they were refined and detailed; but the key features constraining risk-taking
and expropriation of returns by management were largely retained. Only after the New Deal did
state legislation begin to change and alter the set of rules that had long governed state banking
institutions.
        There are a multitude of issues discussed in the modern corporate governance literature
that would benefit from historical perspective, but we focus on two issues specific to boards of
directors: (1) the separation of ownership and control; and, (2) the number of directors on bank
boards. Consistent with discussions in Hilt (2008), Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012) and
Hansmann and Parglender (2012), New York bank directors were heavily invested in the firms
they managed. On average, the combined shareholdings of board members represented more
than one-half the total outstanding shares of early banks. The fraction of shares held by the
directors was smaller in larger banks, but it was rarely a trivial fraction. Our finding is consistent
with Hilt’s (2015) finding reported in this volume. He, too, finds that corporate ownership was


                                                  4
highly concentrated in the nineteenth century and that managerial ownership declined in
manufacturing firm size. Together, our article reveal a general patterns of corporate ownership
and control in the early stages of development.
           Our second notable finding is that the size of bank boards of directors changes over time
as regulatory regimes changed. Prior to the 1860s, the average bank board had 12 to 13
members. Although it only directly affected the federally-chartered national banks, the passage
of the National Bank Act of 1864 altered the rules of the game by setting a new regulatory
standard, with national banks competing with state-chartered banks.                        During the so-called
National Banking Era (1864-1913), the average bank board for state-chartered banks declined in
size by about two members. From the establishment of the Federal Reserve System in 1914
through the New Deal era, beginning in 1934, the average bank board declined by a further two
members. Thus, the average board of directors at a New York bank in the mid-twentieth century
had about half as many members as a century earlier. It remains unclear how much of the decline
was an endogenous response to the changing nature of banking practice and governance and how
much was a response to regulatory regime change. It also remains unclear whether declining
board size was an endogenous movement toward more effective governance. If large boards
slowed decision making and encouraged shirking, smaller boards many have streamlined internal
governance. If, on the other hand, larger boards brought more diverse points of view and
improved the capacity of the board to oversee management, the decline in board size may have
had detrimental consequences for governance. Our exploration does not directly address this
issue, which remains a fundamental issue for future research.


                       Corporate Governance and New York State Banking Law


           In contemporary analysis, corporate governance is treated as an agency problem arising
from the separation of ownership and control of the firm.2 The problem facing owners who
provide the capital for the firm is that they cannot to write a complete contract to specify how
managers will behave in all circumstances. Consequently, managers have substantial residual
control rights, which they may use to expropriate returns that would otherwise be received by the



2
    We draw heavily on Shleifer and Vishny’s (1997) survey of the literature on corporate governance.

                                                           5
owners. Because managers exercise some control over the firm, investment decisions and the
consequent long-term risk-return profile may differ from that desired by shareholders.
           Agency problem would be less severe if the markets for the firm’s inputs and outputs
were perfectly competitive. Managers would be forced to rent labor and capital in spot markets
at competitive prices. But, if firm capital is highly specific and sunk, it will become difficult to
prevent managers from expropriating part of the return from the sunk capital. This simple
insight is important for understanding the nature of the agency problem for the beginnings of
banking in the United States. While one might imagine that many industries in nineteenth
century America were highly competitive with little sunk capital, banking was different. For
firms wishing to make loans, take deposits and issue banknotes, state legislatures controlled the
process of chartering limited liability corporations, first by requiring prospective bankers to
obtain a charter by special legislative act and then later in most states to meet the requirements of
a general incorporation act for banks. This process controlled the location of the bank and a
bank’s initial capital---the geography and minimum size of banks was thus determined; and
various studies have shown that although financial markets might have been integrated early,
banks’ often had some local monopolistic power for good portion of the nineteenth century
(Davis 1966, James 1976, Bodenhorn 1992). The potential for economic profits increased the
potential for expropriation by managers.


Pre- 1838 Chartering Acts
           In New York State, from Independence until the Free Banking Act of 1838, the state
legislature controlled the issue of banking charters.3 Bodenhorn (2006) chronicles the struggles
of hopeful bankers to secure a charter. Of the hundreds of legislative petitions asking for a
charter, only a few successfully wended their way through the committee process to be reported
out as bills; and, then, only a small fraction of the reported bills resulted in chartering acts. The
presence of considerable bribery suggests not only considerable unsatisfied demand for banking
services but also that once a charter was received, the new institution would be earning infra-
marginal rents. Bribery provided legislators with their share.
           Although the charters presented before the legislature could be individually crafted, they
shared many features that became standard in nineteenth century American banking law. To

3
    For the development of chartered banking in Philadelphia, another financial center, see Schwartz (1947).

                                                           6
take a typical example, the 1828 act incorporating the Canal Bank of Albany, established a one
share-one vote regime (New York 1828, Ch.353). A prominent feature of this and other charters
was the regulations governing the board of directors who were expected to oversee the operation
of the bank on behalf of the shareholders between annual meetings when their election was
specified. The “stock, property, affairs, and concerns” of the bank fell under the management of
15 directors, each of whom was required to own at least 50 shares and be a citizen of the state of
New York.        Alert to the potential for manipulation of elections, the charter required the
appointment of independent inspectors to administer the elections on the second Tuesday each
July, thus strengthening the legal protection given by the voting rights to shareholders. 4 To
ensure that the directors continued to have a significant financial interest, Article 17 of the
charter noted that if a director reduced his holdings below 50 shares or moved out of the state,
his seat would be declared vacant and a replacement elected by the board for the remainder of his
term. In a feature that would become common in American banking law, Article 18 required that
president be elected from among the board of directors, and it empowered the board to appoint
the cashier and any other officers. It further ceded to the board the power to draft bylaws and
other rules “as shall be needful.”
        In terms of the theory of modern corporate governance, the charter for the Canal Bank
had many features that reduced agency problems. By requiring the president to be a member of
the board, there was little separation of ownership and management. Directors who were
delegated to oversee the operations of the bank on behalf of the shareholders were required to be
at least modest minority shareholders. A share capital of $300,000 was set, divided into 15,000
shares of $20 denomination. At 50 shares, each director was required to invest $1000 in the bank
and collectively they held a minimum of $15,000 or 5 percent of the bank’s capital. 5 As Shleifer
and Vishny (1997) note, this concentration mitigates the free rider problem with many small
shareholders, and provides directors with incentives to closely monitor the president and other
officers. The power granted by the board to draw up bylaws as needed provided directors with
authority to amend their contract with the officers of the banks. Given that directors met

4
  This concern continues today. During the proxy vote on whether the CEO of JPMorgan Chase should give up the
chairmanship of the board of directors, the shareholders proposing the change complained that the independent firm
handling the vote count was only reporting tallies to the management (Craig and Silver-Greenberg 2013).
5
  According the conversions available on EH.net, the $1,000 minimum director investment in 1828 is the equivalent
of $25,000 in “real price” terms in 2012. It is the equivalent of $700,000 in “economic status” value. By either
metric, it was a nontrivial investment for all but the very wealthiest families in 1828.

                                                        7
frequently, they could respond to most any contingency and closely monitor the president,
cashier and others. The danger, of course, was that larger shareholder-directors might use their
position of privileged information, perhaps in collusion with the president-director, to
expropriate the resources of the firm at the expense of the smaller shareholders. On these
possibilities, the Canal Bank charter was silent.6
         It is important to note that bank directors from the beginning well into the twentieth
century were much more deeply engaged in the firm’s daily operations than many modern
directors. Board meetings to consider loan requests were sometimes held several times each
week. It was not until 1904, for example, that the board of the Philadelphia National Bank
reduced the frequency of its meetings from twice to once each week (Wainwright 1953, 168).
Board meetings were usually weekly affairs at smaller banks. At the typical board meeting the
cashier provided a list of loan applicants, the amounts requested, and whether the applicant “kept
a good, middling, or small account” at the bank (Wainwright 1953, 19). Boards might ration
credit based on each applicant’s account balances and reputation, as well as macroeconomic
considerations. Some bank bylaws required unanimous consent of a quorum of the board; some
instituted black ball systems to preserve anonymity in loan approvals; some allowed the cashier
to make small, run-of-the-mill loans and reserved for themselves prior approval of large loans or
loans to unfamiliar applicants, a procedure became more common over time. In addition to their
regular duties, board committees were regularly appointed to inspect the books, count the money
in the vault, and meet with representatives from other banks to discuss such wide-ranging topics
as the value at which foreign coins and banknotes would be accepted, how to prosecute
counterfeiting, and the terms under which new entrants would be invited to enter into joint
clearing arrangements. Bank directors actively participated in the development and
implementation of short- and long-term corporate policy and strategy.
         Given the responsibilities of shareholders to other stakeholders -- banknote holders,
deposits and other creditors -- the act of incorporation put them under the public gaze.

6
  Early American legislators and investors were aware of the potential for majority shareholder expropriation and
they devised methods to limit its extent. The 1784 articles of association written by Alexander Hamilton for the
Bank of New York, for example, attempted to limit majority shareholder domination by limiting the number of votes
that they could cast at shareholder meetings. These so-called “graduated voting” rules appear to have allayed at least
some fears, as banks in states that imposed these rules had many more shareholders than banks in one share-one vote
regimes. Why New York chose to abandon graduated voting in favor of one share-one vote rules remains an
unresolved issue. On the economics of majority shareholder expropriation see Shleifer and Vishny (1997); and on
the economics of graduated voting see Hilt (2008) and Bodenhorn (2014).

                                                          8
Stakeholders knew (or could know) who the shareholders were and if any notable changes in
ownership had occurred. The law required that a register of stock transfers be kept by the
directors, which “shall at all reasonable house of transacting business, be open to the
examination of any person having in his possession any note, bill, or other evidence of debt
issued by such corporation, the payment of which shall have been refused”(New York State
1829). If an employee or officer refused to produce the book, they were fined $250, which would
be paid to the person refused.7
        If a regulatory regime is judged by how well it protected the banks’ minority shareholders
and other stakeholders, the verdict on New York’s chartering regime is unclear. On one hand, a
majority of the banks chartered between 1790 and 1828 survived into the late antebellum period
and beyond; many reorganized as free banks after 1838 and then again as national banks after
1864. But there were notable failures that imposed large losses on depositors, noteholders and
the state’s taxpayers. The failure of the Safety Fund system, New York’s first attempt at bank
liability insurance, is well documented (Calomiris 1990; Bodenhorn 2003), but was attributable
more to the regulatory authority’s failure to mitigate moral hazard than to poor corporate
governance systems. Most of the banks that failed, in fact, were very close corporations in which
the owners-managers exploited the subsidy to risk taking at the taxpayers’ expense more than at
the minority shareholders’ expense.
        Still, the period was not without its corporate governance failures. The 1848 collapse of
the aforementioned Canal Bank of Albany brought to light the potential for insider self-dealing.
New York’s comptroller, Millard Fillmore, appointed two receivers to take control of the bank
and report on its activities. The receivers, Andrew White and Thomas McMullen, returned a
scathing report. In the report’s opening paragraphs, the receivers stated that “the funds of the
bank for a period of time, have been used for speculating purposes, and that abuses of a criminal
and aggravated nature have been perpetrated for a number of years upon the stockholders and
creditors of the institution” (New York State Comptroller’s Office 1848, 1). The receivers
uncovered several abuses by the directors, the cashier and other bank employees, but what
brought the bank to failure was the directors’ practice of allowing each other to discount notes

7
   Although New York did not enact such a law, some states required banks to provide an annual list of current
shareholders and their shareholdings to clerk of the county court in which the bank was situated. The clerk was then
charged with entering this information into the public record for easy inspection. New Hampshire’s bank
commissioners, for example, sometimes noted in their annual reports when a bank had failed to submit the required
list to the clerk of the court.

                                                         9
far in excess of the limits prescribed in the bank’s bylaws. The bank’s charter and its bylaws
included provisions for good corporate governance, but there was apparently no effective
supervisory mechanism capable of enforcing good practice, absent effective shareholder
oversight.

The New York Free Banking Act of 1838

        After the legislature had provided relatively detailed special charters, the New York free
banking act of 1838 -- a model for other states and the National Bank Act of 1864 -- provided
very little guidance in terms of corporate governance.8 The only mention of directors in the 1838
act was that individuals associating in a bank were obliged “to choose one of their number as
president of such association, and to appoint a cashier, and such other officers and agents as their
business may require” (Barnard 1838). The only rule imposed on directors was set by an
amendment in the Act of March 4, 1863, which set a quorum of five for directors meetings if the
articles of association did not define a quorum. Neither the free banking act, nor any other statute
we found, established board size minima or maxima. The choice appears to have been left to the
discretion of the bank’s organizers to be included in the articles of association. The minimalist
nature of this act may have reflected continued satisfaction with the rules imposed in the 1828
revised statutes and a political desire to leave the rules of the bank to the organizers and
shareholders. Nevertheless, in all cases that we have examined, the articles of association of the
banks bore an uncanny resemblance to the pre-1838 charters of incorporation, perhaps reflecting
the advice given by the attorneys drafting the articles, who used charter conditions as models for
articles. For example, the articles of association for the Oneida Valley Bank, organized in 1852,
included in Article 3, Section 1 a statement that “all the powers and privileges of the associates
[shareholders] … shall be exercised by a board of directors,” which was to consist of between
two and ten persons.9 In addition, there was one share-one vote by ballot or proxy, annual
election of directors was prescribed for on the first Tuesday in June, managed by independent
inspectors, minimum share ownership for directors, the power to fill director vacancies, a
quorum for meetings of the board of directors, and the power for directors to appoint officers.



8
   The law required a minimum capital of $100,000, but was later amended to allow five or fewer owners to
associate and form banks with just $25,000 in paid-in capital.
9
  New York State Archives, Series 14272, Box 43, Number 85.

                                                   10
         Of course, a key feature of the New York free banks was they had a bond-secured issue
of banknote; and loans by a bank were made out of a mix of capital, note issue, and deposits. As
Shleifer and Vishny (1997) note, the use of debt (banknotes and/or deposits for banks) to finance
a firm presents another dimension to the agency problem when a firm is financed by other than
capital alone. Debt represents a contract with a specific repayment promise, and if the firm
defaults, the creditor has certain rights to its assets. Given that holders of banknotes and deposits
are likely not to be concentrated, there is a strong free rider problem. Depositors, holders of
banknotes and other creditors also have limited information relative to that of large shareholders,
as well as directors presidents and other managers with an ownership stake who may have
incentives to take on risk since they share in the upside while other investors and creditors bear
the costs of failure” (Shliefer and Vishny 1997; Jensen and Meckling 1976). In this situation,
creditors might be enticed to provide funds if the bank invests in reputation (Gorton 1996). Of
course, reputation is fragile in banking where banknotes and deposits are convertible into coin on
demand. Bad news concerning a bank may lead to a run and perhaps its failure.
         The problem was that unless a shareholder, banknote holder or depositor was also a
director they faced a sizeable information asymmetry compared to the board and president. The
directors or a subset of the board might expropriate the other stakeholders by a variety of means.
They could increase salaries and other perks, they could take advantage of announcements to
make strategic purchases or sales of stock, or, as at the Canal Bank, they could arrange for
advantageous loans for themselves or other firms in which they had an interest. By the time such
practices were uncovered, the malefactors could have effectively looted the bank.
         The free banking act, however, provided a strong legal protection for banknote holders.
Before issuing banknotes, banks were required to buy specified bonds and deposit them with the
state. In the event of a failure, the bonds would be sold and the banknote holders made whole.
Rules governing the selection and conservation of bonds were detailed. The other creditors --
primarily depositors had no such protection until the 1838 act was amended by the Act of April
5, 1849, which specified that if there was a default in the payment of any debt after January 1,
1850, by any bank issuing bank notes, the shareholders would be individually responsible,
equally and ratably, to the extent of their shares (Cleaveland and Hutchinson 1864).10 Beyond


10
  The language of the act does not make it clear whether this is double liability or a more extended liability, though
later legal scholar considered it to be a double liability, or possible assessments by a receiver up to the original par

                                                          11
the assets of the bank, depositors now had a limited legal claim on the personal wealth of
shareholders. This extended liability would presumably provide an incentive for the shareholders
and directors to control risk-taking. As this protection depended on the shareholders being
available and having sufficient wealth, a further amendment to the 1838 act, the Act of April 15,
1859 required that a book of shareholders with names, addresses and holdings be available and
open for inspection during the business hours of the bank. Failure to do so would lead to a fine
of $100 in first instance; for subsequent failures a fine plus imprisonment for term not exceeding
6 months for the responsible officer was imposed. For this time period, the law allowed
shareholders to be monitored relatively carefully.
        Given the incentives provided by the law, it is perhaps not surprising that free banking in
New York was reasonably safe and sound. Rockoff (1974) effectively debunks the myth of the
wildcat bank and Rolnick and Weber (1983) find that failure rates among New York’s free banks
were relatively low, just 34 of 449 free banks failed between 1838 and 1863. King (1983) also
shows that banknote losses were low. After 1843 the expected redemption value of a typical New
York banknote approached 99 cents on the dollar. Clearly, the success of New York free banking
was not entirely attributable to the quality of corporate governance imposed by statute;
effectively, there were no corporate governance standards imposed by statute. However, it is not
unreasonable to speculate that the era was one in which bank promoters and bank shareholders
negotiated contractual agreements, as outlined in each bank’s articles of association, and
developed oversight mechanisms capable of limiting managerial self-dealing and poor corporate
governance.


The National Bank Act of 1864
        The National Bank Act of 1864 introduced an abrupt shift in the American banking
regime. By creating a federal free banking system and imposing a 10 percent tax on state
banknotes, most state banks shifted to a federal charter, leaving few under the supervision of
Albany’s superintendent of banks. The new federal law, which established the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, headed by the Comptroller and staffed with bank examiners, as the




value of the shares (Cleaveland and Huchinson 1864; Leonard 1940). It should be noted that this only applies to
banks of issue.

                                                      12
supervisory agency, also set a standard for the future, either to be imitated or undermined by the
state legislatures.
        While later legal writers would claim that the New York Act of 1838 provided the basis
for the National Bank Act of 1864, the latter provided much more detailed rules concerning the
governance and management of national banks compared to their New York free bank
precursors, although what it prescribed reflected much of the standard practice as embodied in
the New York banks’ articles of association (Bankers’ Magazine 1864).                        The protections
afforded shareholders and the constraints imposed on management were thus very similar.
While the 1838 New York Act did not set a minimum number of initial shareholders, the 1864
act set a minimum of five. Each shareholder had one vote per share in the elections for directors,
and though they were permitted to have proxies, no officer or employee of the bank could act as
a proxy.
        The 1864 act specified that the affairs of the bank should be managed by not less than
five directors, one of whom should be the president, selected by the board. All directors had to
be citizens of the United States and three-fourths of them had to be residents of the state or
territory in which the bank was located at least one year prior to election. One year was set for a
director’s term, with a day in January set for the election in the bank’s bylaws.
        One innovation was the oath that directors, including the president, were required to take.
Every national bank director was required to take an oath that he would “diligently and honestly
administer the affairs of such Association, and will not knowingly violate or willingly permit to
be violated, any of the provisions of the this Act, and that he is the bona fide owner in his own
right, of the number of shares of stock required by this Act, subscribed by him, or standing in his
name on the books of the Association, and that the same is not hypothecated or in any way
pledged, as security for any loan or debt.” If any of the provisions of the act are violated and the
Comptroller of the Currency brought a suit in federal court, the directors were personally and
individually liable for damages. In the literature on corporate governance, oaths are considered
one of the legal protections offered to shareholders, however, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) are
somewhat skeptical about oaths: “it is difficult to describe exactly what this duty obligates
managers to do.”11

11
  One possibility is that the oath prevents ex post bargaining, whereby managers are bribed by owners to give up
some of their expropriation. On the other hand, it may be simply removing the possibility of constant threats by
management.

                                                      13
         The incentives for directors were influenced by the rules for capital and their stock
ownership. Every national bank director was required to own at least ten shares of stock in the
bank. A minimum capital for national banks $50,000 was set for towns with a population of
under 6,000, $100,000 for towns between 6,000 and 50,000 and $200,000 for larger towns.12 If
there were the minimum of five directors for a bank with an initial capital of $50,000 and each
had to hold 10 shares with a par value of $100, the five directors would hold $5,000 or 10
percent of the bank’s capital with potential extended liability of another $5,000. For the largest
banks with a capital of $200,000, five directors would have had a smaller liability with their
$5,000 initial investment representing only 2.5 percent of the bank’s capital. Directors and the
director-president may well have held more than the minimum number of shares, but modern
empirical studies find that firm value increases when large shareholders increase their holdings
up to 5 percent of the total, though value decreases thereafter (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny 1988).
Such a nonlinear relationship in board ownership and firm value points to the tradeoff between
directors holding a sufficiently large stake to encourage monitoring and holding a large enough
stakes to take control and direct the firm’s resources to their own use.
         The large shareholders, as represented by the board had control and monitored the bank’s
officers. Boards had power to appoint the vice-president, cashier and other officers, define their
duties, and require bonds and fix penalties. Requiring surety bonds may well have been another
federal innovation. Based upon our brief inspection of late nineteenth century national bank
examiner reports, the devise of using a security bond was fairly common.13 Some banks forced


12
   The Act of 1864 required that half of the capital be paid in before the bank opened for operations and the
remainder could be paid in installments of at least 10 percent a year.
13
    There is little systematic evidence on officers tendering performance bonds prior to the National Banking Act, but
it appears to have been common practice. Bank charters allowed directors to ask for a bond from cashiers, but did
not require it. Most New York bank charters between 1805 and 1836 contained a clause similar to that appearing in
the charter of the Merchants’ Bank of New York City: “directors … have power to appoint so many officers, clerks
and servants for carrying on the said business, and with such salaries and allowances as to them shall seem meet”
(New York. State. 1806, Ch. XLIII, p. 64). The 1833 charter of the Chemung Canal Bank, which was typical
included the following paragraph: “The directors of the said corporation shall have power, from time to time, to
appoint so many officers, clerks and servants, for carrying on the business of the corporation, and with such
compensation as to them shall seem meet” (Laws of New York 1833, Ch.132, p. 150). Compare this to the charter of
the Farmers’ and Mechanics’ Bank of Philadelphia (1809), which stated: “it shall be the duty of said board to take of
bond of the cashier, with two or more sufficient sureties … for sum not less than forty thousand dollars” (Farmers’
and Mechanics Bank 1849, p.20). In 1824 Pennsylavnia passed an act applicable to all banks, which included the
same language less the specific dollar amount. Few state bank commissioners consistently reported information
about surety bonds in their annual reports. One known exception is New Hampshire. In 1845, 60 percent of New
Hampshire’s 15 reporting banks provided the value of the cashier’s surety bond. The average value was $21,667
(New Hampshire 1845). In 1865, the bank commissioners’ reported an average $24,000 surety bond at 88 percent of

                                                         14
every employee, except the president and manual laborers, to have a bond; and the amounts were
typically some multiple of their annual salary. The effect of these bonds was to add some down
side risk to bank officer defalcations. The surety bond requirement may have been designed to
reduce the incentive for risk-taking that would increase expropriable returns.
        Banknote holders and depositors were given protections similar to those provided by state
law in the new federal legislation. Like the 1838 New York act, the Act of 1864 permitted banks
to issue a bond-backed currency, but the use of U.S. government bonds, valuation, and tight
controls prevented any expropriation and yielded a safe and stable currency. Depositors who
were most exposed benefitted most from the law’s provision for double liability; if the bank were
insolvent, shareholders would be liable for up to the par value of their stock. The bank was
charged with maintaining a list of the shareholders, their addresses and shareholdings, which
were open to inspection and would facilitate the assessment of double liability if needed.
        In sum, the Act of 1864 may be viewed as a tougher version of the Act of 1838. It
ensured that there were some substantial shareholders on the board of directors and strengthened
a variety of protections for all who had supplied funding---shareholders, banknote holders and
depositors. Although there are no studies that have examined whether these changes improved
bank performance, if one simply considers small losses to various stakeholders from national
bank insolvencies, the law appears to have prevented excessive risk-taking. Between 1865 and
1913, there were 501 national bank insolvencies, their share capital totaled $86.8 million, or an
average of $160,000 (White 2013). This was a small fraction of total national bank share capital,
which stood in August 1913 at $1,056.3 million at the 10,457 banks organized since 1863
(Comptroller of the Currency 1913, pp. 6, 104).14 The 7,488 banks in operation in August 1913
also had $5,761.8 million in individual deposits. Proven claims of the insolvent 501 banks
totaled $191.0 million. Receivers recouped $146.9 million, obtaining $183.9 million from the
sales of assets and $22.5 million in assessment from shareholders. The total losses to depositors
and creditors were $44 million or a payout of 76.9 percent for this 50 year period. At under $1
million in losses per year (a few cents per capita), it appears that regulations that set the
incentives for corporate governance and the behavior of management constrained them from
taking large risks to increase the appropriable returns.

the state’s 49 banks (New Hampshire 1865). In a study of 200 national banks’ examination reports from the early
1890s Calomiris and Carlson (2013) find that 57 percent of bank cashiers were bonded.
14



                                                      15
The Revival of State-Chartered Banking and the Rise of the Trust Companies

       There appears to have been little state bank legislation of any importance in New York
until a comprehensive revision of the law was undertaken in the Act of 1882 (New York 1882;
Hilt 2009). The intent of the law was to enable state banks to compete with national banks. Its
provisions were a blend of the Act of 1838 and the National Bank Act of 1864. Once again, any
number of persons could associate to form a bank, but minimum capital rules were set lower than
for national banks and graded according to population. A minimum of $100,000 was set unless
the town where the bank would be opened had a population under 30,000, in which case, a
minimum of $50,000 was required. If the population of the town was under 6,000, then only
$25,000 of capital was required to open a bank. A true and correct public list of shareholders had
to be maintained; and shareholders of note-issuing banks faced the same extended liability. The
members of the association were to choose one of their number as president.
A more complete revision was attempted in 1891. The Commissioners of Statutory Revision
submitted the new legislation to the state legislature, which became law on May 18, 1892
(Groesbeck and Dickinson 1892; Hall 1895). A minimum of five individuals was required to
organize a bank and five was set as the minimum number of directors. For banks with a capital
of $50,000 or more, a director had to own shares worth at least $1,000 (market value) in his own
right or if the bank has a capital less than $50,000, directors must hold stock worth a minimum of
$500. Directors were required to be citizens of the United States and three-quarters of the
directors were required to be residents of the State of New York. One of the directors was to be
chosen by the board to serve as president. If the certificate of incorporation or by-laws did not
prescribe the number of directors for a quorum, the directors were allowed to fix a number
necessary for transaction of business, with a minimum of five. Directors were required to take
an oath that they would “diligently and honestly administer the affairs of such corporation, and
will not knowingly violate or willingly permit to be violated, any of the provisions of the law
applicable to such corporation, and that he is the owner in good faith and in his own right, of the
number of shares of stock required by this chapter, subscribed by him or standing in his name on
the books of the corporation and that the same is not hypothecated, or in any way pledged as
security for any loan or debt.” The Act of 1892 required some rotation of directors with an
annual election of at least one of its directors. The number of directors could be changed by first

                                                16
securing the permission of the New York superintendent of banking and then by gaining a
majority of shareholders votes. Directors were forbidden to declare dividends except from
profits; and if dividends impaired capital, the directors were jointly and severally liable.
Formerly, only shareholders of banks issuing circulating notes were ratably responsible for the
debts (liabilities) of the bank; but in recognition that this was a dead letter as only national banks
issued banknotes, this liability was now extended to all banks’ stockholders so that they now had
the same liability as the shareholders of national banks.
       In most respects, the New York code governing state banks appear to be very similar to
the federal laws governing national banks. But state banking law was then extended to a new
financial intermediary. The Act 1892 now also included regulation of trust companies, which
began to compete with national banks and the remaining state banks. The rules for directors of
trusts differed significantly. A minimum of thirteen could form a trust company and the board of
directors was to have not less than 13 nor more than 24 members, one of whom would be
selected as president. The directors were divided into three classes for a three year rotation of
elections. Directors were required to hold at least ten shares in the trust company. To begin a
trust company a minimum capital of $500,000 was required if the town in which it had its office
had a population above 250,000; $200,000 if the population was between 100,000 and 250,000;
$150,000 if the population was between 100,000 and 25,000; $100,000 if was under 25,000.
Shareholders were subject to the same extended liability as state banks.

The Era of the Federal Reserve

       State banking law changed little following the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. The rules
set in 1892 were largely retained but directors’ obligations had become much more explicit. With
an apparent awareness that not all directors would be intimately involved or knowledgeable
about a bank’s operations, the law allowed for the creation of an executive committee of the
board (Morgan and Amasa, 1914). The board of directors was required to meet once a month,
where an officer would present a written statement of all purchases and sales of securities and of
every discount, loan or advance including overdrafts and renewals since the last meeting,
describing the collateral, excluding items under $1000.          Twice a year, March-April and
September-October, the board of directors or a committee of at least three members, with



                                                 17
assistants if needed, was obligated to conduct a thorough and complete examination of the books,
papers and affairs of the bank.
Any loans or discounts made to officers or directors or to any corporations of which such officers
or directors were also officers or directors and had a beneficial interest merited particular
scrutiny had to be identified. Although insider loans had been an issue throughout the nineteenth
century, it is striking that regulation did not formally address this issue until the era of the
“Money Trust.” The law now explicitly acknowledged that those controlling the bank might use
it to their particular benefit.    This information would be passed on to the New York
Superintendent of Banks. If the bank was a member of the Federal Reserve or the New York
Clearing House and was subject to at least one examination per year by either, the bank “on
account of such liability to such examination … may omit the latter of the two examinations.”
Still, the bank was required to tender the Federal Reserve or New York Clearinghouse report to
the superintendent of banks. As for the other stakeholders, national banknotes were to be phased
out and replaced by Federal Reserve notes, but deposits, which had become much more
important in banks’ balance sheets still had the protection of double liability.
       For purposes of this study, we consider New York State to have had the following
regulatory/supervisory regimes: (1) Chartered banking 1789-1837 (2) Free Banking 1838-1863,
(3) the National Banking System, 1864-1913, (4) the Early Federal Reserve, 1914-1933, and (5)
New Deal Banking, 1934-1970s.          A central question is whether these regulatory regimes
changed the character and incentives for boards of directors or whether banking followed its own
internal technological dynamic.


                              The “Optimum” Board of Directors


        Given the essential role of the board of directors in serving as the agent of shareholders’
interests its composition and structure are keys to enhancing its performance. In this paper, we
focus on two key dimensions of the board---the ownership stakes of board members and the
number of board members. Boards are presumed to monitor management and act on behalf of
shareholders who cannot do so directly because of the collective action problem. But, because of
their very modest ownership stakes, directors have weak incentives to exert themselves to
exercise effective control and ensure that management pursues policies that maximize firm

                                                 18
value. Shareholders, wrote Berle and Means (1932, 114), are “most emphatically … not served
by a profit seeking controlling group.”
       The diminished incentives to control managers may lead to agency problems of two
types: managerialism and debt-agency (John and Senbet 1998). Managerialism refers to the
potential for managers to act in self-serving fashion at the expense of shareholders (Jensen and
Meckling 1976). Managers consume perks rather than maximize firm value perhaps augmenting
leverage to take more risks to increase the potential returns that they can expropriate. On the
other hand, when there is a debt-agency problem for managers, they may take too few risks in
order to protect their investments in firm-specific human capital.          In this scenario, the
management-controlled firm operates on lower leverage ratios than value maximization to avoid
bankruptcy. While the second case is a possibility, the concern for most of American banking
history has been about excessive risk-taking and managerialism, perhaps because banking skills
are transferable from one bank to another.
       To master these agency problems the structure and composition of the board matters, and
there may be some optimum mix of concentration of ownership and the number of directors. In
terms of concentration of ownership, if one moves from inattentive directors who own
insignificant shares of firm equity to a single controlling shareholder, that shareholder will have
a greater incentive to monitor management. However, the presence of one or even a few
controlling shareholders creates an alternative agency problem; the controlling shareholder(s)
may exercise his (their) voting power to install a board committed to maximizing the value of the
firm to the controlling shareholder(s) (Easterbrook and Fischel 1983; Shleifer and Vishny 1997;
Freeman et al 2012; Hansmann and Parglender 2012). Determining the optimum concentration is
an empirical issue. One study (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny, 1988) found that as directors’
ownership rises from zero to five percent firm value increases, but value declines beyond the
five-percent threshold. Further studies confirm that at high levels of concentrated director
ownership, firm values are lower, suggesting that directors may engage in behavior detrimental
to small shareholders (Morck et al 1998; Liu and Tan 2012; Bae et al 2013; Bodenhorn 2013).
       The agency problem is also affected by the size of a bank’s board of directors: too many
directors may lead to a free rider problem on the board, while too few may open the door for the
few directors to expropriate. There is no general model of equilibrium board size, but there is
consensus in the literature that its optimal size is based on the costs and benefits of the board’s


                                                19
monitoring and advising roles (Pathan and Skully 2010). Given the many duties expected of its
members, a larger board might divide its member’s labor in a way that leads to greater
specialization and effectiveness (Klein 1995). Yet, following Yermack (1996), a host of studies
finds that, ceteris paribus, larger boards are less effective than smaller one, an insight offered a
century ago by Conyngton (1913), who was concerned mostly with how promptly a large board
might act.15 Modern scholars contend that, compared to smaller ones, large boards may be
subject to more shirking, face greater coordination costs, provide less timely advice, monitor less
effectively, or become dysfunctional in other dimensions. But smaller is not always better.
Complex firms, large firms, and those with greater debt-equity ratios place greater advising
demands on directors and may be better served by larger, more diverse boards. Coles, Daniel and
Naveen (2008) find that smaller boards are associated with higher firm value for small, simple
firms, but larger boards enhance value for large, complex firms.16
        This paper is part of a larger research agenda on the connection between board
composition, board diversity, board size and firm performance. The task at hand is basic, namely
to establish some facts about bank boards. Very little is currently known about the historical
corporate board and we begin by exploring two basic features: the separation of ownership and
control and trends in the number of directors. One important question is whether changes in the
bank regulatory/supervisory regime altered the structure and composition of the board of
directors and hence corporate governance. We offer some preliminary evidence that board size
responded to different regimes.


                                                      Data
        Sources of the data are provided in the appendix, but fall into one of three broad types.
The principal sources of information were annual reports of the New York Bank Superintendent.
The office of the superintendent, or its predecessor, collected quarterly bank balance sheets after
passage of the state’s 1838 free banking act. Details about the boards of the reporting banks do
not appear until the mid-1880s, after which the annual reports provide a list of each bank’s
directors. Our study makes use of the 1887, 1900, 1920, 1935, 1940 and 1950 annual reports.


15
   Conyngton (1913, 81) wrote: “For all ordinary corporations a small board is most convenient, and, as a rule, most
effective.”
16
   Adams, Hermalin and Weisbach (2010) provide a parsimonious model, which shows that the Coles, Daniel and
Naveen (2008) result emerges under fairly general conditions.

                                                        20
With the exception of 1940 and 1950, all data appearing in the annual reports for each bank with
a name beginning with letters A through H (including all banks with name starting with “Bank of
…”) were transcribed into machine-readable form.17 Because the number of state-chartered
banks declines after the Great Depression, all banks appearing in the 1940 and 1950 annual
reports are included. The annual reports provide quarterly balance sheets, but only the late
September or early October reports of condition are transcribed.
        These post-1887 data constitute an unbalanced panel: some banks appear in as many as
five years; some banks, especially in the later years, appear only once. In the subsequent
analysis, we mostly estimate pooled cross-section specifications, but exploit the panel nature of
the data to empirically estimate fixed-effects specifications of board size.18 Although this
approach is sometimes used in the modern literature (e.g., Lehn, Patro and Zhou 2009), it is
important to note that fixed-effects estimates rely on time-series (more than cross-section)
variation for identification of causal effects. Fixed effects estimates are also problematic if the
fixed effects themselves account for most of the variation in the dependent variable. Although
board size, as we demonstrate below, evolves only slowly over time, our results generate
reasonable results. Still it is important not to read too much into these preliminary results: neither
the OLS nor the fixed effects estimates are likely to reveal true causal effects. Thus, we approach
our results cautiously and consider them preliminary explorations of interesting correlations.
        A second important source of information on bank directors for the earlier era is the New
York State Archives, which holds the records of the New York State Banking Department
between 1838 and 1967. The archive consists of 125 boxes, and each bank is allotted a separate
folder in one of the boxes. All surviving correspondence between the bank and state regulators
are included in each folder. Up to 1851 banks organized under the 1838 free banking act filed
their articles of association with the Secretary of State, along with a list of bonds and mortgages
to secure their circulation with the state Comptroller. Articles of association defined shareholder
voting rights, board size, residency and shareholding requirements for directors, the time and
place of shareholder meetings, and other governance features of the bank, in addition to a
complete list of subscribing shareholders and the names of the original directors. During a three-


17
   The A through H selection rule includes more than one-half of all banks operating at each date.
18
  Hausman and Taylor (1981) show that fixed-effects estimates control for omitted variable bias in panel data sets,
but Angrist and Pischke (2009) show that instrumental variables estimates are more likely to produce causal
estimates when a good instrument can be identified. We have not been able to identify a valid instrument.

                                                        21
day visit to the archives in June 2013, 127 bank files were randomly chosen and photographed.
These records were used to construct board size and director share ownership. Autumn or early
winter balance sheet information for the pre-Civil War banks included in the sample was
matched, when possible, to bank balance sheets available at an online archive maintained by
Weber (2011).
       Post-Civil War files at the archive tended to include a certificate of organization, rather
than the more detailed articles; certificates only provided information on a bank’s corporate
name, the city in which its business was to be located, its capital, and its subscribing
shareholders. Directors were not regularly identified in the certificates, though director lists
could sometimes be recovered from other correspondence between a bank and the
superintendent. Petitions to the Superintendent for permission to increase a bank’s capital, to
move to a new banking office, or to change the number of members of the board, among other
actions often included the names of the directors and this information was used to construct
board size at dates other than the bank’s organization. September balance sheet information was
matched to the banks when a superintendent’s report for the relevant year could be located.
       The third broad source of information on bank boards was city directories published in
New York City, Albany, Buffalo and Rochester. The directories often included a list of banks
and a complete roster of their directors. Detailed director lists regularly appeared in the 1850s,
and we transcribe four years of lists for New York City (1851, 1857, 1859, and 1860) and three
years of lists for Albany (1844, 1850, and 1853). Banks with director lists were then matched to
bank balance sheets for the autumn of the year preceding publication of the list. Publication lags
imply that a list published in, say, May 1851 was likely collected in late 1850 and the data
matching accounts for those lags.
       Drawing data from so many and such different sources sometimes makes comparisons
across regimes problematic. Our greatest concern is with the changing nature of the bank balance
sheet information. In the Free Banking era, accounting standards were rudimentary and auditing
nonexistent. The balance sheets provided in Weber (2011) were originally reported in annual
legislative documents and were voluntarily tendered by the banks, though each bank’s cashier
and/or president attested to their accuracy and the statements were notarized. One reason for
concern is that a few balance sheets did not balance (assets do not equal liabilities), which may
have been due to failure to report some otherwise important aspect of bank activity, though a


                                               22
more likely explanation is omission. With the professionalization of accounting and improved
reporting practice, it is likely that the accuracy of the data improved over time. But, so far as we
can determine, none of the balance sheets were audited. Balance sheets were produced in-house,
notarized and submitted to the bank commissioners with an oath sworn by the bank president and
cashier that they were accurate. There is no reason to think that the quality of information on the
number of directors improved over time because board sizes were determined by simply
counting the names of the directors serving at the time the statements were forward to the bank
commissioners.
       The balance sheets between the late 1830s and circa 1900 demonstrate a great deal of
reporting continuity. The basic balance sheet categories did not change dramatically, until after
1920. In the New Deal era, new categories were included in the balance sheets, most notably in
reporting deposits. Up to 1920, balance sheets tended to report “Deposits” and “Deposits of
Other Banks,” which sometimes included deposits by local savings banks. After 1920, deposits
were separated into demand deposits, time deposits, deposits by governmental agencies, and
deposits of other banks. For this project, we combined the many post-1920 deposit categories
into the pre-1920 categories, namely “Deposits” and “Deposits of Other Banks.” In the
regression analysis, the only relevant categories are Capital and Total (real) Assets. While
reporting surely improved over the century considered here, our reliance on the two most easily
measured features – capital (= shares outstanding * par value) and total assets – provides us with
some assurance that the results do not turn on changing reporting procedures.
       The changing nature of banking, too, might give pause. While banks’ adherence to its
strictures was a source of constant comment, the foundational principal from the Free Banking
through the Early Fed regimes was the “real-bills” doctrine (Bodenhorn 2003, Lamoreaux 1996,
Meltzer 2004). Strict adherence to real bills placed severe limits on bank lending: advances on
short-term, self-liquidating commercial paper. The two sources of real bills were mercantile
activities (borrowing to move goods, such as cotton, across space with the loan collateralized
with the goods in transit) or goods in process (borrowing working capital to finance inventories).
Statistics reported in Table 1 reveal that the real-bills convention was relaxed over time.
Mortgage lending, which represented about 5 percent of reported assets in the Free Banking,
National Banking and Early Fed eras increased to more than 11 percent during the New Deal. It
was not uncommon for banks to maintain the real-bills fiction by hiding mortgage and other


                                                23
long-term lending as short-term loans constantly renewed, but the reported values reveal a
certain constancy of practice over time.
       Although securities holdings appear to increase over time, the actual change was much
smaller than the statistics in Table 1 suggest. During the Free Banking era, banks were required
to buy state bonds, tender them to the state comptroller and receive banknotes in return. Banks
rarely reported these bond holdings, but most banks’ securities holdings were approximately
equal to their paid-in capital. Securities holdings, thus, were markedly lower in the National
Banking than in other eras. The tax on state bank notes made circulation unprofitable, which
freed state banks from holding collateral securities. In the twentieth century, securities holdings
may have increased as increased liquidity in securities markets reduced the risks of holding
corporate and government-issued debt.
       The most significant changes in banking over the century occurred on the liability side of
the balance sheet. Bank leverage, measured as the inverse of the ratio of capital to total assets,
increased dramatically. In the Free Banking era, the average bank’s capital represented more
than 40 percent of its total liabilities (assets). In the National Banking era, the ratio declined by
half; it decline by a further three-quarters in the Early Fed era. Leverage matters because it
provides on measure of a bank’s capacity to absorb losses before becoming bankrupt. Banks
might have countered the bankruptcy risk by accumulating retained earnings (surplus) to further
insulate themselves from bankruptcy, but the available evidence does not provide any evidence
that banks did so. Over the century considered here, banks worked on thinner capital margins,
which increased their bankruptcy risk.


                                    Evidence on Bank Boards


The Separation of Ownership and Control and Ownership Concentration
       Ownership statistics that come from data collected at the New York State bank
superintendent archives are presented in Table 2. The data span only two of the regulatory eras
discussed above, namely, the Free Banking (1838-1864) and National Banking (1865-1913) eras.
Because the files are not complete, there are a different number of observations in each cell,
which represents bank-year averages. Bank boards were about one member larger during free



                                                 24
than national banking, though the difference is statistically significant only at the 10 percent
level.
         The value of the archival data is that it shows, consistent with the findings of Freeman,
Pearson and Taylor (2012) and Hansmann and Parglender (2012), that ownership and control
were not separated in early incorporated banks. Articles of association for the sample of free
banks included here mandated that directors own, at a minimum, between five and 100 shares.
Free bank directors, on average, owned 18 shares with an average par value of $85, for an
average value of $1,530 ($47,900 in 2012 dollars in “real price” terms or $838,000 in “economic
status” value). Directors’ actual shareholdings exceeded the minimum by a wide margin. The
typical bank director owned more than 75 shares, for a total investment of $6,375 (2012 “real
price” equivalent of $200,000). Directors were heavily invested in their banks; they collectively
owned nearly 60 percent of their bank’s outstanding shares.
         The national era did not bring great changes in director ownership. Articles of association
required potential directors to own between 10 and 50 shares before they could serve, but they
owned, on average, nearly 71 shares with an average par value of $84. In the national banking
era, directors continued to own more than one-half of their bank’s shares. Evidence on share
ownership is consistent with recent interpretations of the historical corporation: it was not owned
by atomistic, fully diversified investors; rather, it was not managed by individuals with, at most,
a trivial ownership stake; it was a close corporation with owner-managers whose investments
most likely represented a substantial fraction of their overall portfolios.
         Archival data found in the New York bank superintendent’s archives also affords a rare
opportunity to investigate the distribution of shareholdings among directors at a sample of 23
New York banks observed between 1839 and 1908. In certain communications with the
superintendent, banks provided complete lists of directors and shareholders and those data are
tabulated to better understand director shareholdings. Table 3 reports the fraction of shares
owned by the five directors with the largest shareholdings among the directors. The data are
informative because they span much of the period of interest and include small and large banks,
as well as city and country banks. The mean board in the sample had 12.2 directors and the
largest proportional director shareholding ranged from 0.9% to 50.0% of all outstanding shares,
with a mean of 13.8%; the fifth largest director holdings varied from 0.0% to 12.5%, with a
mean of 4.0%.


                                                  25
       Concerns with separation of ownership and control do not appear to be particularly
relevant to early banks. Not only did many bank bylaws or articles of association impose
minimum shareholdings for men and women standing for election to the board, actual
shareholdings tended to exceed the mandated minima and represented not insignificant
investments for most households. At New York City’s Park Bank, for example, the largest
fractional director shareholding represented just 0.9% of the bank’s existing shares, or 200
shares. With a par value of $100, William P. Earle’s and R. W. Howe’s $20,000 investments in
the bank were surely sizeable personal investments. Besides being the Park Bank’s president,
Howe was a wholesale shoe dealer; Earle owned a hotel at the corner of Park Row and Sixth
Avenue (Trow’s 1856).
       Except at the smallest banks, which were very close corporations, the directors’ fractional
shareholdings also allay concerns with majority shareholder tunneling or other behaviors that
might expropriate from minority shareholders. Holding less than 14%, on average, of these
bank’s shares, the largest shareholder generally did not own enough shares to unilaterally impose
his will. He might, of course, form a coalition with other directors, but in most cases even the
five largest shareholding directors failed to command a majority of a bank’s shares. Without
detailed information about a bank’s lending practices and its customers, it is impossible to offer
definitive statements about large shareholder control, but the statistics reported in Table 3 are not
consistent with large shareholders controlling the firm.


Evidence on the Size of Bank Boards
       Table 4 reports board size by year and location. The top row reports averages for New
York banks taken from all sources that reported board size. Due to the small number of banks
reporting in the early years, averages are calculated for banks reporting in several years
surrounding the report date: circa 1840 includes all banks reporting between 1835 and 1845;
circa 1860 includes 1855 to 1865, except New York City, which reports values only for 1859;
circa 1885 reports values for 1887, which was the first year the superintendent’s annual reports
include a director list; the values for 1900 through 1950 include data dawn from only from those
years’ annual reports.
       There is a discernible decrease in the average number of directors over time, and across
the evolving regulatory and supervisory regimes. For the entire sample, the average number of


                                                 26
directors declines from approximately 13 in the pre-Civil War era, to about ten between the
1880s and the 1920s. The average number further declines to approximately eight in the period
after 1935.   The regulatory regimes may be represented by the following groupings: the Free
Banking Era, Columns (1) and (2), the National Banking Era, Columns (3) and (4), the Early
Federal Reserve, Column (5), the New Deal Era, Columns (6), (7) and (8).        Given the standard
deviations, the Free Banking and National Banking era may not be distinguishable nor the
National Banking, Early Fed and New Deal Eras. The trend is unmistakable, however; the Free
Banking and New Deal eras are strikingly different.
       The downward trend in average board size for the entire sample is also evident in sub-
samples of New York City banks, at which the average board size declines from 13 to 9; at
country banks average board size declines from approximately 12 to 7 directors. Few
observations at banks in other cities – Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo, Rochester and Syracuse –
make inference problematic, but it appears that board size declined at these banks, as well.
       Figure 1 presents a kernel density plot of board size for three regimes (Free Banking,
National Banking and New Deal) to further investigate changes in board size over time. Like the
averages reported in Table 4, the diagram reveals the decline in mean board size. More
importantly, however, the density plots reveal that the entire distributions of board size changed
over the century. Not only do the mean values decline, the distributions themselves become more
peaked, especially after 1900. Two-way Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests for equality of
distributions, a nonparametric test that is sensitive to both the center and shape of distributions,
reject the null of equality; the two-way p-values in all cases are 0.00. Regardless of how it is
parsed, the data point toward markedly declining board size over time.
       Table 5 parses the data by bank age and regulatory regime. Board size declines from 12
or 13 members for new banks at birth (zero years of age) in the pre-New Deal era to 7 members
for the one bank in our sample that opened in the New Deal era. The sample sizes for more
seasoned banks (6 years and older) all point toward a distinct change in board size in the New
Deal era. National and Early Fed-era banks in their second decade had boards with about 11
directors; equally seasoned banks in the New Deal era had just over eight directors. A
comparable decline in board size occurs for banks 21 years of age and older.
       Although the conjecture deserves a larger study, the evidence is consistent with Gorton’s
(1996) study of free banking in which he demonstrates that it requires several years for new


                                                27
banks to develop reputations for safety and soundness. New banks might accelerate the
reputation-formation process by electing a relatively large board of well-known men and women.
As the bank ages and its reputation is established, board sizes decline. At the same time, it may
be that founding shareholders be more involved in the daily management of young banks than
later, passive investors. There is evidence among modern nonfinancial firms that the market
value of young, post-IPO firms is higher for founder-controlled than professional manager-
controlled firms (Nelson 2003). It is not clear how this result would translate to the historical
financial firm, but it points toward an important role for founders as board members. The
existing literature specifically on bank board size is largely silent on the association between
bank age and board size. Pathan and Skully (2010) and Adusei (2012) include bank size as a
proxy measure of “scope of operations,” or that banks engage in more or more complex
functions over time and will endogenously respond with larger boards populated by members
more capable of monitoring complex activities. In neither case does the data bear out the
hypothesis. Board size tends to increase in firm size among modern firms, and the same is true
for historical banks.
       It is widely believed that board size responds endogenously to features of the firm and the
market in which it operates (Hermalin and Weisbach 1998; Hermalin and Weisbach 2001).
Evidence for banks operating in New York between the mid-nineteenth and mid-twentieth
century are consistent with that belief. Not only did mean board size respond predictably to bank
age, bank location and bank size. The distributions of board size vary systematically across age,
location and size.


Multivariate analysis of bank board size
       In this section, we use regression analysis to investigate the relative magnitudes of the
several features of the firm and its market thought to influence board size. The regressions
account for firm size, firm age and market size, in addition to other features that firms are
believed to endogenously respond to. Thus, the regressions do not identify causal effects; rather,
they are provided to offer insights into how bank boards responded to its other strategic choices
and other features of the banks’ environments.
       Modern studies of board size and structure have generated three hypotheses to explain
board size: (1) the scope of operations hypothesis; (2) the monitoring hypothesis; and (3) the


                                                 28
negotiation hypothesis (Boone et al 2007). The scope of operations hypothesis treats firm size
and complexity as the principal determinants of board size. Larger and more complex firms tend
to have larger boards, which affords the opportunity to include directors with specialist
knowledge of certain features of the firm’s activities. The monitoring hypothesis holds that board
size and structure are driven by the corporation’s competitive and informational environment.
High-growth and/or innovative firms will have smaller boards because the cost of monitoring is
high and outside board members are typically poorly positioned to offer meaningful advice
(Lehn et al 2005; Coles et al 2007). The monitoring hypothesis does not directly relate board size
and firm performance; rather, it implies that the net benefits of alternative board sizes are
dependent on a firm’s competitive position, which is commonly measured by a market
concentration measure, and research and development expenditures, among other firm and
market features. The negotiation hypothesis proposes that board size and structure results from
negotiations between an influential CEO and outside directors. CEO’s capable of generating firm
value use their influence with outside board members to capture some fraction of their
incremental product for themselves (Hermalin and Weisbach 1998). Because we cannot account
for the number of outside directors on bank boards, we cannot analyze whether or the extent
which the negotiation approach applies to banks in our sample.
         The choice of independent variables to include in the regressions is informed by the
“scope” and “monitoring” hypotheses. A polynomial in age is included to account for the
observation that board size decreases in age. We also include a polynomial in total assets to
investigate how board size changes with bank size. Unless managerial capacity is subject to
increasing returns, board size is expected to increase in firm size. Larger firms simply require
more oversight, which demands more directors. Two measures are constructed to control for
bank “scope” effects. First, leverage is measured as the ratio of total assets to capital and is
included to capture a bank’s overall riskiness. Capital provides a buffer against loan losses or the
decline in the market value of other assets in a bank’s portfolio. The greater the leverage, the
smaller the buffer relative to its at-risk portfolio and the more likely a bank is to becoming
bankrupt. Second, correspondent is a dummy variable equal to one if the bank’s “due to other
banks” account in the balance sheet exceeds 15 percent of its total assets.19 As is well known,

19
   The variable was alternatively specified as 10 percent and 20 percent. The results are not substantially different
and, since we have no strong prior concerning the true percentage for city banks that acted as country bank
correspondents, we report results for the intermediate value.

                                                         29
New York City served as central reserve city during the National Bank era, a role it assumed
before the Civil War. Some Albany banks, too, provided correspondent services to country
banks, especially in the antebellum era. Acting as a correspondent increased the demands on a
bank’s board because correspondents held large interbank balances. Banks paid interest on these
accounts and funneled them into profitable investments. It is also well known, that correspondent
accounts were subject to unanticipated withdrawals and exposed banks to short-term liquidity
problems, particularly during seasonal peak demands for credit and credit crunches during
cyclical downturns (Calomiris and Gorton 1991). Providing correspondent services complicated
a bank’s operations and may have required additional director oversight, which may have
prompted banks to employ larger boards of directors.
         Lacking information on national banks in New York, we cannot directly account for the
banks’ competitive environment. City and year fixed effects are used to (imperfectly) account for
each bank’s local competitive environment. Davis (1966), Sylla (1969), and James (1978)
characterize urban banking markets as monopolistically competitive and rural markets as (near)
monopolies. Thus, we include dummy variables for New York City and the state’s other cities
with several state banks. The excluded category is smaller towns and rural places, where a lone
state bank is typical.
         Table 6 report summary statistics of the dependent and independent variables (Column
(1)), as well as four regression specifications. For the first four regressions, we use OLS and for
the last specification we use a negative binomial regression that takes into account the fact that
the dependent variable consists of positive integers.20 Only two coefficients do not have the
expected signs---those for leverage and correspondent banking. These are difficult to explain as
it might be thought that a highly leveraged bank or one engaged in correspondent banking would
require more directors because they are more complex. However, without further information on
the structure of their portfolios, complexity is difficult to judge and a highly leveraged bank
might be focusing carefully on a very few activities, as might a correspondent bank.
         For the remainder of the variables, the coefficients conform fairly closely with the
hypotheses. Coefficients on age and its square in the baseline regression (Column 1) imply that,
in the reference year (1900), board size is minimized at 85 years, which is well out on the right

20
    Mroz (2012) offers a set of flexible tests for regressions with count data dependent variables. After some
experimentation with alternative specifications, we use the negative binomial specification because it is easily
interpreted and accounts for over- or under-dispersion in the dependent variable, relative to a Poisson specification.

                                                         30
tail of the age distribution. The maximum age observed in the sample is 136 years (Manhattan
Bank in 1935). The coefficients on assets and its square imply that board size was maximized
for banks with total real assets between $131 million and $171 million, which are larger values
than for all but the Manhattan Bank. Older banks have smaller boards and larger banks have
larger boards, which is consistent with findings for modern boards for financial and nonfinancial
firms. It is not evident, as least by our observable measures, that banks that took on more risk or
interacted with other banks relied on larger boards of directors. Coefficients on the city variables
are consistent with monitoring hypothesis. New York and other cities were notably more
competitive markets than small towns, and banks adopted larger boards in response.
       One feature of note is that early bank board size declined over time. Using the estimates
in the baseline regression (Column 2), for example, bank boards circa 1840 had nearly 3 more
members than in the reference year of 1900. When we control for Age X Era effects (Column 3),
boards circa 1840 were larger by 3.3 members; and when controlling for Age X Era and Real
Assets X Era effects (Column 4), boards circa 1840 were nearly 5 members larger than in 1900.
Relative to 1900, boards in 1950 were between one-half and one member smaller. With
estimated averages around 10 members, the estimated era effects are notable. Early in the Free
Banking Era, bank boards were about 40 percent larger than national banks; late in the New Deal
era, bank boards were about 10 percent smaller.
       In Column (6) of Table 6, we take advantage of the panel nature of the post-1860 data
and estimate the model using bank fixed effects. It is an unbalanced panel in which banks appear
between one and six times. The results are consistent with our pooled cross-sectional results. The
so-called within estimates imply that board size increased in bank size, decreased in age and
bank leverage, and declined in size after 1900.
               Boards, as the modern literature suggests, serve several functions, principally
monitoring of and advice to management. By 1950, bank managers were trained professionals –
there were university programs, such as the one at Rutgers that specialized in training bankers –
and directors, who remained substantial investors, mostly monitored and advised. In the 1840s,
bankers were not trained professionals; they tended to be merchants who brought their general
human capital to the enterprise. Given the lack of professionalism, bank boards provided a vital
monitoring and advising role and were, by all accounts, much more involved in the day-to-day
operations of the banks they directed. It is also important to recall that finance is about reputation


                                                  31
and it took time for a bank to establish a reputation for soundness and stability. Gorton (1996)
shows that reputation was established slowly. One way to accelerate the process was for a bank
to have a large board of local notables. There is evidence that such was the case, but a systematic
investigation of board members is the subject of future research.


                                          Conclusions
       Our survey of New York banking law suggests that directors were closely bound to the
rest of the owners and stakeholders in a bank, being given incentives to closer monitor
management to push for maximizing firm value. From the early years of the nineteenth century
through the early years of the Fed, legislation did no change in essence but appears to have
tightened the rules. Only with the onset of the New Deal, some of the incentives for directors
weaken. From the limited empirical evidence on stock ownership of directors---who for the first
century of banking were often directly involved in management---it appears that management
and ownership were hardly separable. The ownership stakes of directors bound them closely to
the interests of their fellow shareholders. Older banks may have shed inexperienced directors
and kept a competent core of directors; but larger banks tended to retain larger boards. In
addition, over time boards tended to shrink in size. Whether the last features were due to
increasing bank sophistication from experience individually or in terms of the experience of the
whole banking system or from movement to a regulatory/supervisory regime that allowed a
small number of directors to capture a bank with management for their benefit are subjects of
further research.




                                                32
References

Adams, Renée B., Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Wesibach. 2010. “The Role of Boards

       of Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual Framework and Survey.” Journal of

       Economic Literature 48(1): 58-107.

Adams, Renée B. and Hamid Mehran. 2003. “Is Corporate Governance Different for Bank

       Holding Companies?” Economic Policy Review 9(1):

Adusei, Michael. 2012. “Determinants of Bank Board Structure in Ghana.” International Journal

       of Business and Finance Research 6(1): 15-23.

American Exchange Bank. 1838. The Articles of Association of the American Exchange Bank.

       New York: Wm. H. Colyer, printer.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An

       Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bank of America. The Bank of America: A Brief Account of an Historical Financial Institution

       and Its Site. New York: private printing, 1918.

Barnard, Daniel Dewey. 1838. “An Act to Authorize the Business of Banking Passed April 18,

       1838.”In Speeches and reports in the Assembly of New York, at the annual session of

       1838. Albany: Oliver Steele.



                                               33
Berle, Adolph A and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property.

       New York:

Bodenhorn, Howard. 1992. “Capital Mobility and Financial Integration in Antebellum America.”

       Journal of Economic History 52(3): 585-610.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2003. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History. New

       York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2006. “Bank Chartering and Political Corruption in Antebellum New York:

       Free Banking as Reform.” In Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s History,

       231-257. Edited by Edward Glaeser and Claudia Goldin. Chicago and London:

       University of Chicago Press.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2014. “Voting Rights, Share Concentration, and Leverage in Nineteenth-

       Century US Banks.” Journal of Law and Economics 57(2), forthcoming.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2013. “Large Block Shareholders, Institutional Investors, Boards of

       Directors and Bank Value in the Nineteenth Century.” NBER working paper 18955.

Boone, Audra L., Laura Casares Field, Jonathan M. Karpoff, and Charu G. Raheja. 2007. “The

       Determination of Corporate Board Size and Composition: An Empirical Analysis.”

       Journal of Financial Economics 85(1): 66-101.

Calomiris, Charles W. 1990. “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical Perspective.”

       Journal of Economic History 50(2): 283-295.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Mark Carlson. 2013. “National Bank Examinations and Operations in

       the Early 1890s.” Unpublished working paper.




                                             34
Calomiris, Charles W. and Gary Gorton. 1991. “The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, fact,

       and Bank Regulation.” In Financial Markets and Financial Crises, 109-173. Edited by R.

       Glenn Hubbard. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cleaveland, John and G. S. Huchinson. 1864. The Banking System of the State of New York New

       York: John S. Voorhies.

Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel and Lalitha Naveen. 2008. “Boards: Does One Size Fit All?”

       Journal of Financial Economics 87(2): 329-356.

Comptroller of the Currency. 1913. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government

       Printing Office.

Conyngton, Thomas. 1913. The Modern Corporation: Its Mechanism, Methods, Formation and

       Management. Fourth Printing. New York: Ronald Press.

Craig, Susan and Jessica Silver-Greenberg. 2013 “Shareholders Denied Access to JP Morgan

       Vote Results,” New York Times (May 15, 2013).

Farmers’ and Mechanics’ Bank. 1849. The Charter and by-Laws of the Farmers’ and

       Mechanics’ Bank, to Which Are Added the Several Acts of the Assembly, Relative to

       Banks, Prepared for the Bank, By Order of the Directors. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott

       & Co.

Freeman, Pearson and Taylor. 2012. Shareholder Democracies? Corporate Governance in

       Britain and Ireland before 1850. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gilbart, James William. 1851. A Practical Treatise on Banking. New York: George P. Putnam.

Gorton, Gary. 1996. “Reputation Formation in Early Bank Note Markets.” Journal of Political

       Economy 104(2): 346-397.




                                              35
Groesbeck, Edward A. and Charles C. Dickinson 1892. The General Banking Laws of the State

       of New York. Albany: James B. Lyon.

Hall, Charles Roswell. 1895. Hall’s Bank Laws, Containing the Banking Law of the State of

       New York. Albany, NY: Matthew Bender Law Publisher.

Hansmann, Henry and Mariana Parglender. 2012. “The Evolution of Shareholder Voting Rights:

       Separation of Ownership and Consumption.” Yale Law School working paper.

Hausman, Jerry A. and William E. Taylor. 1981. “Panel Data and Unobservable Individual

       Effects.” Econometrica 49( ): 1377-1398.

Hermalin, Benjamin E and Michael S. Weisbach. 1998. “Endogenously Chosen Boards of

       Directors and Their Monitoring of the CEO.” American Economic Review 88(1): 96-118.

Hermalin, Benjamin E and Michael S. Weisbach. 2003. “Boards of Directors as an

       Endogenously Determined Institution: A Survey of the Economic Literature.” FRB-NY

       Economic Policy Review xx(): 7-26.

Hilt, Eric. 2008. “When Did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance in the

       Early Nineteeth Century.” Journal of Economic History 68(3): 645-685.

Hilt, Eric. 2009. “Wall Street’s First Corporate Governance Crisis: The Panic of 1826” NBER

       Working Paper No. 14892 (April 2009).

Hilt, Eric. 2015. “Corporate Governance and the Development of Manufacturing Enterprises in

       Nineteenth-Century Massachusetts.” In Enterprising America: Businesses, Banks and

       Credit Markets in Historical Perspective. Edited by William Collins and Robert A.

       Margo. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (forthcoming).

James, John A. 1976. “The Development of a National Money Market, 1893-1911.” Journal of

       Economic History 36(4): 878-897.



                                             36
Jensen, Michael C and William H. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,

       Agency Costs and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics 3(4): 305-360.

John, Kose and Lemma W. Senbet. 1998. “Corporate Governance and Board Effectiveness.”

       Journal of Banking & Finance 22: 371-403.

King, Robert G. 1983. “On the Economics of Private Money.” Journal of Monetary Economics

       12(1): 127-158.

Klein, April. 1998. “Firm Performance and Board Committee Structure.” Journal of Law &

       Economics 41(1): 275-304.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. 1996. Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic

       Development in Industrial New England. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lamoreaux, Naomi. 2009. “Scylla or Charybdis? Historical Reflections on Two Basic Problems

       of Corporate Governance.” Business History Review 83(1): 9-34.

Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2006. “Corporate Governance and Minority

       Shareholders in the United States before the Great Depression.” In Corruption and

       Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History, 125-152. Edited by Edward Glaeser

       and Claudia Goldin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lewis, Lawrence, Jr. 1882. A History of the Bank of North America, the First Bank Chartered in

       the United States. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co.

Lehn, Kenneth M., Sukesh Patro, and Mengxin Zhao. 2009. “Determinants of the Size and

       Composition of US Corporate Boards, 1935-2000.” Financial Management 38(4): 474-

       780.

Leonard, Joseph M. 1940. Superadded Liability of Bank Stockholders.” Temple Law Review 14:

       522-524.



                                               37
Linck, James S., Jeffrey M. Netter and Tina Yang. 2008. “The Determination of Board

       Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics 87( ): 308-328.

Meltzer, Allan H. 2004. A History of the Federal Reserve, Vol 1: 1913-1951. Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press.

Melvin, Crandall, Sr. 1969. A History of the Merchants National Bank and Trust Company of

       Syracuse, New York: One Hundred Eighteen Years. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University

       Press.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny. 1988. “Management Ownership and

       Market Valuation.” Journal of Financial Economics 20(1): 293-315.

Morgan, George Wilson and Amasa J. Parker, Jr. 1922. Banking Law of New York. 7th ed. New

       York: Bank Law Publishing Company.

Mroz, Thomas A. 2012. “A Simple, Flexible Estimator for Count and Other Ordered Discrete

       Data.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 27( ): 646-665.

The National Banks of the United States. 1864. “An Act to provide a National Currency, secured

       by a pledge of United States Bonds, and to provide for the circulation and redemption

       thereof, Approved, June 3, 1864.” New York: Office of the Bankers’ Magazine.

Nelson, Teresa. 2003. “The Persistence of Founder Influence: Management, Ownership, and

       Performance Effects at Initial Public Offering.” Strategic Management Journal 24(8):

       707-724.

New Hampshire. Bank Commissioners. 1845. “Bank Commissioners’ Reports.” Journal of the

       House of Representatives of the State of New Hampshire. Concord: carroll & Baker,

       State Printers.




                                              38
New Hampshire. Bank Commissioners. 1865. Annual Report of the Bank Commissioners of the

       State of New Hampshire. Concord: Amos Hadley, State Printer.

New York. State. 1806. “An Act to incorporate the Stockholders of the Merchants’ Bank, in the

       City of New-York.” Laws of the State of New York, pp. 62-66. Albany: Websters and

       Skinner.

New York. State. 1829. “An Act to incorporate the President, Directors and Company of the

       Canal Bank, of Albany, Passed May 2, 1829,” Laws of the State of New York, pp. 531-

       538. Albany: F. Croswell, printer to the state.New York State. 1833. “An Act to

       incorporate the President, Directors and Company of the Chemung Canal Bank, Passed .”

       Laws of the State of New York, pp. 146-153. Albany: F. Croswell, printer to the state.

New York. State. 1882. Banking Laws: An Act to Revise the Statutes of the States of New York

       Relating to Banks, Banking and Trust Companies.Albany: Weed, Parsons and Company.



New York. State. Comptroller’s Office. 1848. Special Agent’s Report to the Comptroller, in

       Relation to the Affairs of the Canal Bank. Albany, NY.

Parglender, Mariana and Henry Hansmann. 2013. “A New View of Shareholder Voting in the

       Nineteenth Century: Evidence from Brazil, England and France.” Business History

       (forthcoming).

Pathan and Skully. 2010. “Endogenously Structured Board of Directors.” Journal of Banking &

       Finance 34: 1590-1606.

Rockoff, Hugh. 1974. “The Free Banking Era: A Reexamination.” Journal of Money, Credit, and

       Banking 6(2): 141-167.




                                               39
Rolnick, Arthur J and Warren E. Weber. 1983. “New Evidence on the Free Banking Era.”

       American Economic Review 73(5): 1080-1091.

Shams, Pathan and Robert Faff. 2013. “Does Board Structure in Banks Really Affect Their

       Performance.” Journal of Banking & Finance (forthcoming).

Sylla, Richard. 1969. “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization in the

       United States, 1863-1913.” Journal of Economic History 29(4): 657-686.

Wainwright, Nicholas B. 1953. History of the Philadelphia National Bank: A Century and a Half

       of Philadelphia Banking, 1803-1953. Philadelphia: William F. Fell, printer.

White, Eugene. 2013. “To Establish More Effective Supervision of Banking: How the Birth of

       the Fed Altered Bank Supervision.” In A Return to Jekyll Island: The Origins, History,

       and Future of the Federal Reserve, pp. 7-55. Edited by Michael D. Bordo and William

       Roberds. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Yermack, David. 1996. “Higher Market Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of

       Directors.” Journal of Financial Economics 40 ( ): 185-211.



Data appendix

Albany Argus. 22 August 1851.

Belden, E. Porter. New York: Past, Present, and Future; Comprising a History of the City of New York, A

       Description of its Present Condition and an Estimate of its Future Increase. Fifth Edition. New

       York: Prall, Lewis & Co., 1851.

Buffalo Business Directory, with Alphabetical and Classified Index. Vol. 1. Buffalo: Hunter & Ostrander,

       1855.

Charter and Directory of the City of Rochester. Rochester: C. & M. Morse, 1834.




                                                  40
A Directory for the City of Buffalo; Containing the Names and Residence of the Heads of Families and

       Householders. Buffalo: I. P. Clary, 1832.

Munsell, Joel. Albany Annual Register for 1850: Containing a Directory to the Places of Business and

       Public Institutions. Albany: E. H. Pease & Co., 1850.

Munsell, Joel. Munsell’s Albany Directory and City Register for 1853-54. Albany: J. Munsell, 1853.

Munsell, Joel. Annals of Albany. Vol. 9. Albany: Munsell & Rowland, 1858.

New York (State). Banking Department. Inactive Institution Files, 1838-1967. Series (N-Ar)14272. New

       York State Archives: Albany, New York.

New York (State). Superintendent of Banks. Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of

       New York. Albany: xxx, 1888.

New York (State). Superintendent of Banks. Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of

       New York. Albany: James B. Lyon, State Printer, 1901.

New York (State). Superintendent of Banks. Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of

       New York. Albany: J. B. Lyon, State Printer, 1902.

New York (State). Superintendent of Banks. Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks for the Year

       Ending December 31, 1920. Legislative Document No. 4. Albany: J. B. Lyon, State Printers,

       1921.

New York (State). Superintendent of Banks. One Hundredth Annual Report of the Superintendent of

       Bank State of New York for the Year Ending December 31, 1950. Legislative Document 22.

       Albany, 1951.

Peck, William F. Semi-Centennial History of the City of Rochester. Syracuse, N.Y.: D. Mason & Co.,

       1884.

Wilson, H. (compiler). Trow’s New York City Directory. New York: John F. Trow, 1857.

Wilson, H. (compiler). Trow’s New York City Directory. New York: John F. Trow, 1859.

Weber, Warren E. 2011. Balance Sheets for U.S. Antebellum State Banks. Research Department, Federal

       Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

                                                   41
                                                  Table 1
                                      Bank operating ratios in four eras

                                  Free Banking            National Banking   Early Fed   New Deal

Loan/Assets                             0.685                   0.668          0.439       0.362
                                       (0.182)                 (0.138)        (0.165)     (0.174)

Mortgages/Assets                        0.049                   0.046          0.054       0.113
                                       (0.109)                 (0.268)        (0.048)     (0.093)

Securities/Assets                         na                    0.028          0.314       0.308
                                                               (0.053)        (0.156)     (0.259)

Capital/Liabilities                     0.414                   0.191          .055        0.075
                                       (0.158)                 (0.153)        (0.039)     (0.087)

Surplus/Liabilities                       na                    0.064           na         0.054
                                                               (0.056)                    (0.031)

Circulation/Liabilities                 0.128                     na            na          na
                                       (0.107)

Deposits/Liabilities                    0.323                   0.696           na         0.305
                                       (0.162)                 (0.163)                    (0.173)

Real Assets ($m 1900)                   2.325                   2.236         3.271        2.125
                                       (2.895)                 (3.455)       (10.292)    (17.563)

Observations                              84                      62           129         235

Sources: see Data Appendix and text




                                                        42
                                        Table 2
                       Bank director share ownership in two eras

                                                       Free banks   National banks
                                                       1838-1864    1865-1908

Number of directors                                        11.39          10.23
                                                           (3.58)         (5.06)
                                                            [38]           [83]
Shares required to serve                                   18.04          15.00
                                                          (19.64)        (14.14)
                                                            [23]            [8]
Average director shareholding                              75.34          70.71
                                                          (55.74)        (58.21)
                                                            [22]           [17]
Fraction of shares owned by directors                       0.58           0.53
                                                           (0.30)         (0.36)
                                                            [24]           [15]
Number of shareholders                                     83.15          48.22
                                                         (102.84)        (59.16)
                                                            [61]           [41]
Capital ($000)                                            278.14         376.61
                                                         (450.29)       (929.01)
                                                            [66]           [91]

Notes: bank-year observations.
Standard deviation in parentheses; observations in brackets
Source: New York State Archives, Record Group 14272.




                                                       43
                                                         Table 3
                                   Ownership share by five largest shareholding directors
                                                                                                  Fraction of shares held by:
Bank Name                  Place                 Year    Share-         Directors              second-       third-     fourth-    fifth-
                                                         holders                    largest     largest     largest     largest   largest
                                                                                    director   director director director         director
                                                            #              #           %           %           %           %         %


Agricultural Bank          Herkimer              1839      58              13         9.8        7.8         4.9         4.9        2.9
Bank of Brockport          Brockport             1838      57              15        16.7       13.3         4.4         2.0        1.7
Farmers & Mechanics Bank   Batavia               1838       8              8         12.5       12.5        12.5        12.5       12.5
Commercial Bank            Albany                1847      148             12         6.0        5.1         4.9         1.4        1.3
Buffalo City Bank          Buffalo               1853      11              7         15.0       15.0        10.0        10.0        5.0
Spraker Bank               Canajoharie           1853      21              15        15.2       15.2        15.2        12.7        5.1
Bank of Albany             Albany                1854      161             12         8.2        3.5         2.9         1.9        1.4
Onondaga Bank              Syracuse              1854      20              11        23.3        8.6         8.6         8.6        8.6
Park Bank                  New York City         1856      451             22         0.9        0.9         0.7         0.7        0.7
Market Bank                Troy                  1859      107             14         3.2        2.9         2.9         2.9        2.5
Bank of Otego              Ostego                1861       4              5         50.0       40.0         7.0         3.0        0.0
Ulster County Bank         Kingston              1861      63              11         5.0        4.7         2.2         1.0        0.7
Central Bank               Rome                  1865      119             16         3.2        3.0         2.2         1.9        1.6
Cuba Bank                  Cuba                  1865      36              13        29.3       13.2         6.0         5.4        5.2
Genesee River Bank         Mount Morris          1865      12              8         26.5       25.1        20.8         6.3        5.0
Fulton County Bank         Gloversville          1865      32              15        12.3       11.2         9.4         9.2        6.3
Ulster County Bank         Kingston              1865      69              11         5.6        5.0         2.5         1.4        1.0
Dry Goods Bank             New York City         1871      174             20         1.0        1.0         1.0         1.0        1.0
Brewers & Grocers Bank     New York City         1876      13              10        14.6       14.6        14.6         9.8        9.8
Bank of Long Island        Jamaica               1902       8              8         20.0       20.0        20.0        10.0       10.0
Bank of Metropolis         New York City         1903      22              15        11.1        7.4         3.9         3.4        3.4
Bank of Angola             Angola                1905      61              9          5.4        5.4         4.3         3.3        2.7


                                                                   44
Bank of Corfu                          Corfu   1908   11          10     22.0   20.0   20.0   4.0   4.0


Free banking (1838-184) average                       92.4        12.1   13.8   10.8   6.4    5.1   3.5
National banking (1865-1908) average                  50.6        12.3   13.7   11.4   9.5    5.1   4.5

Source: See Table 1




                                                             45
                                                            Table 4
                                      Mean number of bank directors by era and bank location
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)     (6)        (7)      (8)
                                      Free Banking           National Banking         Early Fed            New Deal
                                  ca.1840     ca.1860        ca.1885      1900            1920    1935       1940     1950

All banks                         13.15        12.53          10.65       10.46          10.73     8.47      7.41      7.40
                                  (5.08)       (3.41)         (3.84)      (3.89)         (4.22)   (2.80)    (2.12)    (2.24)
                                   [20]         [64]           [60]       [145]          [146]    [107]     [127]      [67]

New York City banks                17.00       13.11          12.03       12.51          12.94    11.90     10.29      8.75
                                    (na)       (3.07)         (3.60)      (4.26)         (4.65)   (2.77)    (3.59)    (3.92)
                                     [1]        [51]           [36]        [54]           [31]     [10]       [7]       [8]

Other city banks                  13.55         9.17           8.63       10.56          15.78    5.00       5.00     5.00
                                  (6.07)       (3.97)         (2.26)      (2.82)         (5.85)   (na)       (na)     (na)
                                   [11]          [6]            [8]        [27]            [9]     [1]        [1]      [1]

Country banks                     12.13        11.14           8.56        8.69           9.66     8.16      7.26      7.26
                                  (3.68)       (3.72)         (3.76)      (3.01)         (3.35)   (2.56)    (1.89)    (1.88)
                                    [8]          [7]           [16]        [64]          [106]     [96]     [119]      [58]

Notes: New York City includes boroughs of Manhattan, Brooklyn and Bronx
Other cities includes Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo and Rochester
(standard deviation) [observations]
Sources: see data appendix.




                                                                          46
                                         Table 5
                        Mean number of directors by bank age and era

                            (1)                  (2)                (3)        (4)
                       Free Banking       National Banking       Early Fed   New Deal

New Banks                 12.86                  11.5              12.00       7.00
                          (6.14)                (4.64)             (1.73)      (na)
                           [14]                   [6]                [3]        [1]
1-5 years                  11.2                 10.13              11.20       9.00
                          (4.85)                (3.73)             (5.20)     (5.29)
                           [10]                  [32]               [25]        [3]
6-10 years                13.44                 11.53               9.76      10.40
                          (3.19)                (4.18)             (2.63)     (3.44)
                           [27]                  [45]               [17]       [15]
11-20 years               13.25                 10.61              11.03       8.18
                          (2.63)                (4.08)             (3.81)     (2.60)
                            [4]                  [77]               [31]       [76]
21+ years                 12.07                  9.49              10.61       7.42
                          (2.46)                (2.90)             (4.42)     (2.12)
                           [27]                  [45]               [70]      [213]

Notes: see Table 3
Sources: see Table 3




                                                  47
                                  Table 6
                       Determinants of bank board size
                   (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)               (5)         (6)
                  Mean      OLS       OLS       OLS              Negative     Fixed
                  (std
                  dev)                                           Binomial    Effects


Age                24.3       -0.06      -0.089        -0.11      -0.01      -0.029
                  [17.83]    [0.022]**   [0.025]**   [0.029]**   [0.003]**    [0.123]
Age squared      907.95         0           0             0         0        -0.001
                 [1389.55]    [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.007]
Assets ($mil)      2.43       0.154       0.183       0.262       0.023        0.31
                  [12.55]    [0.042]**   [0.053]**   [0.089]**   [0.007]**   [0.074]**
Assets squared   163.24         0        -0.001       -0.001        0           0
                 [3493.06]   [0.000]**   [0.000]**    [0.001]    [0.000]*     [0.000]
Leverage          16.03      -0.013      -0.015       -0.022      -0.002     -0.044
                  [13.28]     [0.012]     [0.012]     [0.012]     [0.001]    [0.015]**
Correspondent     0.048      -1.824      -1.661       -2.215      -0.175      0.309
                  [0.21]     [0.783]*    [0.788]*    [0.791]**   [0.068]*     [1.121]
New York
City               0.27       2.992       3.128       3.024       0.285
                  [0.45]     [0.471]**   [0.475]**   [0.500]**   [0.045]**
Albany             0.02       1.795       1.913       1.782       0.173
                  [0.13]      [1.464]     [1.327]     [1.428]     [0.125]
Buffalo            0.04       0.766        1.01       1.023       0.104
                  [0.19]      [0.820]     [0.805]     [0.826]     [0.081]
Rochester          0.02       3.521       3.581       3.548       0.316
                  [0.13]     [1.584]*    [1.521]*     [1.504]*   [0.111]**
Binghamton          0         4.586       4.429       4.375       0.372
                  [0.07]     [0.569]**   [0.623]**   [0.659]**   [0.051]**
Syracuse           0.01      -1.055      -0.851       -0.697      -0.087
                  [0.07]      [1.743]     [1.690]     [1.624]     [0.189]
1840               0.02       2.967       2.369       1.959       0.156
                  [0.14]      [1.924]     [2.210]     [2.317]     [0.171]
1860               0.08       1.235       0.517       -0.141      -0.02
                  [0.28]     [0.584]*     [0.788]     [0.839]     [0.070]
1885               0.08      -0.519      -0.773       -0.822      -0.082      0.443
                  [0.28]      [0.512]     [0.780]     [0.810]     [0.073]     [1.250]
1900                                        reference year

1920               0.18       1.015       0.299       0.007       0.005       -2.11
                  [0.39]     [0.441]*     [0.691]     [0.692]     [0.063]     [4.835]

                                                     48
1935               0.14      -0.318     -1.225       -1.228     -0.113      -8.084
                  [0.35]     [0.443]     [0.720]     [0.746]     [0.074]    [12.275]
1940               0.18      -1.022     -2.144       -2.725     -0.303      -10.171
                  [0.38]    [0.449]*    [0.688]**   [0.707]**   [0.079]**   [15.392]
1950               0.1       -0.722     -3.209        -3.16     -0.385      -12.671
                  [0.30]     [0.582]    [1.053]**   [1.101]**   [0.129]**   [23.043]
Age * 1840                               0.037       0.037       0.004
                                         [0.046]     [0.050]     [0.004]
Age * 1860                               0.038       0.031       0.004
                                         [0.027]     [0.032]     [0.003]
Age * 1885                               0.011       0.021       0.002      -0.084
                                         [0.027]     [0.035]     [0.003]     [0.202]
Age * 1920                               0.045       0.077       0.007       0.139
                                         [0.026]     [0.030]*   [0.003]**    [0.291]
Age * 1935                               0.054       0.059       0.004       0.229
                                        [0.025]*     [0.029]*    [0.003]     [0.506]
Age * 1940                                0.06       0.072       0.006        0.25
                                        [0.024]*    [0.027]**   [0.003]*     [0.578]
Age * 1950                               0.091       0.099        0.01       0.291
                                        [0.030]**   [0.032]**   [0.003]**    [0.722]
Assets * 1840                                        0.828       0.057
                                                     [1.202]     [0.093]
Assets * 1860                                        0.265       0.013
                                                     [0.161]     [0.012]
Assets * 1885                                        -0.064     -0.006       0.452
                                                     [0.110]     [0.009]    [0.125]**
Assets * 1920                                         -0.11     -0.011      -0.203
                                                     [0.096]     [0.008]    [0.077]**
Assets * 1935                                        0.068       0.007      -0.212
                                                     [0.189]     [0.013]    [0.084]*
Assets * 1940                                        0.588       0.069      -0.145
                                                    [0.208]**   [0.019]**    [0.202]
Assets * 1950                                        0.052       0.014      -0.203
                                                     [0.136]     [0.012]     [0.151]
Constant                     9.749      10.224       10.462      2.339      11.738
                            [0.403]**   [0.494]**   [0.520]**   [0.049]**   [2.672]**

Observations                     711       711        711         711         637
R-squared                        0.38      0.39       0.4                     0.29
F statistic/Wald Chi sq         33.87     24.48      31.54       967.3
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


                                                    49
                                          Board Size Distribution
                                                  by Year
             .2
           .15
Density



             .1
           .05
                 0




                          5               10           15            20   25
                                                  directors

                                                       ca1860
                                                       1900
                                                       1940
                     country banks only




          Source: See data appendix and text for discussion.




                                                                50
