NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX POLICY AND
INTERNATIONAL COMPETATIVENESS

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 2007

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1986

I have benefited from useful discussions with Richard Cooper, Rudi
Dornbusch, and Jeff Sachs. This paper draws in part on earlier
joint work with John Earle. I am indebted to Fernando Ramos and
Mark Sundberg for valuable research assistance. This paper is
forthcoming in the NBER conference volume International Aspects of
Fiscal Policies (ed. J. Frenkel). The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #2007
August 1986

Tax Policy and International Competitiveness

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the interactions between tax policy,
international capital mobility, and international competitiveness. It
demonstrates that tax policies which stimulate national investment
without affecting national savings must inevitably lead to deterioration
in a country's trade balance in the short and intermediate run.
This
conclusion, which contradicts a great deal of popular rhetoric highlights
the importance of considering the macroeconomic as well as the
microeconomic aspects of tax changes.
More generally, the effects of tax policies depend critically on
the extent of the international capital flows which they generate. The
paper examines the issue of international capital mobility both
theoretically and empirically.
A variety of considerations suggest that
while tax policies could generate large capital flows, governments pursue
policies which tend to inhibit capital flows following tax changes. This
makes the analysis of tax policies difficult.

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

International considerations are coming to play an increasingly important

role in U.S. tax policy debates. Policy discussions of tax provisions bearing
on foreign investment in the United States and American investment abroad has

long focused on the competitiveness question. Recently reductions in taxes on
business investment have been advocated on the grounds that they will increase

American competitiveness. Excessive tax burdens are frequently blamed for the
poor international performance of some American industries. Indeed the
President's Commission on International Competitiveness recently urged
business tax relief as a major element in a strategy directed at improving the

trade position of the United States. Tax increases to reduce looming budget
deficits are often defended on the grounds that they will reduce trade
deficits.

While economists have long recognized that increased international
competitiveness is not necessarily a good thing, because it is the mirror
image of a decline in a nation's terms of trade, it is nonetheless an

important policy goal. An analysis of the interrelationships between tax
policy and competitiveness therefore seems worthwhile. This paper provides
such an analysis stressing the crucial role of capital mobility in determining

the impact of tax reforms on an economy's traded goods sector. I begin by
examining theoretically the relationship between tax changes and
competitiveness under various assumptions about international capital

mobility. Finding the conclusions sensitive to assumptions about capital
mobility, I go on to consider empirically the extent of international capital

mobility. Drawing on both the theoretical and empirical analysis, I attempt

-2-

to assess the likely impact of alternative tax reforms on international corn—
petit iveness.

The common assumption that capital flows freely internationally leads to

striking conclusions regarding the effects of tax policies. Tax measures
which stimulate investment but do not affect savings will inevitably lead to
declines in international competitiveness as long as capital is freely mobile

internationally. The economic mechanism is simple. Measures which promote
investment attract funds from abroad leading to an appreciation in the real
exchange rate and a reduction in the competitiveness of domestic industry.
The accounting identity holding that the current account equals the difference
between national savings and national investment insures that increases in
investment ceteris paribus will be associated with decreases in the trade

balance. Conversely tax policies which promote savings but do not have a
direct impact on investment will improve trade performance.
These results challenge the commonly expressed view that reductions in
tax burdens on business will improve competitiveness by enabling them to

undertake more productivity enhancing investment. They also raise an
interesting question in political economy. Why do firms in the traded goods
sector whose competitivenes will be hurt by the capital inf lows associated

with investment incentives lobby in favor of them? Consideration of this
question leads naturally to an examination of the premise of free
international capital mobility which underlies the arguments in the previous

paragraph. If capital is not internationally mobile, stimulus to investment
will not lead to capital inflows and therefore will not be associated with
trade balance deterioration.

-3-

While there certainly is a large pool of internationally mobile capital,
Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Feldstein (1983) have pointed out an
important puzzle raised by the hypothesis of perfect international capital

mobility. This hypothesis would predict that there should be no systematic
relationship between domestic saving and investment rates, since capital can

flow freely. Yet looking across the OECD nations there is a very strong
positive correlation between savings and investment rates. Looking over long
periods of time cumulative current account deficits or surpluses are quite

small despite large variations in domestic savings rates. On a very consistent
basis, high savings countries are also high investment countries while low
savings countries like the United States have relative low rates of
investment.

The observation that domestic savings and investment rates are strongly
associated can be interpreted as suggesting tax policies which raise savings

are likely to significantly increase domestic investment. Similarly, policies
directed at investment are unlikely to lead to permanent increases in

investment unless domestic savings are increased as well. Alternatively, as
many international economists argue, the cross-sectional correlation between
national savings and investment rates may be a statistical artifact which does

not call into question the international mobility of capital. Resolving the
issue requires that some interpretation of the close cross-sectional linkages
between national savings and investment be provided.
I consider three alternative hypotheses regarding the apparent

international immobility of capital. The first is the hypothesis advanced by
Feldstein and Horioka that institutional and legal restrictions of a variety

-4-

of types preclude substantial international capital flows. Second is a
possibility advanced by Obstfeld (1985) among others that the high correlation
between domestic savings and investment rates is an artifact of common factors

such as high population growth which affect both savings and investment. The
third hypothesis is that capital is mobile internationally but that countries
systematically utilize economic policy tools in an effort to achieve
approximate current account balance so that large sustained capital flows are

not observed. My conclusion is that the third hypothesis provides the most
satisfactory available explanation for the observed correlations between
domestic savings and investment rates.

I suggest several reasons why

countries might find it desirable to maintain external balance.

This conclusion raises an important question. Given that policies to
limit net capital mobility are frequently pursued, how should the effects of

tax policy reforms which affect savings or investment be evaluated? If no
other policy measures are undertaken, their effects should be analyzed under

the assumption that capital is perfectly mobile. But the historical record
suggests that current account imbalances are likely to be offset by other

policy actions. Both these issues have obvious relevance to the current
American situation where business tax reductions appear to have stimulated a
significant amount of capital formation and drawn capital in from abroad in
large quantity; but where the trade deficit is seen as a major problem.

The paper is organized as follows. The first section examines
theoretically the effects of alternative tax policies on competitiveness under

Different assumptions about international capital mobility. It suggests some
possible explanations for the paradox that firms in traded goods industries

—5—

frequently support tax policies that seem likely to reduce competitiveness.
The second section takes up the question of the extent of international
capital mobility and documents the very high correlation between domestic

savings and investment rates across the OECD nations. The third section
considers alternative hypotheses regarding this phenomenon and concludes that
it

is

most likely the result of national economic policies directed at

maintaining external balance. Possible reasons why nations might pursue such
policies are considered. The fourth and final section considers the implications of the results for tax policy in general and the current American
situation in particular.

I.

Tax Policy in an Open Economy

This section examines theoretically the effects of various tax policies

in an open economy where capital is mobile. In considering taxation in an
open economy it is crucial to distinguish between taxes on savings and

investment. As I use the terms here, taxes on savings refer to taxes on
capital income received by home country residents regardless of where the

capital is located. The U.S. interest income tax is an example of such a tax.
Conversely, taxes on investment refer to taxes levied on capital within the

home country regardless of its ownership. The corporate income tax is an
example of an investment tax. In closed economies it is clear that there is
no important difference between savings and investment taxes. But in open
economies where capital flows are possible they will have quite different

effects. The model presented below makes it possible to analyze the short and

-6—

long run effects of both pure savings and investment taxes. There are a
variety of complexities involved in mapping real world tax structures with
their complex foreign tax credit and deferral provisions into the pure savings

and investment taxes treated here. I bypass these problems.
The main conclusions of the formal analysis presented below may be
motivated by considering the national income accounting identity S-I = X-M.
This identity holds that the trade balance (X-M) must equal the excess of

domestic savings over investment. Equivalently, as the balance of payments
must balance, the current account (X-M) must be just offset by the capital

account (S-I). It is apparent from this identify that policies which increase
national investment without increasing national savings must necessarily lead

to increases in imports or decreases in exports. In either event, the traded
goods sector of the economy will contract. Conversely policies which increase
national savings without affecting national investment will improve the
current account and, in a fully employed economy, lead the traded goods sector
to expand.

These results apply in the short and intermediate run. Ultimately, they
will be reversed. Consider again the case where investment is increased with no
change in savings. Foreigners who finance the excess of investment over
savings will accumulate claims on the domestic economy. Ultimately these
claims must be paid back and this will require that the home country run a

trade surplus, exporting more than it imports. Similarly, increases in
domestic savings without changes in investment will lead ultimately to trade
deficits as domestic residents liquidate their claims on foreign economies.

F&ure 1
The Long Run

Effects

of Corporate Tax

Increase

w

#d(lrO)

d(.7r1)

R°

1-ir

R

—7—

Modelling the Linkages between Tax Policy and Competitiveness
While a number of studies, notably Feldstein and Hartman (1980) and
Hartman (1983) have examined the effects of tax policy on capital intensity,
they have assumed that there is only one internationally produced good making

it impossible to study issues relating to competitiveness. Goulder, Shoven
and Whalley (1983) examine the implications of international capital mobility
within the context of a computable general equilibrium model and show that
international considerations can have important implications for tax policy.
Because the model they consider is not grounded in intertemporal optimization,
it is not possible to distinguish the short and long run effects of tax

policies. Lipton and Sachs (1983) examine a two country growth model with two
sectors producing traded and non-traded goods and with an investment function

based adjustment costs. Their model is sufficiently complex that it must be
solved by numerical simulation.

Here I follow very closely Bruno (1982) and less closely Sachs (1981,
1982) in considering a two period model in which the first period corresponds
to the short run and the second period corresponds to the long run.
Consideration of a more realistic infinite horizon model would be analytically
intractable.

I treat the case of a small open economy which takes both the

price of the traded good and the interest rate as given.

The analysis could

be modified to treat the case of an economy large enough to affect world
markets.

Consider a two commodity, two period framework. Tradeables Qf are
produced in each period according to the production function Q =

Qf(LK)

which is assumed to have constant returns to scale. The non-tradeable
domestic good d is produced with the constant returns to scale production

—8-

function

=

The price of tradeables is taken as the numeraire

Qd(LIK).

and price of the domestic good is denoted ir.

Increases in ii correspond to

real appreciations of the local currency. Production of tradeable goods is
allocated between consumption Cf ,

investment I, and net exports X which may be

negative. Production of non-tradeable goods is divided between private

consumption Cd and public consumption G. It is examined further below. The
assumed sectoral specialization of investment and government spending
simplifies the analysis, and does not alter the basic conclusions.

Total labor supply in each period is fixed at [t, ([t =

L + L).

Total

capital is fixed in the first period and cannot be reallocated between

sectors. First period investment or disinvestment augments the second period

+

capital stock. (K -

- Kf

=

I).

Since for simplicity it is assumed

that capital does not depreciate, it is reasonable to allow I to be ne9ative.
No new capital goods are produced in the second period since it represents
posterity.
Firms maximize the present value of after corporate tax profits:
PV =

where R =

(1-T)[Q

(1+r).

+

ir1Q - w1L1

+

R1(Q+ir2Q-w2L2))

-

Ii

Note that since capital does not depreciate the firm is

allowed no tax depreciation allowances. Maximization subject to the
production functions and factor accumulation constraints yields standard first
order conditions:

t

(1)

t

r—=—--=w
8Ld

aLf

t=1,2

-9-

R =

(2)

(1-T)n2aQ2/8K

=

(1-T)8Q/K

where equality of first period marginal products at the point Kd, Kf has been
assumed •1

At this point, we are ready to examine the implications of a corporate

tax change for factor and product prices in the long run. Figure 1 depicts
the factor price frontiers in the two sectors under the assumption that the

traded goods sector is more capital intensive. Production occurs at the
intersection of the two frontiers. The relative price of the non-traded good,
r, shifts until the factor price frontiers intersect at the world interest

rate. Now consider a corporate tax increase. The factor price frontier for
the tradeable good does not shift but the required pre-tax return on capital
is increased from

to R°/1-T. This necessitates a change in ir to shift the

domestic goods factor price frontier. It is clear from Figure 1 that under
our assumption that the traded good sector is more capital intensive than the
non-traded goods sector, a corporate tax will lower capital intensity in both
sectors and reduce the relative price of domestic goods, thereby causing the

traded goods sector to contract. The last result would be reversed if the
opposite factor intensity assumption was maintained.
Learner (1980) presents some rather dated evidence on the relative capital

intensities of U.S. traded and non-traded goods in the context of a study of

the Leontief paradox. His data, drawn from Leontief's original work, indicate
that the traded goods sector is much more capital intensive than the

non-traded goods sector. However he notes that the more recent data provided
in Baldwin (1971) suggests the opposite conclusion. At present, I am unaware

-10-

of more satisfactory evidence on this question for the United States. It
seems appropriate to be agnostic in the relative capital intensity question
and to conclude that capital intensity effects will not lead to large effects
of tax policies on the long run composition of national output.
As just demonstrated, it is possible to examine the impact of a corporate
tax change on factor and product prices in the long run without specifying

anything about product demands. In order to address the sectoral composition
of output and employment, and to consider short run issues, it is necessary to

specify how demand is determined. For simplicity, I assume that consumers
maximize a Cobb-Douglas utility function:
(3)

U =

a1nC

+

(1-c)1nC

+

D(a1nC

+

(1—a)1nC]

where 0 is a discount factor, and a is the share of consumption-expenditure
devoted to the foreign good.
Households maximize utility subject to their budget constraint which
holds that:
(4)

C + 1T1C + ((1—e)R]1 (C +

nC)

=

where Q represents the present value of their endowment in terms of the
foreign good, and B is the tax rate levied on savings. Net household wealth fl
is given by:
(5)

Q =

(Q+ir1Q)

+

((1—9)R](Q+w2Q)

Q, it

government. Since C + Gt =
=

I

= 7rG1 + R7r2G2 is the total cumulative revenue of the

where T = T1 +

(6)

— T -

QO) +

+

follows that:

(((1—O)R]w2L2

—

((1-6)R]

1ir262 +

Rd + Kf)

Figure 2

The Determination of Long Run Equilibrium

22
7rCd Cd

-ir

L

—11—

where it can be assumed that Qf is a negative function of it1.

At this point we are ready to solve the model using the very ingenious

graphical technique developed in Bruno (1982). Equation (6) and the
assumption of Cobb-Douglas utility imply that:
lT1C = bcl[7r1, R(1-9) G2)

(7)

The bQ function is negatively related to all three of its arguments. It is
plotted as the line marked bl in Figure 2.

In order to characterize first

period equilibrium we add a supply function for the total value of Cd:
(8)

ir1C =

ir1Q(ir1)

-

ir1G'.

This curve is also depicted in quadrant I of Figure 2.
Together these two schedules already permit us to characterize the

determination of first period equilibrium. Note that any policy which reduces
first period consumption such as a reduction in the individual tax rate 0,
will lead to a reduction in it1 and an increase in the size of the tradeable

goods sector. Likewise a decrease in public consumption will lead to a
reduction in it, and an increase in competitiveness.

In what follows it will be useful to examine the behavior of domestic

savings S. Note that S1 =
utility,
=

Yf

-

C.

Given our assumption of Cobb-Douglas

is proportional to irC. Drawing in the schedule Yf(ir1) where

(1-a)/(a),

we can see that savings is proportional to the vertical distance

between this schedule and the bc schedule. Note that the
steeper than the bQ schedule because b <

.

schedule is

We are now ready to consider second period equilibrium and the

Figure 3

The Effect of a Savings Incentive

22

.77-

22 11
Cd

-rr

Cd

/

/
/

Q(ir1)-G

bu
13yf

K

77-1

-G2

—r

K?

—12-

determination of investment. The determination of second period factor
and product prices has already been discussed. These serve to uniquely
determine capital-labor and capital-output ratios in both sectors. In
quadrant 2 of Figure 2, the relationship between ir2C2d and K2 is depicted.

The slope of this schedule increases with the period 2 capital output ratio

and the intercept is 2o2. It is possible to put ir1C and ir2C on the same
axis because they are proportional by the Cobb-Douglas assumption.
The requirement of full employment in period 2 is expressed as the
C2

schedule in quadrant 3.

It will be less (more) steep than the 45° line as

the non-traded goods sector is more (less) capital intensive than the traded

22

goods sector. The equation of this schedule is XdKd +

22 =—2
L

AfKf

where A. represents the labor—capital ratio in sector 1, which is determined
by factor prices. The level of investment can be read as the vertical

distance between the L2 schedules and the 450 line's K intercept.
The schedules in Figure 2 along with the factor price frontiers in

Figure 1 serve to fully characterize equilibrium. Notice finally that the
current account, CA, is given by S-I which can be read from Figure 2.

Savings Incentives
At this point, we are ready to consider the effects of policy changes.
The effect of a decrease in period 1 public consumption is depicted in
Figure 3. As already noted, the relative price of non-tradeables, it,

declines.

Employment in the traded goods sector increases, while decreasing

in the non—traded sector. National savings increases. None of the schedules
in the other quadrants shifts. It is apparent that in the long run

Figure 4

The Effect of an Investment Incentive

22

\

ir2cr1c

\\

Qi?)-G

bw
-G2

+1

K?

-13—

K increases and

decreases. Since capital labor ratios are unchanged, it

follows that employment in the traded goods sector will decline in the long

run after its initial increase. Investment will increase (decrease) as the
traded goods sector is less (more) capital intensive than the non-traded goods

sector. As long as the non-traded goods sector is not "far" more capital
intensive than the traded goods sector, savings will increase more than
investment and a current account surplus will result.

The effects of a decrease in 0, which reduces private consumption,

parallel those of a reduction in public consumption. They cannot be neatly
analyzed diagrammatically because a change in 9 breaks the proportionality
between

and ir2C. Note however that the effect of a savings incentive

will be to raise ir2C, and give rise to second period effects very similar to

those of a change in government spending. The traded goods sector will expand
in the short run and contract in the long run. Investment may rise or fall
but it is unlikely to change a great deal.

Investment Incentives
The effects of an investment incentive, treated here as a decline in T,

are depicted in Figure 4. The solution is most easily achieved working
backwards. It is clear that with capital mobile, the long run effect of an
investment incentive will be to raise capital intensity in both production

sectors and to raise real wages. Thus the C2 schedule in the third quadrant
shifts downwards. The shift will be parallel in the special case depicted
here where the elasticities of substitution in the two sectors are equal. The
capital output ratio in the domestic goods sector must increase shifting the

-14-

schedule down and to the left. Finally, the increase in second period
real wages increases human wealth and shifts the bfl schedule in the first

quadrant upwards.
The effect of an investment incentive is to reduce short run

competitiveness, and to reduce domestic savings. Long run capital intensity
is increased, so the current account unambiguously declines. An investment
incentive has an ambiguous effect on 1r2, the relative price of non-tradeables,

depending on the relative capital intensities of the two sectors. In the
special case where the two sectors have equal capital intensity, an investment

subsidy will increase long run employment in the traded goods sector. More
generally, however, the result is ambiguous.
In assessing the implications of this theoretical analysis, a crucial

question arises. How much real time corresponds to the short and long run in
the stylized two period model considered here? The issue is difficult to
judge but it seems likely that the model's short run predictions are

applicable over fairly long horizons. Policies directed at increasing the
domestic capital stock are likely to lead to increased net investment for many

years as new capital is accumulated. The available evidence, while weak,
suggests that capital adjusts relatively slowly to its desired level. Likewise
simulations of the type presented by Summers (1979) and Chamley (1981) suggest
that households will take periods of up to a decade to fully adjust their
wealth holding following a change in the available rate of return. These
considerations suggest that with a horizon of a decade or less it is probably
appropriate to use the short run predictions of the economy to tax reforms.
The simulation results of Lipton and Sachs (1983) are consistent with this
suggestion.

—15—

The Political Economy of International Competitiveness

The arguments of this section raise an obvious question. Why is business
tax relief so frequently advocated as a vehicle for increasing international

competitiveness? The analysis here suggests that tax reduction measures,
which encourage investment, inevitably reduce competitiveness and hurt firms

in the traded goods sector as long as capital is mobile internationally. In
part, advocacy of tax relief must result from a failure to consider its

general equilibrium ramifications. With fixed real exchange rates, tax relief
does help the traded goods sector. Its advocates may fail to take account of
the increase in real exchange rates that necessarily accompanies capital

inflows. But economists should be reluctant to assume that self interested
parties are advocating positions contrary to their interests. It is therefore
worthwhile to consider other reasons why those in the traded goods sector
might advocate tax relief.
A first possibility is that they are motivated by long run

considerations. Accumulating debt to foreigners will eventually require that
we run a trade surplus. But it seems unlikely that such a long run
consideration plays an important role in current policy debates. A second
explanation starts with the recognition that the traded goods sector is not

monolithic. Tax reforms which benefit firms in some but not all of the traded
goods sector may cause their competitiveness to increase even as the total

traded goods sector is shrinking. It might for example be argued that
incentives to invest in plant and equipment benefit American manufacturers at

the expense of farmers. The corporate sector is so large a fraction of the
traded goods sector that it seems unlikely that this is the whole story.

-16-

A third explanation for the advocacy of investment incentives to increase
competitiveness is that advocates suspect that investment incentives will not

in fact lead to prolonged capital inflows. This may be because capital
mobility is limited and so investment incentives will lead to only small

capital inflows. Alternatively, it may be because governments are perceived
as unlikely to permit large trade deficits to continue for long periods of

time. In either of these cases, tax incentives will raise the after tax
profits of firms in the traded goods sector and will not lead to significant
declines in competitiveness.

I explore the question of the extent of

international capital mobility in the remainder of the paper.

II. National Savings and National Investment

The preceding section demonstrated that the assumption of perfect
international capital mobility has important implications for the analysis of

competitiveness. It also is important for other fiscal questions. With
internationally mobile capital, taxes on investment will all be borne by

labor. Government budget deficits will not affect national levels of

investment, but will instead reduce investment around the world. More
generally, policies which increase national savings will have no effect on
national investment.
In provocative recent papers, Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Feldstein
(1983) point out that if national savings do not affect national investment as
the capital mobility hypothesis implies, one would not expect to see any

strong relationship between national savings and investment rates. Yet, as

—17—

Table 1 demonstrates, there is a very close association between levels of

national savings and national investment. While the long run average net
savings rate varied across countries between 6.5 and 19.6 percent, the largest
average current account deficit was 8.3 percent and the largest surplus was

only 2.3 percent. The correlation between domestic savings and investment
rates was .92.

Table 2 presents regressions of the national investment rates on national

savings rates for a number of different intervals. Using both net and gross
measures, the data suggest a strong relationship between investment and

savings.2 In all cases, the savings variable is highly significant. It is
noteworthy that there is no evidence that the impact of national savings on
national investment has declined through time, even though institutional
barriers to international capital mobility have been broken down over the past

25 years. There is some evidence however that the correlation between savings
and investment rates has declined through time.
Comparisons of the size of actual capital flows with those that might be

expected highlight the apparent immobility of capital. Consider a policy
which raises the return on domestic investment by 20 percent. This is about
the right order of magnitude for the 1981 and 1982 United States tax reforms.
Assuming a Cobb-Douglas production function with a capital share of .25, an
increase of about 20 percent in the capital stock would be required to

equalize the return on domestic and international investment. With a capital
output ratio of 1.5, this would mean a capital inflow of close to 30 percent

of GNP. Only one OECD nation, Portugal, experienced a capital inflow of this
magnitude over the 1975-1981 period. Stating the point differently --

the

-18-

capital flows that are observed do not seem to be large enough to have very
large effects on rates of return.

A number of papers including Sachs (1981, 1982), Feldstein (1983), and
Caprio and Howard (1984) have examined the relationships between changes in

domestic savings and investment rates. While the approaches taken in these
papers differ somewhat, several conclusions emerge. There is a positive
relationship between changes in domestic savings and changes in domestic
investment which is weaker than the relationship between savings and

investment levels. Also, it appears that both shocks to domestic savings and
to domestic investment have significant effects on the current account

although their relative importance is a subject of debate. Finally, there is
very weak evidence that the degree of international capital mobility has

increased somewhat in recent years. But, none of the time series analysis
calls into question the proposition that domestic savings and investment rates
are closely linked.

One consideration that could account for some degree of association
between domestic savings and investment rates is the fact that countries are

not perfectly "small" on the world capital market. A share of each country's
savings would be invested in it, even if capital was perfectly mobile.

It

seems unlikely that this can account for a large part of the correlation

between savings and investment rates. Even for the United States, a dollar of
savings would be expected to produce only about 25 or 30 cents of domestic

investment if capital were really perfectly mobile. Moreover, this point has
no force in considering the cross-sectional association between domestic
savings and investment rates.

-19-

Another possible source of association between domestic savings and

investment is Keynesian effects. Increases in investment which raise domestic
income temporarily would be expected to increase domestic savings as well.
The fact that savings and investment rates are about equally highly correlated

over short and long periods of time suggests that this is not likely to be too
important a factor.
It is not clear how to interpret the observation that savings and

investment rates are highly correlated across countries. The questions of
policy interest concern the allocation of the marginal dollar of domestic

savings, or the financing of a marginal dollar of domestic investment. It is
conceivable that incremental savings are invested in a very different way than

the average dollar of savings. The fact that the linkages between changes in
savings and changes in investment are weaker than those between levels

suggests this view. An argument of this kind must explain however why ongoing
capital flows are not observed between countries with stable high and low

savings rates. In the next section we consider alternative explanations for
the close association between savings and investment rates across nations.
These explanations have differing implications for the hypothesis of marginal
capital mobility and for the effects of fiscal policies.

III. Explaining Apparent Capital Mobility

The previous section documented the very high correlation between

national savings and investment rates. This section considers three possible
explanations for this phenomenon. These explanations assume in turn that

-20—

capital mobility is greatly limited by institutional factors, that the
correlation between national savings and investment rates is a spurious
reflection of third factors, and that apparent capital immobility reflects the

endogenous adjustment of savings and investment rates. While there is some
element of truth in each of these explanations we are led to accept the third
one as the primary reason for the close association of domestic savings and
investment rates.

Capital Immobility
A first natural explanation for the observed savings and investment

patterns is that most capital is immobile. While some capital can flow
freely, restrictions in financial institutions, capital controls, and the

perceived risks of foreign investment, greatly reduce the flow of capital. As
Feldstein and Horioka (1960) suggest,

"official restrictions impede the export of capital. Moreover the fear
of future capital export controls by potential host countries.. .deters
investors.... Important institutional rigidities also tend to keep a
large segment of domestic savings at home. The most obvious of these in
the United States is the savings institutions that are required by law to
be invested in mortgages on local real estate."
There is, of course, a large pool of very liquid international capital.
The argument, however, is that only this money is freely mobile with other

savings being immobile. This raises an immediate problem. If only a small
pool of "hot money" were available to arbitrage large international return

differentials, one would expect that it would all end up in one place. As
long as some mobile funds are located almost everywhere there is a presumption
that rates of return must be equalized.
The related argument of Feldstein and Horioka that returns on short term

—21—

financial assets are arbitraged but returns on longer term investments are not

equalized is also difficult to accept. Arbitrage like equality is transitive.
As long as there are institutions in each country (e.g., Citibank) which hold
different types of domestic assets and also hold some foreign asset, we can be
sure that the returns on domestic and foreign assets are arbitraged.
Equalization of returns does not require that there be any agent who makes

long term investments both at home and abroad. As long as the standard
assumption of marginal domestic capital mobility is maintained, the existence

of investors at interior solutions holding any domestic and any foreign assets
is sufficient to insure marginal capital mobility on an international basis.3
A clear piece of evidence suggesting the mobility of capital
internationally is the fact that the relatively small net flows of capital

that are observed reflect large offsetting gross flows. If capital were
immobile one would expect to see small gross as well as net flows.
Unfortunately data on foreign investment by domestic firms and domestic
investment by foreign firms are not available on a consistent international
basis. Therefore, Table 3 presents some information on gross and net flows of

investment for the United States. In 1982, both capital inflows and outflows

for the U.S. were more than ten times the net flow of capital. Even these
figures underestimate the true flows because they fail to take account of
replacement investment by Americans abroad and foreigners here.
Large reciprocal gross investment flows also call into question
Feldstein's (1983) argument that subjective uncertainties inhibit capital

flows. Feldstein and Horioka argue that foreign investment is typically
directed at exploiting specialized opportunities rather than the general

—22—

pursuit

of higher returns. This claim is difficult to reconcile with the

large volume of portfolio investment and with Hartman's (1983) demonstration
that foreign direct investment is very sensitive to tax considerations.
Recall that no foreign direct investment is necessary for international

arbitrage to equalize returns. Even granting that direct foreign investments
represent special situations, it is still reasonable to expect that increased
domestic savings which reduce domestic rates of return would lead to more
specialized foreign investments.

This discussion suggests that there exist capital flows which seem to

have the potential to equalize rates of return around the world. A more
subtle explanation for capital immobility, which accommodates this

observation, might suggest that total net capital mobility is limited by fears

of expropriation. This is the essential idea lying behind the burgeoning
literature on international debt. It was first treated formally by Eaton and
Gersovitz (1981). While capital can be freely moved, investors are aware that
if a country has imported too much capital, the gains from expropriating it
will exceed the costs that can be imposed.

In this case, marginal investors

will not invest abroad even if foreign assets are yielding higher returns. At
the margin, capital will be immobile. Changes in domestic saving will affect
international capital flows only insofar as they affect countries' debt
capacity by affecting the size of the "punishment" that can be inflicted on
them for defaulting.
It would seem likely that arguments of this type would be more applicable

to LOCs than to the OECD nations, where expropriations seem implausible. One
way of testing this explanation for apparent capital immobility is to examine

—23—

the association between savings and investment across a broad range of

countries. If expropriation fears were a major cause of capital immobility,
one would expect to see savings and investment rates even more closely

associated among LDCs than among the OECD nations. This hypothesis was tested
by examining data on national savings and investment rates for 115 countries
using data provided by the World Bank.
A regression of investment rates on savings rates using data arranged
over the 1973-80 perIod yields:

I/V

18
(1.1)

+

.311(S/Y)

R2 — .24

(.051)

These results were almost unchanged *hen the OECD countries were excluded from

the sample. As a further check, the equation was reestimated dropping
observations with large residuals from the sample. Observations with residuals
with absolute value greater than two and three times the standard error of the

regression were omitted. This did not have a significant Impact on the
results. One possible explanation for the low correlation between savings and
investment is that aid flows drive a wedge between Investment and savings even

though capital is Immobile. However, subtracting aid flows from investment
had little Impact on the results. It might be argued that the low correlation
between domestic savings and investment is the result of measurement error.

This seems unlikely. In most cases1 domestic savings Is estimated as a
residual. When this method is used, measurement error may result in a
spurious positive correlation between measured savings and investment.

The results suggest a much greater degree of apparent capital mobility

—24-

when a large sample of countries is considered. Similar results are reported
by Fieleke (1982) and Frankel (1985). This provides evidence against the
hypothesis of capital immobility which offers exactly the wrong predictions --

that

capital should be most mobile between politically allied developed

countries with well functioning capital markets.
It does not seem reasonable to conclude that capital immobility is the
right way to explain the close association between national savings and
investment rates.

I therefore turn to other explanations.

Common Factor Explanations
Another possible explanation for the close association between national

savings and investment rates is the fallacy of the common cause. Perhaps
there is some third factor which determines both savings and investment
leading them to be highly correlated, even though exogenous changes in savings

would have only very small effects on investment. Two such factors suggest
themselves. Countries with high rates of population or productivity growth
would be expected to have high investment rates because of the opportunities

created by a rapidly growing labor pool. Life cycle savings considerations
suggest that such countries should also have high savings rates, as young
savers are more numerous and have more lifetime income than older dissavers.
Thus growth could be a common factor accounting for associations between

savings and investment. Obstfeld (1985) provides a rather elaborate example
illustrating this point.

A second factor which could lead to a positive association of savings and

investment is initial wealth. A clear example is provided by a nation ravaged

—25—

by war. Such a country would be expected to have a high investment rate
because of the destruction of its capital stock, and a high savings rate

because of households' desire to rebuild their wealth holdings. Any source of

national

initial differences in

wealth income ratios would tend to work the

same way.

The growth explanation for the strong association between savings and

investment rates is easily tested. It is only necessary to add measures of
the rate of growth to a regression of the investment rate on the savings
rate.

A regression of the net investment rate on the net savings rate and the
rates of population growth and productivity growth using the data in Table 1
yields:

I/Y =

-.015

+

1.02 Sly - .002n

(.023) (1.39)

(.01)

+

.0026g

R2 = .703

(.001)

Similar results are obtained reversing the equation, using gross rather than

net concepts and varying the sample period. Adding growth variables actually
increases the coefficient on S/Y. This implies that variations in savings
that are uncorrelated with variations in growth actually have more relation to

investment than variations explained by the growth variables. Growth is not
the spurious factor accounting for the strong correlations between national
savings and investment rates.

There is no single variable which can capture the possible effects of

initial conditions on both savings and investment. Therefore it is necessary
to take a more indirect approach. Estimating the basic investment—savings

-26-

relationship with instrumental variables, using as instruments any variable
expected to affect savings but not investment, will yield a consistent

estimate of the "pure" correlation between savings and investment. Feldstein
and Horioka report a number of estimates of this type using social security

variables as instruments. They find that this has little effect on the
estimated savings coefficient. Indeed, in several cases it actually
increases. Frankel (1985) presents some corroborating evidence.
In order to further examine this issue, the basic savings investment
relationship was reestimated using the government budget deficit as an

instrument. Because of data limitations, a smaller sample (14 countries) and
a shorter time period (1973—80) were used in the estimation. For this sample
the net result of an OLS regression was:

I/Y = .02 + .97 (S/Y)
(.03) (.13)

Using the government deficit as a share of GOP as an instrument, the result
was:

I/V =

-.10

+

1.45

(S/Y)

(1.10)

This result is surprising. The coefficient on the savings variable rises
substantially rather than declining. It attains an implausible value
exceeding one. On the "spurious factor" explanation, one would have expected
the savings coefficient to decline.

There is no evidence here to support the "spurious factor" explanation

for the close association of national savings and investment rates. But the

-27—

last equation does raise a puzzle. Why should purging the savings and
investment variables of the effects of their common causes cause their

estimated association to increase? Clearly the answer must have something to
do with the properties of the deficit variable. This issue is explored in the
next subsection.

The Maintained External Balance Hypothesis
The assumption has been made so far that national savings and investment

rates are exogenously determined. Feldstein and Horioka treat differences
in national savings rates as a consequence of "basic structural differences

among countries." In their formal model (p. 324), the level of public savings
is an exogenous variable affecting the national savings rate.

An alternative view is that countries consistently manipulate the levels

of economic policy with a view to maintaining external balance. Such an
argument has been made by Fieleke (1982) and Tobin (1983) among others. In
this case capital appears immobile only because countries pursue policies

which bring savings and investment into balance. Possible rationales for this
behavior are discussed below.

The endogeneity of budget policy can easily explain the empirical results

in the preceding section. Consider the special case where capital is
completely mobile on world markets and countries set budget deficits according
to:

(9)

Di = a(PS1 —

I)

+

U. with

0

a

1

where D1 is the deficit, PS., is private saving, and u. represents the effect

of other factors on the deficit of country i. The assumption that deficits

-28-

are exogenous corresponds to a = 0 in this formulation. Standard
calculations suggest that the coefficient on saving in our basic equation will
equal:

(1

(l_a)apsi

—
OLS —
(1-a)

2 2

Notice

+

2 2

a

+

+

cw

2a(1-a)a1

+

2

=

that in the special case where a = 1 and

0,

6 =

1, and that

with Feldstein and Horioka's implicit assumptions that a 0 and
in a perfect capital market, & =
in a and reductions in

0.

=

0

As these polar cases suggest, increases

will tend to raise the value of 6. Direct

estimation of (9) yields:

(11)

0. =
1

-.01
(.004)

.715 (PS.-I.)
1
1

+

(.107)

= .77

= .00024

Using this estimated value of a and the observed sample moments
tautologically yields the OLS estimate for 6.
that a = 0 and that a2 =

a, the

If we reevaluate (10) assuming

implied value of 6 is .597. This confirms

that some of the strength cf the Feldstein and Horioka results arises from

deficit policy actions directed at maintaining external balance. Note that
Feldstein (1983) admits that some positive association between PS. and I is
to be expected, arising from factors such as growth rates which simultaneously

impact both PS and I. And other policy levers besides deficits may be used
to bring savings and investment into balance. Hence the remaining correlation
of .6 should not be treated as evidence of the immobility of capital.

-29—

The maintained external balance hypothesis also explains the paradoxical

results obtained when Di is used as an instrument. In this case, the
probability limit of the coefficient of interest is given by:
2

00, I 6IVa01S —a 22
01 -

-

—

2

a(1_a)a

+

a(1_2a)a,1

+

2

which will be greater than unity as long as:
a(1—a) var (I-PS) >

The estimates of

and

reported above imply that this condition is

satisfied in practice.
This section has shown that the maintained external balance hypothesis
can explain how the observed high correlation of national savings and

investment rates could occur in a world with perfect capital mobility. It
also explains an additional finding, the high degree of capital mobility
among less developed countries, which is anomalous on the view that capital is

internationally immobile. In these nations the pressure to maintain external
balance is much weaker, and so fiscal policy actions are not taken to prevent

capital flows. As a consequence, greater current account imbalances and
capital mobility are observed.
The maintained external balance hypothesis seems on the basis of the

evidence considered here to be the most plausible explanation for the high

cross—sectional correlation between domestic savings and investment rates. By
its nature it is difficult to test, since levels of national savings and

-30-

investment are affected by a wide variety of policy levers, and so the stance
of policy towards saving and investment in any given country is difficult to

evaluate. Below, I discuss a number of plausible reasons why nations might
seek to maintain external balance. The fact that countries so frequently
resort to capital controls which force savings and investment into balance

makes it very plausible that they also use other policy levers to achieve the
same purpose.

Capital will be effectively immobile internationally if nations act so as

to avoid either capital outflows or capital inflows. Either would be
sufficient to preclude capital flows. Consider first the incentives nations
might have to avoid capital outflows. The fundamental reason why nations
might prefer to do this is that the social return to domestic investment
exceed the social return to foreign investment even when their private returns

are equated. Most obviously, this will be the case where there are taxes on
domestic investment. More subtly and more importantly, there is the risk
associated with capital expropriation by government action or by labor.4
Keynes (1924) puts the argument well:
"Consider two investments, the one at home and the other abroad
with equal risks of repudiation or confiscation or legislation
restricting profit. It is a matter of indifference to the
individual investor which he selects. But the nation as a whole
retains in the one case the object of the investment and fruits of
it; whilst in the other case both are lost. If a loan to improve
South American capital is repudiated we have nothing. If a Poplar
housing loan is repudiated, we as a nation still have the houses."

Note that the phrase "legislation restricting profit" covers a host of

possibilities far short of outright nationalization. There is also the
possibility that capital expropriation will take the form of actions by

—31—

workers to raise wages and capture the rents that can be earned from

irreversible capital investments. Together these Possibilities seem likely to

be of substantial importance. They provide a motivation for countries which
find themselves exporting capital on a substantial scale to pursue measures
directed at spurring domestic investment.

social return to foreign investment

In so far as they suggest that the

may be rather low, they also suggest the

possible desirability of reducing savings when they are primarily flowing

abroad. Certainly this was Keynes's view regarding the huge British capital
outflows in the early part of this century.
It is noteworthy in this regard that

capital exporting nations tend to be

large countries with substantial international

power. The British in the

Victorian era and the US during the post World War II period are obvious

examples. The current Japanese situation is less clear.
Outflows are made by dominant international

Where capital

powers they may confer external

benefits which raise their social return by increasing international

influence. Large countries may also regard themselves as relatively immune

from expropriation risks. The striking feature of Table 2 is that almost all
of the small countries are capital

importers. With large countries unwilling

to export capital in large quantities however, the scope for international
capital mobility is relatively limited.
Keynes went on to provide an additional reason why a nation might want to

limit its capital exports.5 He wrote that
"Foreign investment does not automatically expand our exports by a
corresponding amount. it so affects the foreign exchanges that we
are compel led to export more -in order to maintain our solvency.
It may be the case--I fancy that it now is the case--that we can
only do this by lowering the price of our products in terms of the
products of other nations, that -is by allowing the ratio of real
interchange to move to our disadvantage."

—32-

This consideration which is important only for countries with some market
power may also help to explain why
possible example is provided by the

large capital outflows are so rare. A
efforts of the United States to limit

capital outflows in the early 1960s in an effort to maintain the value of the

dollar. Whether the motivation for maintaining the value of the dollar was
enjoying favorable terms of trade is not clear.
There are also reasons why countries would be reluctant to accept large

capital inf lows. Where these are associated with large movements in real
exchange rates, they are likely to damage severely an economy's traded goods

sector. This may generate political pressures

to increase domestic savings or

to reduce the rate of investment. These pressures are likely to be
particularly serious in situations where the real exchange rate changes
quickly or where the traded goods sector is not benefiting from the capital

inflows. It should not be surprising that capital

inflows into Canada to

finance development of its natural resources have proved more politically
acceptable than recent inflows into the United States to finance budget
deficits.

These arguments are suggestive as to why we see such a small volume of

net international capital mobility. Evaluating their relative importance is
left for future research. In the next section, we tentatively accept their
validity and explore their implications for economic policy.

—33-

IV.

Conclusions
Our analysis of the historical experience of the last twenty years

suggests that capital was internationally mobile but that governments acted so

as to permit only relatively small capital flows. This makes it difficult to
analyze the effects of tax policy changes. Such changes, if not accommodated
by other policies, would lead to significant capital flows with associated

implications for competitiveness. But the historic record suggests that

policy changes would be adopted to maintain external balance. If such changes
are always adopted, capital is effectively immobile. National investment
cannot be increased without increasing national savings. The effect of any
policy depends on the policies it engenders. Consider, for example, an
investment tax credit. The resulting capital inflow would lead to a trade
deficit. If this created pressures which led to an increase in public
savings, the ultimate result would be more domestic investment and only small

effects on the traded goods sector. If, on the other hand, other countries
responded to their capital outflows by strengthening capital controls, the
result would be increased domestic interest rates and only relatively small

investment increases. In this case short run competitiveness might actually
be improved by investment tax incentives.
Clearly there are no general principles which can be used to assess the

effects of different policies in all situations. Neither the analytic
benchmark of perfect capital mobility, nor the polar opposite assumption that
capital is immobile seems appropriate in assessing the effects of tax reforms.

-34-

These points are well illustrated by considering the current American

situation. The dollar is extremely strong, having risen by about 60 percent in
the last four years. This has led to the large trade and current account
deficits, which are regarded by many observers as a cause for grave concern.
Beyond the direct effects on industries producing traded goods, concerns are
expressed about the United States becoming a debtor nation, and about a

weakening in our national commitment to free trade. Following the Reagan tax
incentives, an increase of close to 25 percent in the capital stock would be
necessary to bring the after-tax return to capital back to its former level.
Since the United States is not a small country on the world capital market,
not all of these funds would come from abroad even if capital were perfectly

mobile. But with mobile capital, one would have to predict a cumulative
current account deficit in excess of 15 percent of GNP in response to the 1981

tax cuts. This is on top of any current account deficit attributable to
federal budget deficits. It seems unlikely that such large sustained capital
inflows will be allowed to materialize. Some combination of increased savings
through reduced budget deficits and expansionary monetary policy is likely to

be used to restore external balance. Thus, the recent u.s. experience is in a
sense the exception that proves the validity of the maintained external
balance hypothesis.
Note finally that the maintained external balance hypothesis resolves the
riddle of why firms producing traded goods favor investment incentives.

If

they expect these incentives to be coupled with other policies directed at
stabilizing the current account, they are rational in advocating investment

incentives. This is true if investment incentives are accommodated by

—35--

increased public savings expansionary monetary policies, or even protectionist

policies. This point may well be illustrated by the evolution of the U.S.
economy over the next few years.

-36Footnotes
1.

Note that the formulation here requires that capital invested in either

sector earn the world rate of return R in period 2. As Frankel (1985) has
stressed, there is no reason to expect that real interest rates measured
relative to a domestic price index which includes both tradeable and
non-tradeable goods will be equalized across countries. Indeed as long as
purchasing power parity fails as a description of exchange rate behavior, real
interest rates cannot be equalized measured both relative to price changes in

tradeable goods, and the domestic consumption basket. In the model considered
here despite capital mobility, there is not real interest rate equalization
measured in the standard way using general domestic price indices.
2.

There is no obvious reason for regressing investment on savings rather

than running the reverse regression. The interested reader can compute the
coefficient that would be obtained from the reverse regression by dividing the

reported coefficient into the regression's R2. The reverse regression
coefficients tend to be a little smaller than the reported coefficients.
3.

Zeira (1986) in a very perceptive analysis notes that this conclusion is

only correct if assets are perfect substitutes in individual portfolios. The
empirical

importance of this qualification is however open to question given

the findings of Frankel (1985) that the standard CAPM along with reasonable
assumptions regarding risk aversion implies that assets are in fact very close
substitutes.

4.
to

I am indebted to Jeff Sachs for bringing Keynes discussion of this issue

my attention.

—37—

5.

This argument in many ways parallels the one developed by Roger Gordon in

his comment on this paper.

-38-

References

Blanchard, 0. and Summers, L.

1984. Perspectives on high world real interest

rates. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2.

Bruno, M. Adjustment and structural change under supply shocks. NBER
Working Paper 814. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Caprio, G. and Howard, D. Domestic saving, current accounts, and
international capital mobility. International Finance Discussion Paper
244.

Chamley, C. 1981. The welfare costs of capital taxation in a growing economy.
Journal of Political Economy (June): 468-96.

Eaton J. and Gersovitz, M. 1981. Debt with potential repudiation:
theoretical and empirical analysis. Review of Economic Studies.

Feldstein, M. 1983. Domestic savings and international capital movements in
the long run and the short run. European Economic Review (March):
129—51.

__________ and Hartman, 0. 1979. The optimal taxation of foreign source
investment income. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
__________ and C. 1-lorioka. 1980. Domestic savings and international capital
flows. The Economic Journal 90: 314-29.

Fieleke, N. 1982. National saving and international investment. In Saving
and government policy. Conference series no. 25. Boston Federal
Reserve Bank.

-39-

Frankel J. 1986. International capital mobility and crowding out in the U.S.
economy: imperfect integration of financial markets or of goods

markets. In How open is the US economy? St. Louis Federal Reserve
conference volume.

_________

1985.

The implications of mean-variance optimization for four

questions in international macroeconomics. Journal of International
Money and Finance.

Goulder, L., Shoven, J. and Whalley, J. 1983. Domestic tax policy and the
foreign sector. In Behavioral Methods in Tax Simulation Analysis, ed.
M. Feldstein.

Hartman, D. Domestic tax policy and foreign investment: some evidence.
NBER Working Paper 784. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Keynes, J.M. 1924. Foreign investment and national advantage. The Nation
and Athenaeum (August 9).

Lipton, D. and Sachs, J. 1983. Accumulation and growth in a two country
model: a simulation approach. Journal of International Economics.

Obstfeld, M. 1985. Capital mobility in the world economy: theory and
measurement. Carnegie Rochester Public Policy Conference.

Sachs, J. 1981. The current account and macroeconomic adjustment in the
1970s. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 201-82.

__________

1982.

The current account in the macroeconomic adjustment

process. Scandinavian Journal of Economics.

-40-

Summers, L. 1979. Tax Policy in a Life Cycle Model. NBER Working Paper 302.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Zeira, J. 1986. Risk and the current account. Mimeographed.

Table 1: Net Savings and Investment (1960-1983)

Net Savings
GOP

Net Investment
GOP

GOP

U.S.A.

.065

.066

.001

Iceland

.071

.113

.042

U.K.

.074

.070

-.004

Sweden

.008

.102

.013

Ireland

.oi

.174

.083

Canada

.098

.110

.012

Denmark

.098

.128

.030

Belgium

.105

.115

.010

Spain

.108

.122

.014

Finland

.110

.124

.014

Italy

.112

.115

.003

France

.112

.12].

.009

Turkey

.118

.153

.035

Norway

.126

.144

.018

Germany

.129

.124

-.005

Netherlands

.142

.129

—.013

Austria

.145

.152

.007

Australia

.146

.165

.019

New Zealand

.150

.188

.038

Greece

.155

.179

.024

Switzerland

.182

.159

—.023

Portugal

.191

.265

—.074

Japan

.196

.191

—.003

Country

Source: OECD.

i-s

Table 2: The Correlation Between National Investment
and National Savings

Period

Intercept

S.

(Net)

1960-1964

.015
(.013)

.962
(.095)

.821

1965-1969

.043

.750

.687

(.016)

(.106)

.042

.777

(.017)

(.099)

.025

.941
(.185)

1970—1974

1975—1979

(.024)

1980-1983

.024

.960

(.018)

(.164)

.733

.528

.586

(Gross)
.920
(.073)

.879

.783

(.023)

.834
(.093)

1970-1974

.049
(.026)

.835
(.106)

.755

1975—1979

.065
(.042)

.789

.439

(.185)

.086
(.032)

.679
(.152)

1960-1964

.029
(.017)

1965—1969

1980-1983

.047

.464

Table 3: Net and Gross Flows in the U.S.
(Billions of $)

Current Account Balance*
Net Foreign Investment
Increase in U.S. Assets Abroad**
(capital outflows)
Increase in Foreign Assets in the 1J.S.**
(capital inflows)

1981

1982

4.5

—8.1

4.1

—4.6

109.3

118.3

77.9

84.5

*The Current Account Balance and

Net Foreign Investment are
conceptually the same, differing only by the allocations of SORs
("capital grants" in the NIPA) and some small definitional
differences.
**The net increase over the
year; that is, conceptually, the
difference between the value of assets at the end of the year
and the value at the 'ar's
beginning.

The reason that the difference of
the gross flows is not equal
to the reported net flows is a Sizable statistical discrepancy.

Source: Survey of Current

Business, March 1983, pp. 13 and 51.

