NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO ETFS INCREASE VOLATILITY?
Itzhak Ben-David
Francesco Franzoni
Rabih Moussawi
Working Paper 20071
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20071
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014

We are especially grateful to Robin Greenwood (AFA discussant) and Dimitri Vayanos. We thank
George Aragon, Chris Downing, Andrew Ellul, Vincent Fardeau, Thierry Foucault, Rik Frehen, Denys
Glushkov, Jungsuk Han, Harald Hau, Augustin Landier, Ananth Madhavan, David Mann, Rodolfo
Martell, Albert Menkveld, Robert Nestor, Marco Pagano, Alberto Plazzi, Scott Richardson, Anton
Tonev, Tugkan Tuzun, Scott Williamson, Hongjun Yan, and participants at seminars at SAC Capital
Advisors, the University of Lugano, the University of Verona, the fourth Paris Hedge Funds Conference,
the fifth Paul Woolley Conference (London School of Economics), the eighth Csef - IGIER Symposium
(Capri), the fifth Erasmus Liquidity Conference (Rotterdam), the first Luxembourg Asset Pricing Summit,
the Geneva Conference and Liquidity and Arbitrage, the 20th Annual Conference of the Multinational
Finance Society, and the Swedish House of Finance seminar for helpful comments and suggestions.
Ben - David acknowledges support from the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate and from
the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business. An earlier version of this paper was circulated under
the title “ETFs, Arbitrage, and Shock Propagation”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Francesco
Franzoni acknowledges support from the Swiss Finance Institute.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do ETFs Increase Volatility?
Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi
NBER Working Paper No. 20071
April 2014, Revised June 2014
JEL No. G12,G14,G15
ABSTRACT
We study whether exchange traded funds (ETFs)—an asset of increasing importance—impact the
volatility of their underlying stocks. Using identification strategies based on the mechanical variation
in ETF ownership, we present evidence that stocks owned by ETFs exhibit significantly higher intraday
and daily volatility. We estimate that an increase of one standard deviation in ETF ownership is associated
with an increase of 16% in daily stock volatility. The driving channel appears to be arbitrage activity
between ETFs and the underlying stocks. Consistent with this view, the effects are stronger for stocks
with lower bid-ask spread and lending fees. Finally, the evidence that ETF ownership increases stock
turnover suggests that ETF arbitrage adds a new layer of trading to the underlying securities.
Itzhak Ben-David
Associate professor of finance and
Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Francesco Franzoni
Swiss Finance Institute
Via G. Buffi 13
6904, Lugano - Switzerland
and University of Lugano
francesco.franzoni@usi.ch

Rabih Moussawi
University of Pennsylvania
rabih@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction
The question about the effect of derivatives on the quality of the underlying securities’

prices has concerned the theoretical and empirical literature in finance for a long time. On one
side of the debate, some authors have expressed the concern that liquidity shocks in derivatives
markets can trickle down to the cash market adding noise to prices. For example, Stein (1987)
makes the point that imperfectly informed speculators in futures market can destabilize spot
prices. Among the supporters of the alternative view, Grossman (1988) argues that the existence
of futures provides additional market-making power to absorb the impact of liquidity shocks. As
a result, volatility in the spot market is reduced (see also Danthine (1978) and Turnovsky
(1983)). This paper intends to contribute to this debate by bringing empirical evidence from the
market for Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs).
With $2.5 trillion of assets under management globally as of October 2013,1 ETFs are
rising steadily among the big players in the asset management industry. More importantly, this
asset class is capturing an increasing share of transactions in financial markets. For example, in
August 2010, exchange traded products accounted for about 40% of all trading volume in U.S.
markets (Blackrock (2011)). This explosive growth has attracted the attention of regulators. The
SEC has begun to review the role of ETFs in increasing volatility of the underlying securities.
Regulators are wary of high frequency volatility because it can reduce participation of long-term
investors.2 The desire to address some open questions regarding this relatively unexplored asset
class, as long as readily available data on ETF stocks ownership, flows, prices, and NAV,
motivate us to choose the ETF market as a laboratory to study the impact of derivatives on
security prices.
Using exogenous variation in ETF ownership we test whether ETFs lead to an increase in
the non-fundamental volatility of the securities in their baskets. The main empirical finding of
1

See
http://www.hedgefundfundamentals.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/HFF_Hedge_Funds_101_102013FINAL.pdf
2
Regulators have taken into consideration the potential illiquidity of ETFs, which manifested during the Flash Crash
of May 6, 2010, when 65% of the cancelled trades were ETF trades. Also relevant is the potential for counterparty
risk, which seems to be operating in the cases of both synthetic replication (as the swap counterparty may fail to
deliver the index return) and physical replication (as the basket securities are often loaned out). Concerns have been
expressed that a run on ETFs may endanger the stability of the financial system (Ramaswamy (2011)). With regard
to the SEC ETF-related concerns, see “SEC Reviewing Effects of ETFs on Volatility” by Andrew Ackerman, Wall
Street Journal, 19 October 2011, and “Volatility, Thy Name is E.T.F.”, by Andrew Ross Sorkin, New York Times,
October 10, 2011. With regard to the SEC focus on short-term volatility, see the SEC Concept release No. 34-61358.

2

the paper is a causal link going from ETF ownership to stock volatility. At least part of this
volatility effect can be traced to the impact of ETF arbitrage on the mean-reverting component of
stock prices. Hence, the evidence supports the hypothesis that ETFs increase noise in stock
prices.
The theoretical channel for the effect that we identify relies on limited arbitrage and
clientele effects. If arbitrage is limited, a liquidity shock can propagate from the ETF market to
the underlying securities and add noise to prices. To illustrate this effect, consider the example of
a large liquidity sell order of ETF shares by an institutional trader. As captured by the models of
Greenwood (2005) and Gromb and Vayanos (2010), arbitrageurs buy the ETF and hedge this
position by selling the underlying portfolio. Arbitrageurs with limited risk-bearing capacity
require a compensation in terms of positive expected returns to take the other side of the liquidity
trade. Hence, the selling activity leads to downward price pressure on the underlying portfolio.
Through this channel, the repeated arrival of liquidity shocks in the ETF market adds a new layer
of non-fundamental volatility in the prices of the underlying securities. An additional assumption
to obtain this result is that, in the absence of ETFs, liquidity trades would not hit the underlying
security with the same intensity. Rather, it has to be the case that ETFs attract a new clientele of
high-turnover investors that impound liquidity shocks at a higher rate.3 This conjecture seems
warranted in light of Amihud and Mendelson’s (1987) model, which predicts that short-horizon
investors self-select into more liquid assets, such as ETFs.
For robustness, we rely on two different identification strategies to obtain the main
empirical result. First, we exploit cross-sectional and time-series variation in ETF ownership of
stocks. ETFs tend to hold stocks in the same proportion as in the index that they track. The
identification comes from the fact that variation in ETF ownership, across stocks and over time,
depends on factors that are exogenous with respect to our dependent variables of interest
(volatility and turnover). Specifically, the same stock appears with different weights in different
indexes. Furthermore, the fraction of ETF ownership in a firm depends also on the size of the
ETF (its assets under management) relative to that of the company. As a result, while it is
possible that flows into ETFs are correlated with fundamental information regarding the

3

E.g., hedge funds prefer using ETFs as a hedging vehicle (“Hedge Fund Monitor” by Goldman Sachs, November
2013).

3

underlying stocks (e.g., sector-related news), it is unlikely that fundamental reasons produce an
effect on volatility that is stronger for stocks with higher ETF ownership.
For the second identification strategy, we draw on recent research by Chang, Hong, and
Liskovich (2013). These authors implement a regression discontinuity design that exploits the
mechanical rule allocating stocks to the Russell 1000 (top 1000 stocks by size) and Russell 2000
(next 2000 stocks by size) indexes. Due to the big difference in index weights, the top stocks in
the Russell 2000 receive significantly larger amounts of passive money than the bottom stocks in
the Russell 1000. Hence, in a close proximity of the cutoff, a switch to either index generates a
great amount of exogenous variation in ETF ownership, which we use to identify the effect of
ETFs on volatility. This procedure identifies in a clean way the effect of interest, but the
estimates are local effects. For this reason, we choose to emphasize the more conservative
magnitudes that result from the first identification strategy.
Our first set of results shows that intraday volatility increases with ETF ownership. For
S&P 500 stocks, a one standard deviation change in ETF ownership is associated with a 19%
standard deviation increase in intraday volatility. The effect on volatility also survives in daily
returns and is not explained by mutual fund ownership, including that by index funds. The
estimates are generally less economically significant for smaller stocks, consistent with ETF
arbitrageurs concentrating on a subset of more liquid stocks to build the replicating portfolio.
The increase in volatility is not necessarily a negative phenomenon if it results from
enhanced price discovery which makes prices more reactive to fundamental information. This
case corresponds to an improvement of price efficiency. To test whether this effect is behind the
observed increase in volatility, we measure the impact of ETFs on the mean-reverting component
of stock prices. Using intraday variance ratios as in O’Hara and Ye (2011), we show that price
efficiency deteriorates for stocks with higher ETF ownership at the fifteen second frequency,
which captures the investment horizon of ETF arbitrageurs. At the daily frequency, ETF flows
trigger price reversals suggesting a persistence of liquidity shocks at lower frequencies as well.
In sum, ETFs appear to inflate the mean-reverting component of stock prices which suggests a
deterioration in price efficiency, both intraday and at the daily frequency.
To bring further evidence on the driving channel for the volatility effect, we document
that volatility increases at times when arbitrage is more likely to occur, that is, when the
4

divergence between the ETF price and the NAV is large. We also find that ETF flows impact the
volatility of the underlying stocks and this effect is stronger for stocks with high ETF ownership.
Further supporting the arbitrage channel, we show that the volatility effect is more pronounced
among stocks with lower limits of arbitrage, as captured by bid-ask spreads and share lending
fees.
The hypothesis that ETFs attract a new clientele of high-turnover investors yields the
testable prediction that turnover should also increase with ETF ownership. The evidence
suggests that this is the case. In particular, a one-standard deviation increase in ETF ownership is
associated with an increase of 19% of a standard deviation in daily turnover. Also, the higher
turnover is linked to the same arbitrage channels that are driving the volatility effect. This
finding corroborates the view that the high turnover clientele of ETFs is inherited by the
underlying stocks as a result of arbitrage.
Our study is related to several strands of the literature. Earlier studies that examine
whether the existence of derivatives increase the volatility of the fundamental asset focused on
the link between futures and equities. The proposed economic channel in this literature is the
same as the one that we test in this paper: non-fundamental shocks in the futures market filter to
the equity market via arbitrage trades, thus increasing the volatility in the equity market. In a
cross-sectional analysis, Bessembinder and Seguin (1992) find that high trading volume in the
futures market is associated with lower equity volatility. However, consistent with the idea that
non-fundamental shocks in the futures market are passed down to the equity market, they find
that unexpected futures-trading volume is positively correlated with equity volatility. Chang,
Cheng, and Pinegar (1999) document that the introduction of futures trading increased the
volatility of stocks in the Nikkei index stocks. Roll, Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2007) find
evidence of Granger causality between prices in the futures and equity markets: price shocks are
transmitted from the futures market to the equity market and vice versa. Relative to this
literature, our evidence is more conclusive in finding a significant impact of ETF ownership on
the volatility of the underlying assets.
Several studies test whether ETFs have a destabilizing effect on markets. Cheng and
Madhavan (2009) and Trainor (2010) investigate whether the daily rebalancing of leveraged and
inverse ETFs increases stock volatility and find mixed evidence. Bradley and Litan (2010) voice
5

concerns that ETFs may drain the liquidity of already illiquid stocks and commodities, especially
if a short squeeze occurs and ETF sponsors rush to create new ETF shares. Madhavan (2011)
relates market fragmentation in ETF trading to the Flash Crash of 2010. In work that is more
recent than our paper, Da and Shive (2013) find that ETF ownership has a positive effect on the
comovement of stocks in the same basket. This result is a direct implication of our finding. We
show that ETF ownership increases stock volatility via the propagation of liquidity shocks.
Because the stocks in the same basket are going to be affected by the same liquidity shocks, their
covariance increases as a result.
This paper also relates to the empirical and theoretical literature studying the effect of
institutions on asset prices. There is mounting evidence of the effect of institutional investors on
expected returns (Shleifer (1986), Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), Greenwood (2005),
Coval and Stafford (2007), and Wurgler (2011) for a survey) and on correlations of asset returns
(Anton and Polk (2014), Chang and Hong (2011), Greenwood and Thesmar (2011), Lou (2011),
and Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Ramadorai (2012)). Cella, Ellul, and Giannetti (2013) show that
institutional investors’ portfolio turnover is an important determinant of stock price resiliency
following adverse shocks. In the context of momentum strategies, Lou and Polk (2013) make the
related claim that arbitrageurs can have a destabilizing impact on stock prices. Related to our
empirical evidence, Basak and Pavlova (2013a, 2013b) make the theoretical point that the
inclusion of an asset in an index tracked by institutional investors increases the non-fundamental
volatility in that asset’s prices.
The theoretical framework for the shock propagation effect that we describe is based on
the literature on shock propagation with limited arbitrage. Shock propagation can occur via a
number of different channels, including portfolio rebalancing by risk-averse arbitrageurs (e.g.,
Greenwood (2005)), wealth effects (e.g., Kyle and Xiong (2001)), and liquidity spillovers (e.g.,
Cespa and Foucault (2012)). The mechanism that most closely describes our empirical evidence
is the one by Greenwood (2005).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional details on ETF arbitrage
and the theoretical framework for the effects that we study. Section 3 describes the data. Section
4 provides the main evidence of the effects of ETF ownership on stock volatility and turnover.

6

Section 5 provides evidence on role of arbitrage in driving the main effect on volatility. Section 6
concludes.

2

ETF Arbitrage: Institutional Details and Theoretical Framework

2.1

Mechanics of Arbitrage
Exchange traded funds (ETFs) are investment companies that typically focus on one asset

class, industry, or geographical area. Most ETFs track an index, very much like passive index
mutual funds. Unlike index funds, ETFs are listed on an exchange and trade throughout the day.
ETFs were first introduced in the late 1980s and became popular with the issuance in January
1993 of the SPDR (Standard & Poor’s Depository Receipts, known as “Spider”), which is an
ETF that tracks the S&P 500 (which we label “SPY,” from its ticker). In 1995, another SPDR,
the S&P MidCap 400 Index (MDY) was introduced, and subsequently the number of ETFs
exploded to more than 1,600 by the end of 2012, spanning various asset classes and investment
strategies.
To illustrate the growing importance of ETFs in the ownership of common stocks, we
present descriptive statistics for S&P 500 and Russell 30004 stocks in Table 1. Due to the
expansion of this asset class, ETF ownership of individual stocks has increased dramatically over
the last decade. For S&P 500 stocks, the average fraction of a stock’s capitalization held by ETFs
has risen from 0.27% in 2000 to 3.78% in 2012. The table shows that the number of ETFs that
follow the S&P500 index grew from 2 to about 50 during the same period. The average assets
under management (AUM) for ETFs holding S&P 500 stocks in 2012 was $5bn. The statistics
for the Russell 3000 stocks paint a similar picture.
In our analysis, we focus on ETFs that are listed on U.S. exchanges and whose baskets
contain U.S. stocks. The discussion that follows applies strictly to these “plain vanilla” exchange
traded products that do physical replication, that is, they hold the securities of the basket that
they aim to track. We omit from our sample leveraged and inverse leveraged ETFs that use
derivatives to deliver the performance of the index, which represent at most 2.3% of the assets in

4

The Russell 3000 includes the largest 3000 stocks by market capitalization, reconstituted at the beginning of June
each year.

7

the sector (source: BlackRock). These more complex products are studied by Cheng and
Madhavan (2009), among others.
Similar to closed-end funds, retail and institutional investors can trade ETF shares in the
secondary market.5 However, unlike closed-end funds, new ETF shares can be created and
redeemed. Because the price of ETF shares is determined by the demand and supply in the
secondary market, it can diverge from the value of the underlying securities (the NAV). Some
institutional investors (called “authorized participants,” APs), which are dealers that have signed
an agreement with the ETF provider, can trade bundles of ETF shares (called “creation units,”
typically 50,000 shares) with the ETF sponsor. An AP can create new ETF shares by transferring
the securities underlying the ETF to the ETF sponsor. These transactions constitute the primary
market for ETFs. Similarly, the AP can redeem ETF shares and receive the underlying securities
in exchange. For some funds, ETF shares can be created and redeemed in cash.6
To illustrate the arbitrage process through creation/redemption of ETF shares, we
distinguish the two cases of (i) ETF premium (the price of the ETF exceeds the NAV) and (ii)
ETF discount (the ETF price is below the NAV). In the case of an ETF premium, APs have an
incentive to buy the underlying securities, submit them to the ETF sponsor, and ask for newly
created ETF shares in exchange. Then the AP sells the new supply of ETF shares on the
secondary market. This process puts downward pressure on the ETF price and, potentially, leads
to an increase in the NAV, reducing the premium. In the case of an ETF discount, APs buy ETF
units in the market and redeem them for the basket of underlying securities from the ETF
sponsor. Then the APs can sell the securities in the market. This generates positive price pressure
on the ETF and possibly negative pressure on the NAV, which reduces the discount.
Creating/redeeming ETF shares has limited costs in most cases, especially for equityfocused funds. These costs include the fixed creation/redemption fee plus the costs of trading the
underlying securities. Petajisto (2013) describes the fixed creation/redemption costs as ranging in
absolute terms from $500 to $3,000 per creation/redemption transaction, irrespective of the
5

Unlike premia and discounts in closed-end funds (e.g., Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991), Pontiff (1996)), price
divergence between the ETF and the NAV can be more easily arbitraged away thanks to the possibility of
continuously creating and redeeming ETF shares. As a result ETF premia/discounts are order of magnitudes smaller
than for closed-end funds.
6
Creation and redemption in cash is especially common with ETFs on foreign assets or for illiquid assets, e.g., fixed
income ETFs.

8

number of units involved. This fee would amount to about 3.4 bps for a single creation unit in the
SPY (that is, 50,000 shares worth about $8.8 million as of October 2013), or 0.6 bps for five
creation units. During our sample period (2000–2012), share creation/redemption occurs, on
average, on 71% of the trading days. For the largest ETF, the SPY, flows into and out of the fund
occurred almost every day in 2012 (99.2% of the trading days).
Arbitrage can also be undertaken by market participants who are not APs and without
creation/redemption of ETF shares. Because both the underlying securities and ETFs are traded,
investors can buy the inexpensive asset and short sell the more expensive one. For example, in
the case of an ETF premium, traders buy the underlying securities and short sell the ETF. They
hold the positions until prices converge, at which point they close down the positions to realize
the arbitrage profit. Conversely, in the case of an ETF discount, traders buy the ETF and short
sell the individual securities. ETF sponsors facilitate arbitrageur activity by disseminating NAV
values at a 15-second frequency throughout the trading day. They do so because the smooth
functioning of arbitrage is what brings about the low tracking error of these instruments. As a
result of the low trading costs and availability of information, arbitraging ETFs against the NAV
has become popular among hedge funds and high-frequency traders in recent years (Marshall,
Nguyen, and Visaltanachoti (2010)). ETF prices can also be arbitraged against other ETFs
(Marshall, Nguyen, and Visaltanachoti (2010)) or against futures contracts (Richie, Daigler, and
Gleason (2008)).7
These institutional details, with some modifications, also apply to synthetic ETFs, which
are more prevalent in Europe. These products replicate the performance of the index using total
return swaps and other derivatives. As a result, creation and redemption are handled in cash.
However, the secondary market arbitrage still involves transactions in the underlying securities.
So, the potential for propagation of demand shocks from the ETF market to the underlying
securities via arbitrage is also present among synthetic ETFs.

7

To be precise, although these trading strategies involve claims on the same cash flows, they may not be arbitrages
in the strict sense because they can involve some amount of risk. In particular, market frictions can introduce noise
into the process. For example, execution may not be immediate, shares may not be available for short selling, or
mispricing can persist for longer than the arbitrageurs’ planned horizon for the trade. In the remainder of the paper,
when we refer to ETF arbitrage, we are implying the broader definition of “risky arbitrage.”

9

Finally, although we limit our analysis to ETFs that track equity indexes, the arbitrage
process is an inherent characteristic of all types of ETFs. As a consequence, one should expect
the effects of ETFs that we describe in this paper to play out for all types of underlying assets.

2.2

Theoretical Framework
The main testable hypothesis of the paper is that the arbitrage between ETFs and the

securities in their baskets propagates liquidity shocks from the ETF market to the prices of the
basket securities. As a consequence, non-fundamental volatility of the underlying securities
increases due to ETF ownership.
We use Greenwood’s (2005) model with risk-averse market makers to explain the
channel of shock transmission that generates this testable conjecture. The market makers in the
model can be thought of as the Authorized Participants or, more generally, the arbitrageurs in the
ETF market. We apply this model to two assets with identical fundamentals: the ETF and the
basket of underlying securities (whose market value is the NAV of the ETF). To illustrate, we
imagine a situation in which the ETF price and the NAV are aligned at the level of the
fundamental value of the underlying securities, as in Figure 1a. Then, a non-fundamental shock,
such as an exogenous increase in demand, hits the ETF market. This type of shock could happen,
for example, if a large institution receives inflows and scales up its existing ETF allocation.
Arbitrageurs absorb the liquidity demand by shorting the ETF. Because they are risk averse, the
arbitrageurs require compensation for the (negative) inventory in the ETF that they are taking on.
Hence, the ETF price has to rise (Figure 1b). At the same time, to hedge their short ETF position,
arbitrageurs take a long position in the securities in the ETF basket. Again, to compensate the
arbitrageurs for the risk they take, the prices of the basket securities have to rise, as in Figure 1c.
Eventually, when other sources of liquidity materialize or uncertainty is resolved, prices revert
back to fundamentals (Figure 1d). In sum, shock transmission results from the trading of riskaverse investors who require compensation for holding assets in the two markets. To provide the
investors with the required risk premium, prices have to adjust in both markets.
In Greenwood’s (2005) model, the long and short hedging trades happen simultaneously
(i.e., the movements in Figures 1b and 1c happen at the same time). Moreover, given that there is
a unique market maker, two assets with identical payoffs always end up having the same price,
10

and no discrepancy between the ETF price and the NAV can be present at any time. As a result,
a strict adherence to the model would prevent the ETF price from ever deviating from the NAV.
Although this simple theoretical framework allows us to describe the mechanism for liquidity
shock transmission, we need a richer model to capture the fact that in reality the ETF price and
the NAV can diverge for some time.
Cespa and Foucault (2012) provide a useful framework with multiple investor classes and
some degree of market fragmentation. They assume three types of traders: liquidity demanders,
who submit market orders in one of two markets, and two types of liquidity suppliers: market
makers, who specialize in one asset class, and cross-market arbitrageurs, who trade securities in
both markets. Arbitrageurs respond to misalignments in the prices of the assets in the two
markets. The model is static in the sense that all investor classes trade in the same period. As a
result, even with this model, price discrepancies between two identical assets cannot emerge.
However, one can conceive a dynamic extension of the Cespa and Foucault (2012) framework in
which trades occur sequentially. In the first period, there is a liquidity shock in one of the two
assets that is accommodated by market makers via a price adjustment. In the next period, the
market makers for the second asset observe the price realization of the first asset and adjust their
own price. Cross-market arbitrageur trading occurs in the second period, bringing about price
convergence between the two assets. In this dynamic framework, the prices of two identical
assets can temporarily differ (in the first period). In this modified framework, arbitrageurs’ risk
aversion and hedging trades are still crucial for the transmission of liquidity shocks between the
two markets.
The mechanism that we have just described generates predictions that partly overlap with
those from an alternative scenario positing gradual price discovery after a shock to fundamentals.
According to this alternative view, prices behave similarly to the description in Figure 1, but the
trigger is a fundamental shock rather than a liquidity shock. Specifically, it is possible that price
discovery takes place in the ETF market first, for example, because it is more liquid. Then, when
fundamental information gets to the market, ETF prices adjust immediately, but the underlying
securities’ prices remain temporarily fixed (“stale pricing”). The slow adjustment of the NAV
generates a sequence of price moves that resembles those in Figure 1. This situation is illustrated
in Figure 2. The initial equilibrium (Figure 2a) is perturbed by a shock to the fundamental value
of the ETF components (Figure 2b). If price discovery takes place in the ETF market, the ETF
11

price moves first (Figure 2c) and the prices of the underlying securities move with a delay
(Figure 2d).
Because stale pricing could be a relevant phenomenon, especially for the more illiquid
underlying securities, one needs to assess whether liquidity shock propagation does take place.
The crucial distinction between the liquidity shock propagation mechanism (Figure 1) and the
alternative scenario with stale pricing (Figure 2) is that non-fundamental shocks induce a
reversal in stock prices (Figure 1d). This does not happen if the initial shock is a fundamental
one, as in the price discovery scenario. Hence, to disentangle the two hypotheses, in the
empirical analysis we test for price reversals after arbitrage activity.
The hypothesis that ETF ownership increases volatility faces the challenge of clearly
specifying the counterfactual. An alternative hypothesis is that, if ETFs were not available, the
same investors would directly trade the underlying securities. According to this argument, ETFs
are simply another vehicle through which the same clientele trades in the underlying securities.
Grossman (1988) makes a related point about futures. He argues that the volatility of the prices
of the underlying assets would be even higher in the absence of futures, because future markets,
being more liquid, are better suited to absorb non-fundamental shocks.
Hence, the hypothesis that ETF ownership increases the rate of arrival of liquidity shocks
needs the complementary assumption that ETFs attract a new clientele of investors, who would
not otherwise trade the underlying securities. Theoretical support for this conjecture comes from
Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and Constantinides (1986), who propose that investors with
shorter holding periods self-select into assets with lower trading costs. Atkins and Dyl (1997)
find support for this conjecture by showing that securities with lower bid-ask spread have higher
trading volume. These theories and empirical evidence suggest that, due to the low trading costs
of ETFs, a new clientele of high-frequency investors can materialize around the newly created
securities. This clientele would not trade the less-liquid underlying assets if ETFs were not
present.
Ultimately, whether low transaction costs of ETFs attract a clientele of high-frequency
traders that increase the exposure of the underlying securities to non-fundamental shocks is an
empirical question. A unique prediction of the new-clientele hypothesis is that ETF ownership is

12

related to higher turnover in the underlying securities. This consideration motivates us to use
turnover as an additional dependent variable, besides volatility, in our empirical tests.

3

Data
We use Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), Compustat, Bloomberg, and

OptionMetrics data to identify ETFs traded on the major U.S. exchanges and to extract returns,
prices, and shares outstanding. To identify ETFs, we first draw information from CRSP for all
securities that have the historical share code of 73, which exclusively defines ETFs in the CRSP
universe. We then screen all U.S.-traded securities in the Compustat XpressFeed and
OptionMetrics data, identifying ETFs using the security-type variables, and merge this sample
with the CRSP ETF sample.8 Our initial sample consists of 1,883,124 daily observations for
1,673 ETFs between 1993 and 2012. Because very few ETFs traded in the 1990s, we restrict the
sample to the 2000–2012 period. Among other statistics, Table 1 reports stock-level averages of
the number of ETFs and of the AUM of the ETFs, broken down by the S&P 500 and Russell
3000 universes. The table shows that the number of ETFs holding the average stock increased
dramatically since the year 2000, for both S&P 500 and Russell 3000 stocks. In 2000, there were
two ETFs per stock in both universes, on average, compared to 49 and 27 in 2012 for the average
S&P 500 and Russell 3000 stock, respectively. Furthermore, as the total market capitalization of
ETFs increased, the average ownership of ETFs per stock increased from 0.3% in 2000 to 3.8%
in 2012.
We use total shares outstanding at day-end to compute the daily market capitalization of
each ETF and to measure the net share creations/redemptions of each ETF at the daily level.
Because CRSP shares outstanding figures are stale during the month, we assessed the accuracy
of three databases that provide shares outstanding data at a daily frequency: Bloomberg,
Compustat, and OptionMetrics. Thanks to direct validation by BlackRock, we concluded that
Bloomberg is more accurate and timely in updating ETF shares outstanding when newly created
or redeemed shares are cleared with the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC). On
many occasions, Compustat and OptionMetrics shares outstanding data lag Bloomberg by up to
8

Note that at the time of the first draft of this paper in 2011, the CRSP-Compustat merged product did not correctly
link ETF securities in the CRSP and Compustat universes. For this reason, we use historical CUSIP and ticker
information to map securities in the CRSP, Compustat, and OptionMetrics databases.

13

three and sometimes five days. Therefore, Bloomberg is our primary source for shares
outstanding and the related net flow measures. We use Compustat and OptionMetrics to
complement the ETF series when there are gaps in the Bloomberg data.
We then obtain net asset value (NAV), in addition to fund styles (objectives) and other
characteristics, from the CRSP Mutual Fund and Morningstar databases. We restrict our sample
to ETFs that invest primarily in U.S. domestic equity stocks, because they are not plagued with
stale pricing issues (global equity or bond ETFs) or other issues (short bias, volatility, and
futures-based ETFs, commodities, etc.). Therefore, we exclude leveraged, short equity ETFs, and
all ETFs that invest in international or non-equity securities, or in futures and physical
commodities. We also eliminate active and long/short ETFs as well as dedicated short bias funds
and focus on plain vanilla U.S. domestic long equity ETFs. To do so, we use both CRSP Style
Codes and Lipper prospectus objective codes in the CRSP Mutual Fund Database and restrict our
sample to the fund objectives that span broad-based U.S. Diversified Equity funds and U.S.
sector ETFs that invest in equities (e.g., U.S. companies investing in oil and natural resources vs.
those investing in oil or commodity futures).9 We end up with 660 U.S. equity ETFs, for which
we obtain quarterly holdings information using Thomson-Reuters Mutual Fund holdings
database. ETFs are subject to Investment Company Act reporting requirements, and similar to
mutual funds, they have to disclose their portfolio holdings at the end of each fiscal quarter.10 We
use these data to align ETF ownership every month using the most recently reported holdings.
Then, for every stock, we sum the total ownership by various ETFs to construct our ETF
holdings measure. We also use Thomson-Reuters Mutual Fund holdings database to compute the
ownership by index funds, active funds, and total mutual fund ownership excluding ETFs. To do
that, we use the index fund flag in CRSP Mutual Fund database, and merge it with Thomson9

The Lipper Asset Code is not sufficient to accurately filter for U.S. domestic equity funds, because the Equity
Funds code comprises of a wide array of U.S. and global funds that implement various direct investment or
alternative/inverse strategies. Instead, we use Lipper Objective Code classifications that are assigned by Lipper to a
specific population of equity funds and are based on how the fund invests by looking at the actual holdings of the
fund to determine market cap and style versus a benchmark. We restrict our sample to the following Lipper
Objective Codes: Board Based U.S. Equity: S&P 500 Index Objective Funds, Mid-Cap Funds, Small-Cap Funds,
Micro-Cap Funds, Capital Appreciation Funds, Growth Funds, Growth and Income Funds, and Equity Income
Funds ('CA' ,'EI' ,'G' ,'GI' ,'MC' ,'MR' ,'SG' ,'SP' respectively). We also include Sector Funds that invest in U.S.
companies: Basic Materials, Consumer Goods, Consumer Services, Financial Services, Health/Biotechnology,
Industrials, Natural Resources, Real Estate, Science and Technology, Telecommunications, Specialty/Miscellaneous
Funds, and Utilities (BM, CG, CS, FS, H, ID, NR, RE, TK, TL, S, and UT, respectively).
10
We find that Thomson Mutual Fund Ownership data is more reliable and more complete than CRSP Mutual Fund
Holdings until mid-2010.

14

Reuters holdings data using WRDS MFLinks. Similar to how ETF ownership is calculated, we
compute monthly index and active fund ownership by using the most recently reported holdings.
We use Trade and Quote database (TAQ) data to compute stock-level volatility at a daily
frequency from second-by-second data. For each stock, we compute a return in each second
during the day using the last trade price at the end of each second during market hours (between
9:30 am and 4:00 pm). Then, we compute the standard deviation of those second-by-second
returns as the intraday volatility measure.11 Daily turnover is computed as CRSP volume divided
by shares outstanding.
We follow the methodology in O’Hara and Ye (2011) and use TAQ data to compute the
variance ratio as the absolute value of the 15-second log returns divided by three times the
variance of 5-second log returns minus one. We decide on the 15-second return interval as the
base case since ETF intraday indicative values used by arbitrageurs are typically disseminated
every 15 seconds.
Some ETFs are traded until 4:15 pm (Engle and Sarkar (2006)), but the major U.S. stock
markets close at 4:00 pm. Thus, to ensure that ETF prices and the NAV are computed at the
same time, we obtain 4:00 pm ETF prices from the TAQ feed as the last trade in the ETF at or
before 4:00 pm. Then, we compute ETF mispricing as the difference between the ETF share
price and the NAV of the ETF portfolio at 4:00 pm. Mispricing is expressed as a fraction of the
ETF price.12 Part of our analysis is carried out at a monthly frequency. To this end, we compute
volatility at a monthly frequency from the standard deviation of daily returns within the month.
We extract stock lending fees from the Markit Securities Finance (formerly Data
Explorers) database. The database contains about 85% of the OTC security lending market, with
historical data going back to 2002. In constructing the aggregate security loan fee, Markit
extracts the agreed fees from contract-level information and constructs a fee value that is the
volume weighted average of each contract-level security loan fee. We use the variable that
reports the average lending fee over the prior seven days.

11

We also compute intraday volatility using intraday returns based on NBBO midpoints, and the results are similar.
The label “mispricing” does not mean to imply that either the ETF or the NAV are correctly priced, while the
other is not. We are just complying with the standard jargon in the industry and taking a shortcut with respect to the
more cumbersome label of “discount/premium.”
12

15

Table 2 reports summary statistics for the variables that we use in the regressions. Panel
A presents summary statistics for the day-stock level sample. Panel B presents summary
statistics for the month-stock level sample. Panel C presents a correlation table for the daily
sample. Panel D presents summary statistics for the variables used in the returns regressions at
the daily frequency. We further describe these variables in later sections.

4

The Effect of ETF Ownership on Volatility and Turnover

4.1

Identification from Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Variation in ETF Ownership
The focus of our tests is whether ETF ownership leads to an increase in the volatility of

the underlying securities. The first source of identification is the variation in ETF ownership
across stocks and over time.
ETF ownership of stock i at time t is defined as the sum of the dollar value of holdings by
all ETFs investing in the stock divided by the stock’s capitalization. In formulas
∑
(1)
where J is the set of ETFs holding stock i;
j; and

is the weight of the stock in the portfolio of ETF

is the assets under management of ETF j.
From Equation (1), it appears that variation in ETF ownership across stocks and over

time primarily comes from three sources. First, stocks are typically part of multiple indices (e.g.,
a stock might be part of the S&P 500, the S&P 500 Value, the Russell 3000, and sector indices).
Second, there is variation in ETFs’ assets under management; thus, the dollar amount that the
ETFs invest across stocks varies. Third, there is variation in weighting schemes. The S&P 500
and many other indexes are capitalization-weighted, but the Dow Jones is price-weighted. Our
identifying assumption is that variation in ETF ownership resulting from these three sources is
exogenous with respect to our dependent variables of interest, stock volatility and turnover,
especially when stock-level controls (such as market capitalization and liquidity) are included in
the regression. Conditioning on a given universe, such us the S&P 500 and the Russell 3000,

16

characteristics like volatility and turnover play no role in determining the sub-index to which a
stock belongs (e.g., S&P 500 Growth or Value or sector indices).
One could argue that investors’ demand for ETFs, which determines AUM, may relate to
fundamental information, which also affects volatility and turnover. However, the way these
AUM translate into demand for individual stocks is arguably exogenous, because it depends on
the way in which indices are computed. Given these considerations, we believe that the
identifying assumption is well founded.
To further ensure that our results are driven by exogenous variation in ETF ownership, in
our preferred specifications we include stock-level fixed effects. In these regressions, the
variation in ETF ownership is for the same stock over time while controlling for unobservable
characteristics that are potentially correlated with the dependent variable.
A caveat to this design is a potentially mechanical relation between ETF ownership and
volatility due to the relation between ETF ownership and stock size. Specifically, based on
Equation (1), we can anticipate that there is a mechanical negative correlation between ETF
ownership and stock market capitalization. This can happen if the weights at the numerator do
not grow fast enough with capitalization to compensate for the increase in the denominator.
Given that market capitalization is negatively correlated with volatility (Table 2, Panel C), which
is one of the main dependent variables of interest in our analysis, the negative relation between
ownership and size (Table 2, Panel C) could induce a spurious positive relation between
ownership and volatility. To filter out this mechanical link, we include controls for market
capitalization in all of our analyses.
Overall, these arguments suggest that there is exogenous variation in ETF ownership that
can be used to identify the effect of ETFs on volatility. We isolate this exogenous component of
ETF ownership by controlling for stock size and fixed effects.

4.2

ETF Ownership, Intraday Volatility, and Turnover
We start by looking at whether ETF ownership has an impact on intraday volatility,

which is the frequency at which arbitrage takes place. Using daily stock-level observations, we
regress intraday volatility, computed using second-by-second returns from TAQ, on prior-day
17

ETF ownership as well as on prior-day controls for size and liquidity. The controls for liquidity
are the inverse of the stock price, the Amihud (2002) measure of price impact, and the bid-ask
spread expressed as a percentage. We also include day fixed effects in all regressions and add
stock fixed effects in even numbered columns. Standard errors are clustered at the stock level.
Also stemming from the liquidity-shock-propagation hypothesis is the implication that
the securities in the ETF baskets inherit the high-turnover clientele of the ETFs. Hence, to test
this prediction, we regress turnover on ETF ownership in specifications that mirror those for
volatility. Turnover is computed as the CRSP dollar volume divided by market capitalization.
First, we limit our sample to the S&P 500 stock universe. The volatility results are
presented in Table 3, Columns (1) and (2). The regressions show that intraday volatility is
significantly related to ETF ownership. Column (2) indicates that a one standard deviation
increase in ETF ownership is associated with higher volatility by 19% of a standard deviation.13
The effect seems economically important.
In Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3, we explore whether ETF ownership also affects stock
turnover. The estimates reveal a positive and significant relation between ETF ownership and
turnover. Column (4) shows that a one standard deviation increase in ETF ownership is
associated with higher turnover by about 19% of a standard deviation.14 Again, the effect seems
economically large and supports the view that ETFs attract a high-turnover clientele which is
passed down to the underlying securities.
In Columns (5) to (8), we repeat these tests for the sample of Russell 3000 stocks. After
controlling for stock fixed effects, we again find a significant relation between ETF ownership
and stock volatility. In both turnover specifications, the estimates are statistically significant. In
this sample, however, the effects are substantially smaller than for large stocks. For example,
Column (6) shows that a one standard deviation increase in ETF ownership raises intraday
volatility by about 8% of a standard deviation. Quite plausibly, arbitrageurs are less likely to rely
on small stocks to replicate ETF baskets. Hence, small stocks’ prices and volume are less
impacted by ETF ownership.

13
14

(0.243 * 0.014) / 0.018 = 0.1890.
(11.631 * 0.014) / 0.853 = 0.1909.

18

The results in Table 3 provide our first evidence that stock volatility is significantly
related to ETF ownership. We consider variation in ETF ownership as exogenous with respect to
the dependent variables, especially after controlling for stock characteristics and fixed effects.
Hence, we feel that we can attribute a causal interpretation to the estimates in Table 3. Further
corroboration on the causal link between ETF ownership and volatility comes from the
alternative identification strategy in Section 4.5 which uses a regression discontinuity design.

4.3

Lower Frequency Effect and Controls for Mutual Fund Ownership
Our results in Table 3 show that ETF ownership is associated with higher return volatility

within the day. However, a legitimate concern is that while it is possible that ETFs affect the
microstructure of trading for the underlying securities, these effects are washed out over longer
horizons. To examine this possibility, we study whether the effects that we identify are a shortlived phenomenon (e.g., induced by high-frequency traders) or whether these effects also exist at
frequencies that are relevant for long-term investors. We define our explanatory variables at the
monthly frequency and construct the dependent variable, volatility, using the daily return
observations within a month. In this way, we can study whether ETF ownership impacts the
volatility of daily returns.
Table 4 shows a regression of daily stock volatility in a given month on the average ETF
ownership of the stock within the month. We use stock-level controls to absorb effects that could
induce a mechanical link between ownership and our dependent variable. To this purpose, we
include (the logarithm of) the market capitalization of the stock as well as the same controls for
liquidity as in Table 3. We cluster standard errors both at the date and the stock levels. In
addition, date and stock fixed effects are included in all the specifications.
In Columns (1) to (3), we limit the sample to S&P 500 stocks, and in Columns (4) to (6),
we extend it to Russell 3000 stocks. The regressions in Columns (1) and (4) show that stock
volatility is positively related to ETF ownership and that the effect is stronger for large stocks. In
Column (1), a one standard deviation increase in stock ownership for S&P 500 stocks (1.44%) is
associated with a 20 bps increase in daily volatility, which represents 16% of a standard

19

deviation of the dependent variable.15 The economic significance is therefore large. Extending
the universe to smaller stocks (Column (4)), the effect is diluted, amounting to about 5% of a
standard deviation.16 This finding confirms the evidence for intraday volatility in Table 3.
The prior results may raise the question about the extent to which ETF ownership
captures a separate effect from the ownership of other institutional investors. Among these, open
end funds are the most similar to ETFs because they are also exposed to daily flows. In Columns
(2) and (5), we include a control for total mutual fund ownership, which is measured using
quarterly holdings and end-of-prior-month stock capitalization. The coefficient on mutual fund
ownership is positive and significant suggesting that other institutions may be affecting volatility
in a similar way to ETFs. However, the estimate is at least an order of magnitude smaller than
the effect of ETF ownership, which remains intact. This finding suggests that the arbitrage
channel, which is specific to ETFs, plays the dominant role in affecting stock volatility.
Among open-ended funds, index funds are the closest to ETFs as they are also passively
tracking a basket of stocks. While active funds retain some discretion on the amount of trading,
index funds are forced to scale up and down their portfolios in response to daily flows. Columns
(3) and (6) include separate controls for active and index fund ownership. While both positive
and significant, the coefficient for index funds is significantly larger, consistent with our priors.
The estimates for ETF ownership is only slightly impacted by these controls and remains by far
the most important effect.
Overall, the evidence suggests that the effect of ETFs on volatility persists beyond the
intraday horizon. The daily volatility we study in this section is relevant for investors, such as
mutual funds, that do not trade at high frequencies but still reallocate their portfolio on a daily
basis. Also important, ETF ownership impacts volatility well beyond the general effect of
ownership by mutual funds. While index funds resemble ETFs in that they adjust their ownership
daily to track a basket of stocks, not being listed on an exchange they are not exposed to highfrequency arbitrage. The significantly larger impact of ETF ownership on volatility likely
reflects this peculiarity of ETFs.17
15

(0.146 * 1.440) / 1.290 = 0.1630.
(0.044 * 1.730) / 1.490 = 0.0511.
17
Although we include stock fixed effects in our main regressions, concerns about identification may linger in case
unobservable stock characteristics determine ETF ownership and stock volatility in sub-periods of a stock’s
16

20

4.4

Identifying the Impact on Non-Fundamental Volatility: Variance Ratios and Price

Reversals
The finding that higher ETF ownership is associated with increased volatility is not
necessarily evidence in favor of the hypothesis that ETFs increase the noise in the prices of the
underlying securities. For example, Amihud and Mendelson (1987) provide a simple model in
which the volatility of trading prices is positively related to the speed at which prices adjust to
fundamentals. If ETF arbitrage makes prices adjust more promptly to fundamentals, the model
yields the prediction that the fundamental volatility of the underlying securities goes up. This
increase in volatility differs from the prediction of the hypothesis that is tested in this paper,
which instead focuses on non-fundamental volatility, or noise in the definition of Black (1986).
O’Hara and Ye (2011) use variance ratios to measure price efficiency in intra-day data.
On each day t, stock i’s variance ratio is constructed as:
|

(

)
(

)

|

(2)

where the numerator is the variance of k-period log returns on day t and the denominator is k
times the variance of single period log returns on day t (also see Lo and MacKinlay (1988)). As
argued by these authors, in an efficient market, the variance ratio should be closer to zero as
prices are expected to follow a random walk and the fraction in Equation (2) approaches one.
This device can be used to test the impact of ETFs on non-fundamental volatility. If ETFs add
noise to prices, the variance ratios should increase with ETF ownership. In other words, the
liquidity shocks originating in the ETF market boost the mean-reverting component in the prices
of the underlying securities.
In our application, we measure single-period returns from transaction prices at fivesecond intervals and choose k = 3, so that multi-period returns are measured over fifteen-second
intervals. While this choice of time-interval is to some extent arbitrary, it can be justified based
on the observation that information about NAV is disseminated by ETF sponsors at fifteen

appearance in the sample. To address this concern, we run the regressions in first differences. The main results
remain significant, as shown in Appendix Table A1.

21

second intervals to facilitate high-frequency arbitrage. This frequency is therefore relevant to
capture the effect of arbitrageurs on the underlying stock prices.
Table 5 reports estimates from regressions of the stock-level variance ratio on ETF
ownership in the prior day and the same set of controls as in the previous table. The results point
unambiguously to a positive and significant relation between ETF ownership and variance ratios.
This evidence suggests that, at this frequency, prices of stocks with higher ETF ownership are
farther away from a random walk and, therefore, contain more noise. For S&P 500 stocks, the
economic magnitude is large and in line with the effects from Table 3. Based on Column (2) of
Table 5, a one-standard deviation increase in ETF ownership is associated with an increase of
about 12% of a standard deviation in the variance ratio.18 Consistent with the results in Table 3,
the effect is reduced, but still significant, when the universe is extended to smaller stocks.
Another way to test whether ETFs add noise to prices is to focus on price reversals. In
Section 2.2, we argue that if the initial price impact is reversed, the trigger is a non-fundamental
shock (as in Figure 1). Instead, if prices remain at the new level the initial shock results from
new fundamental information (as in Figure 2). Disentangling these two scenarios is another way
to test whether ETF arbitrage induces a mean-reverting component in stock prices. Further, by
casting the analysis at the daily frequency, we test whether the noise in prices survives beyond
the intra-day horizon used for the variance ratio tests in Table 5.
We use stock-level ETF flows at the daily frequency as a conditioning variable to identify
prices reversals. As explained above, ETF flows (redemptions and creations) are the result of
APs’ arbitrage activity. Stock level flows are defined as the weighted average of the daily flows
in the ETFs that own the stock. The weights are the fraction of ownership in the stock by each
ETF. Daily ETF flows are measures as a fraction of prior day assets under management.
On the day in which flows occurs, we expect a price move in the same direction as the
flows, irrespective of whether the motive for trade is fundamental or non-fundamental. To the
extent that at least part of the originating shock is non-fundamental, a reversal should occur in
the next days. To capture this behavior we regress returns at different horizons on stock level
flows. We include the usual stock-level controls and time fixed effects. The standard errors are

18

(1.123 * 0.014) / 0.134 = 0.1173.

22

clustered at the stock level to correct for the autocorrelation of residuals induced by overlapping
observations for multiday returns.
The evidence in Table 6 is broadly consistent with the transmission of non-fundamental
shocks. In Column (1), we observe that the first-day effect of ETF flows is positive and
significant.19 In the twenty trading days following the flows, prices partially revert suggesting
that the initial shock adds a mean-reverting component to stock prices. In terms of magnitude,
after twenty days, about 45% of the initial shock has reverted. Extending the horizon farther out
to forty days does not increase the magnitude of reversals (not reported), which suggests that on
average flows convey fundamental and non-fundamental shocks in roughly equal shares.
In sum, the evidence in this section suggests that the positive link between ETF
ownership and volatility, which we report in Tables 3 and 4, is consistent with an increase in
non-fundamental volatility. Specifically, ETFs appear to add a mean-reverting component to
stock prices both intraday (Table 5) and at the daily frequency (Table 6).

4.5

Identification Using Regression Discontinuity Design
The identification based on cross-sectional and time-series variation in ETF ownership,

which underlies the results in Tables 3 and 4, can be flawed if the stock level controls fail to
capture characteristics that co-determine ETF ownership and volatility. While this is unlikely
because our preferred specifications include stock level fixed effects, in this section we
corroborate our main results with an alternative approach to identification.
Chang, Hong, and Liskovich (2013) devise an identification strategy that exploits the
exogenous variation in the membership of the Russell 1000 and Russell 2000 indexes and is cast
within the regression discontinuity (RD) framework. The identifying assumption in RD is that
the individuals (in our case, the firms) have imprecise control over the treatment variable (in our
case, the assignment to an index). If this is the case, the treatment is “as good as” randomly
assigned around the cutoff (Lee and Lemieux (2010)).

19

The magnitude of the effect is economically important. For the S&P 500 sample (Column (1)), a one-standard
deviation move in ETF flows is associated with a contemporaneous return of about 12 bps (=12.418*0.01). This
seems like a large effect given that the mean daily return in the sample is 0.056%.

23

This argument nicely fits the Russell index assignment experiment. The Russell 1000
index is comprised of the top 1000 stocks by market capitalization, while the Russell 2000
includes the next 2000 stocks. The index is reconstituted in June of each year only based on endof-May stock capitalization, hence no discretion is involved in index assignment. Index
composition is kept constant for the rest of the year. For stocks in a close proximity of the cutoff,
changes in index membership can be considered as exogenous events as they result from random
variation in stock prices at the end of May.
Chang, Hong, and Liskovich (2013) corroborate the validity of RD design in the context
of the Russell 1000/Russell 2000 experiment. In particular, they show that firms in a close
neighborhood of the cutoff are similar in terms of the distribution of some baseline covariates
(Returns in the month before reconstitution, Assets, EPS), which is a necessary condition for the
validity of the RD design. Also, they test for manipulation of the ranking variable using
McCrary’s (2008) methodology and reject this hypothesis. These authors also show that,
although the amount of passive assets benchmarked to the Russell 1000 is 2 to 3.5 larger than
those tracking the Russell 2000, the weights of the top stocks in the Russell 2000 are about 10
times larger than those for the bottom stocks in the Russell 1000. As a result, there is a
significantly larger amount of passive money tracking the top Russell 2000 stocks.
We exploit the latter finding to identify discontinuous variation in ETF ownership around
the cutoff between the two indexes. In particular, we focus on stocks that switch between indexes
and use the event of a switch as an instrument for ETF ownership. Then, we regress our outcome
variable, stock volatility, on instrumented ETF ownership. To identify the effect of interest, we
rely on the insight from RD that variation in ETF ownership around the cutoff can be considered
as exogenous. One additional identifying assumption that needs to be satisfied is excludability,
that is, the requirement that the instrument affects the outcome variable only through the
treatment variable. In our context, this translates into the condition that a switch in index
membership only affects volatility through ETF ownership. Below, we discuss instances in
which this assumption may not be satisfied and propose some solutions.
Following Chang, Hong, and Liskovich (2013), we cast our analysis at the monthly
frequency. The first index reconstitution in our sample occurs in May 2000, so we include all
months between June 2000 and December 2012. Although we use actual switches between
24

indexes as our instrument, we still need to restrict the sample to stocks in a close neighborhood
of the cutoff. Rules for defining the cutoff changed during the sample period. The cutoff used to
be simply the 1000th position in terms of market capitalization until 2006. Starting with the 2007
reconstitution, Russell Inc. adopted a banding rule whereby stocks only switch from their current
index if they move beyond a 5% range around the market capitalization percentile of the 1000th
stock. To account for this effect, we use membership data and market capitalization directly
provided by Russell Inc. to compute index switches and cutoffs for every year in the sample.
Finally, Chang, Hong, and Liskovich (2013) argue that the optimal bandwidth is about 100
stocks around the cutoff. To be conservative, we consider bandwidths of 50, 100, 150, and 200
stocks on each side of the cutoff.
We carry out a two-stage least square estimation. Throughout the analysis, we focus
alternatively on stocks that in May of each year start in either of the two indexes. The first stage
consists of a regression of ETF ownership on an indicator for a change of membership to either
the Russell 1000 or the Russell 2000. In the second stage, we regress daily volatility on the fitted
value of ETF ownership from the first stage. The same stocks enter the sample in all months
from June after reconstitution to May of the next year, except if delistings occur.
Table 7, Panel A, has the first stage regressions of ETF ownership on indicator variables
for a switch to either index. We separately consider stocks that belong to the Russell 1000 before
index reconstitution (Columns (1), (3), (5) and (7)) and stocks belonging to the Russell 2000
before index reconstitution (Columns (2), (4), (6) and (8)). The independent variable of interest
is an indicator for whether the stock switches to the other index. The dependent variable (ETF
ownership) is measured following the index reconstitution. To illustrate the setting, consider
Column (1). The sample includes stocks that are in Russell 1000 in May (prior to the
reconstitution). We use the end-of-May cutoff to determine the stocks that are included in the
sample (± 50 stocks around the cutoff). The indicator variable flags the stocks that switch to the
Russell 2000 after reconstitution. The estimate suggests that ETF ownership in the twelve
months after reconstitution increases for the stocks switching to the Russell 2000, which is
expected given that the amount of passive money tracking these stocks is significantly larger.
We add the usual set of controls for size and liquidity. Although a well-specified RD
design does not require the inclusion of covariates for identification, Lee and Lemieux (2010)
25

suggest that covariates could help in improving estimation efficiency. Note, however, that while
have time fixed effects, we do not include stock fixed effects because identification in RD is
inherently cross-sectional. Standard errors are clustered at the month level.
Across bandwidths, the estimates unambiguously point that ETF ownership increases for
stocks switching to the Russell 2000 and decreases for stocks moving to the Russell 1000. The
magnitudes are similar for moves in either direction (especially for bandwidths above 50) and
suggest that top Russell 2000 members have ETF ownership larger by, on average, about 45 bps
than bottom Russell 1000 stocks. These results confirm the evidence in Chang, Hong, and
Liskovich (2013) that the amount of passive money tracking the top Russell 2000 stocks is
significantly larger.
Table 7, Panel B, reports the second stage estimates of the effect of ETF ownership on
volatility. Mirroring the layout in Panel A, the instruments are indicators for a switch to either
index and the sample is also restricted to members of either index before reconstitution. The
effect of ETF ownership on volatility is significant across most samples and bandwidths. The
estimates are larger for stocks that are included in the Russell 2000 than for switchers to the
Russell 1000. To explain these different magnitudes, one could speculate that, once they appear
onto the radar screen of arbitrageurs as top members of the Russell 2000, stocks do not
immediately leave arbitrageurs’ portfolios as they could still prove to be valid hedging
instruments.
The magnitudes are considerably larger than those from prior tables (e.g., compare to
Table 4, which is also based on monthly data). However, it is known that the RD estimates can
be interpreted as a weighted average treatment effect, where the weights are the relative ex ante
probability that the value of an individual’s assignment variable will be in the neighborhood of
the threshold (Lee and Lemieux (2010)). In other words, the effect we measure is tilted towards
stocks that are highly likely to switch indexes, that is, stocks that can experience a drastic change
from being not considered in arbitrageurs’ strategies to having top weights in their replicating
portfolios. For this reason, we prefer to emphasize the magnitudes from the prior tables as they
are more general and more conservative.
Another good practice in RD is to include controls for polynomials of the ranking
variable, which is market capitalization in our application. A sign of a well-specified experiment
26

is the fact that the estimates are stable when different degrees of the polynomials are included
(Lee and Lemieux (2010)). In Panels A and B, we control for a linear specification of the ranking
variable. Panel C replicates the IV estimation with a quadratic polynomial. Reassuringly, the
estimates are in the same ballpark as in Panel B.
Finally, we come back to the validity of the exclusion restriction in our context. This
could be violated, for example, if ownership by other institutions tracking the index affects
volatility beyond ownership by ETFs. We replicate our analysis including ownership by active
funds and index funds and results are unaffected (Appendix Table A2). Another case of violation
is where inclusion among the top stocks in the Russell 2000 makes a firm more visible. In that
case, prices could react more quickly to fundamental information and returns could become more
volatile (see the argument in Section 4.3). According to this story, price efficiency would be
increased. As in Section 4.3, we use variance ratios (computed using intra-day data and averaged
over the month) to measure noise in prices and replicate the RD estimation. Results in the
Appendix Table A3 show that for the set of switchers to the Russell 2000, variance ratios are
increasing in ETF ownership, which suggests that that price efficiency actually decreases after
inclusion.
Overall, the RD design provides us with additional confidence in the causal interpretation
of the effect of ETF ownership on stock-level non-fundamental volatility. For the rest of the
analysis, we go back to using the pooled regressions, as they provide more conservative
estimates of the effect on the entire sample of stocks.

5

Exploring the Arbitrage Channel
As discussed in Section 2, we want to investigate whether ETFs propagate demand

shocks to the underlying securities. If this were the case, a new layer of liquidity shocks would
hit the basket securities. In Section 4, we provide evidence consistent with this conjecture by
showing that stocks with higher ETF ownership display higher volatility and turnover. In this
section, we study more closely the arbitrage channel.

27

5.1

Stock Volatility, ETF Ownership, and Arbitrage Activity

Arbitrage occurs in two ways. At high frequencies, arbitrageurs take long and short positions in
ETFs and the underlying baskets and wait for price convergence. At lower frequencies,
Authorized Participants create and redeem ETF shares to profit from mispricing. In both cases,
arbitrageurs and APs react to price discrepancies between the ETF price and the NAV (ETF
mispricing). Hence, in our first set of tests, we use stock-level mispricing as a proxy for arbitrage
trading. Then, in a second set of tests, we focusing more closely on APs’ activities and measure
arbitrage trading using creation and redemption of ETF shares (i.e., ETF flows).

5.1.1 Arbitrage Trades following ETF Mispricing
In this analysis the main explanatory variable is stock-level absolute mispricing, which is
a signal for arbitrage profitability and therefore it proxies for the potential amount of arbitrage
volume. For stock i on day t, absolute mispricing is defined as the weighted average of the
mispricing of the ETFs holding the stock:
(

)

∑

|

|
(3)

∑

where J is the set of ETFs holding stock i at time t, and

is the difference between

the ETF price and its NAV, scaled by the ETF price and measured using closing prices. The
absolute value is motivated by the fact that arbitrage responds to both positive and negative
levels of mispricing.
The question is whether the main effect of ownership on volatility is larger for stocks that
are more exposed to arbitrage, as proxied by mispricing. Then, our regression specification is:
(
(

)
)

(4)

28

We run a similar specification using stock turnover as the dependent variable. We use the
same controls as in Table 3, and standard errors are clustered at the stock level. The main
variable of interest in equation (4) is the interaction between ownership and mispricing.20
Table 8, Panel A, presents the regressions. In Column (1), we observe that intraday
volatility increases with the ETF ownership, as previously found. The new result is that the effect
is significantly stronger for stocks with high ETF mispricing, which is reflected in the slope on
the interaction. For stocks that have close to zero ETF ownership, the effect of ETF mispricing is
minimal. A one standard deviation increase in abs(ETF mispricing) is associated with an increase
of 0.4% of a standard deviation in volatility.21 However, if ETF ownership is at its mean (1.9%),
the effect is much larger: a one standard deviation increase in abs(ETF mispricing) is associated
with an increase of 85.4% of a standard deviation in volatility.22
In Column (2) we repeat the analysis, this time controlling for lagged intraday volatility,
and its interaction with ETF ownership. This specification addresses the concern that mispricing
is mechanically higher for ETFs that contain more volatile stocks in their baskets. The significant
relation between volatility and lagged mispricing remains significant after controlling for oneday lagged volatility and its interaction with ETF ownership. This result suggests that a
mechanical link between volatility and mispricing is not driving our results.
The effect on intraday turnover is large as well (Column (3)). For ETF ownership
approaching zero, a one standard deviation increase in lagged absolute mispricing is associated
with higher intraday turnover by 0.3% of a standard deviation.23 However, when ETF ownership
is at its mean, intraday turnover is higher by 26.3% of a standard deviation.24 Also in this case,
the results remain statistically significant after controlling for the previous’ day turnover and its
interaction with ETF ownership (Column (4)).
Comparing the coefficients of the variables of interest (ETF ownership, and its
interaction with the absolute value of the mispricing) indicates that about 40% to 50% of the

20

We use lagged end-of-day mispricing in our tests because it proxies for arbitrage that takes place during day t.
Using day-t mispricing instead does not materially affect the results.
21
0.006 * 0.013 / 0.018 = 0.0043.
22
(0.006 * 0.013 + 42.035* 0.013 * 0.019) / 0.018 = 0.8543.
23
(0.207 * 0.013) / 0.853 = 0.0032.
24
(0.207 * 0.013 + 896.893 * 0.013 * 0.019) / 0.853 = 0.2628.

29

correlation between volatility and mispricing is driven by factors other than a mechanical
relationship.
Although the results for the S&P 500 sample are very strong both statistically and
economically, the corresponding results for the Russell 3000 are not significantly different from
zero, confirming the prior evidence of a weaker effect on smaller stocks. Overall, these results
suggest that the arbitrage of ETF mispricing is an important channel to explain the impact of
ETF ownership on volatility, especially for large stocks.

5.1.2

A Direct Measure of Arbitrage Activity by APs
Next, we more directly test the impact of ETF arbitrage through creation and redemption

activity by APs. We measure stock-level flows using the following definition:
∑
(

)

∑

|

|

(5)

∑

For each stock i and day t, we sum the product of the percentage of flows into the ETFs that own
the stock and the percentage ownership of the ETF in the stock. For example, if ETF j
experiences a flow of 1% and owns 10% of stock i, the stock is likely to experience a demand for
1% * 10% = 0.1% of its shares. Because both positive (share creation) and negative (share
redemption) flows represent arbitrage activity (that potentially can increase volatility), in
equation (5) we take the absolute value of the flows.
Our specification resembles equation (4), but we replace
(

(

) with

). Table 8, Panel B, presents the results of the regressions. We first

consider the S&P 500 sample (Columns (1) through (4)). The main effect of ETF ownership on
stock volatility (Column (1)) remains positive and significant. Moreover, the effect is magnified
for stocks with higher flows. When ETF ownership is at its mean, a one standard deviation
increase in absolute ETF flows translates into volatility that is higher by 3.7% of a standard
deviation.25

25

(-0.009 * 0.013 + 3.197 * 0.019 * 0.013) / 0.018 = 0.0373.

30

The effect of ETF ownership interacted with flows on stock turnover is similar in
magnitude and significance (Column (3)). For the mean value of ETF ownership, a one standard
deviation increase in absolute ETF flows is associated with turnover higher by 6.6% of a
standard deviation.26
Columns (5) through (8) present similar regressions for the Russell 3000 sample. Here,
the results are in the same direction as in the S&P 500 sample. They are weaker for volatility and
stronger for turnover. For stocks at the mean level of ownership, a one standard deviation
increase in absolute ETF flows translates into an increase of 1.2% of a standard deviation in
intraday volatility (Column (5))27 and of 12.3% of a standard deviation in intraday turnover
(Column (7).28 In most specifications, controlling for the lagged dependent variable and its
interaction with flows reduces the main effect, but does not impact the statistical significance.
In sum, our findings support the conjecture that ETF ownership also increases volatility
and turnover through the channel of share creation/redemption by market makers (APs). The
economic importance of this channel seems smaller in magnitude than the effect originating from
ETF mispricing arbitrage. This is consistent with the fact that share creation/redemption activity
occurs at lower frequencies than intraday arbitrage. Hence, intraday volatility is less impacted.

5.2

Limits to Arbitrage
To further test whether the main effects operate through the arbitrage channel, we

introduce interactions with proxies for limits to arbitrage. The prior is that arbitrage trading
should be less important when limits to arbitrage are more binding. We use two proxies for limits
to arbitrage: the stock-level bid-ask spread and stock lending fees.
Because ETF arbitrage involves a roundtrip transaction in the stock, a large stock-level
bid-ask spread reduces the profitability of arbitrage trades and the incidence of arbitrage trading
in a given stock. The prediction is, therefore, that the volatility and turnover of stocks with high
bid-ask spreads are less sensitive to proxies of ETF arbitrage. In Table 9, Panel A, we split the
sample according to the median percentage bid-ask spread in the cross-section of stocks in the
26

(-0.090 * 0.013 + 232.101 * 0.019 * 0.013) / 0.853 = 0.0534.
(0 * 0.080 + 0.141 * 0.021 * 0.080) / 0.020 = 0.0118.
28
(-0.129 * 0.080 + 70.306 * 0.021 * 0.080) / 0.875 = 0.1227.
27

31

prior day and re-run the analysis from Table 3. The panel shows that overall the sensitivity of
both volatility and turnover to the interaction of absolute mispricing and ETF ownership is
higher for stocks with a low spread. For the same level of mispricing and ETF ownership, the
impact on intraday volatility and turnover is lower for high bid-ask spread stocks. The only
exception to this pattern comes from the turnover of S&P 500 stocks.
We find additional evidence consistent with the idea that arbitrageurs trade on ETF
mispricing when we examine the effects on intraday volatility and turnover of ETF flows (Table
9, Panel B). Similar to Panel A, we regress intraday volatility and turnover on ETF ownership
interacted with absolute ETF flows, as well as main effects, controls, and fixed effects. We are
interested in the way the coefficient on the interaction varies across columns. The sample is split
by bid-ask spread, with odd columns containing stocks with below-median spreads and even
columns containing stocks with above-median spreads. The results show that in most regression
pairs, the effects are stronger for the low bid-ask spread sample than for the high bid-ask spread
sample. These results are consistent with the idea that APs are reluctant to create/redeem shares
when the costs of the transactions are too high.
Next, we use stock lending fees as a proxy for limits-to-arbitrage. When the lending cost
is high, arbitrageurs are less likely to engage in arbitrage transactions, because the transaction
costs associated with short selling shares are higher, hence reducing the profitability of trades.
Also, a high lending fee can reflect a shortage in shares for lending, meaning that some
arbitrageurs may simply not be able to carry out the trade (Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2007)).
The prior is that the effects of arbitrage trades on intraday volatility and turnover are expected to
be stronger when lending fees are lower.
Table 9, Panel C, presents evidence of this effect. For both intraday volatility and
turnover, the effect of absolute mispricing is weaker, for a given level of ETF ownership, when
lending fees are higher (even-numbered columns). In other words, when stock lending fees are
high, ETF ownership does not increase intraday volatility as much for a given level of
mispricing. To provide evidence that APs’ trades are also affected by the cost of shorting, we
split the sample by lending fees and repeat the tests for fund flows. The results are presented in
Table 9, Panel D. Again, we are interested in the coefficient on the interaction between ETF
ownership and the absolute measure of fund flows. Consistent with the prior, the results show
32

that in all specifications the effect is stronger for the subsample that has low lending fees (oddnumbered columns).
Overall, these results seem to corroborate the relevance of the arbitrage channel for the
impact of ETF ownership on stock volatility and turnover. Whenever arbitrage is more costly, as
signaled by a higher bid-ask spread or steeper stock lending fees, the impact of the arbitrage
proxies is reduced.

6

Conclusion
ETFs have enjoyed rising popularity with both retail and institutional investors. This

success seems warranted given that ETFs provide an unprecedented source of diversification at
low cost and high liquidity. However, the evidence in this paper seems to point out an
unintended effect of this relatively new asset class on the prices of their underlying securities.
We present results showing that arbitrage activity between ETFs and the underlying
securities leads to an increase in stock volatility. Moreover, consistent with a deterioration of
pricing efficiency, ETF ownership and flows appear to make prices diverge from random walks,
both intra-day and daily. These findings lend support to the conjecture that liquidity shocks in the
ETF market are propagated via arbitrage trades to the prices of underlying securities, adding a
new layer of non-fundamental volatility.
While the effects that we point out are obtained in the universe of ETFs written on U.S.
equity, no theoretical reason seems to prevent a generalization of these conclusions to other
underlying asset classes and other types of derivatives. For this reason, our work contributes to
the ongoing debate on the effect of derivatives on the quality and behavior of the prices of the
underlying securities. Moreover, our evidence corroborates the results of a recent literature
showing a role of index trading in generating non-fundamental volatility and comovement
(Basak and Pavlova (2013a, 2013b)).

33

References
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects,
Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 223–249.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1987, Trading mechanisms and stock returns: An
empirical investigation, Journal of Finance 42(3), 533–553.
Anton, Miguel, and Christopher Polk, 2014, Connected stocks, Journal of Finance 69(3), 1099–
1128.
Atkins, Allen B., and Edward A. Dyl, 1997, Transactions Costs and Holding Periods for
Common Stocks, Journal of Finance 52 (1), 309–325.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005, Comovement, Journal of
Financial Economics 75(2), 283–317.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2013a, Asset Prices and Institutional Investors, American
Economic Review 103(5), 1728–1758.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 201b3, A model of financialization of commodities,
Working paper, London Business School.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, and Paul J. Seguin, 1992, Futures-trading activity and stock price
volatility, Journal of Finance 47 (5), 2015–2034.
Black, Fisher, 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41(3), 529–543.
Blackrock, 2011, ETF landscape, Industry review, 2011–H1.
Borkovec, Milan, Ian Domowitz, Vitaly Serbin, and Henry Yegerman, 2010, Liquidity and price
discovery in exchange-traded funds, Investment Technology Group Report.
Bradley, Harold, and Robert E. Litan, 2010, Choking the recovery: Why new growth firms aren’t
going public and unrecognized risks of future market disruptions, Working paper, Kauffman
Foundation.
Cella, Cristina, Andrew Ellul, and Mariassunta Giannetti, 2013, Investors’ horizons and the
amplification of market shocks, Review of Financial Studies 26(7), 1607–1648.
Cespa, Giovanni, and Thierry Foucault, 2012, Illiquidity shock propagation and liquidity crashes,
Working paper, HEC Paris.
Chang, Eric C., Joseph W. Cheng, and J. Michael Pinegar, 1999, Does futures trading increase
stock market volatility? The case of the Nikkei stock index futures markets, Journal of Banking
& Finance 23, 727–753.
Chang, Yen-Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich, 2013, Regression Discontinuity and
the Price Effects of Stock Market Indexing, NBER working paper 19290.
Cheng, Minder, and Ananth Madhavan, 2009, The dynamics of leveraged and inverse exchangetraded funds, Journal of Investment Management 7 (4).

34

Cohen, Lauren, Karl B. Diether, and Christopher J. Malloy, 2007, Supply and demand shifts in
the shorting market, Journal of Finance 62(5), 2061–2096.
Constantinides, George M., 1986, Capital Market Equilibrium with Transaction Costs, Journal of
Political Economy 94(4), 842–862.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 86(2), 479–512.
Da, Zhi, and Sophie Shive, 2013, When the bellwether dances to noise: Evidence from
exchange-traded funds, Working Paper, University of Notre Dame.
Danthine, Jean-Pierre, 1978, Information, Futures Prices, and Stabilizing Speculation, Journal of
Economic Theory 17, 79–98.
Engle, Robert F., and Debojyoti Sarkar, 2006, Premiums-Discounts and exchange-traded funds,
ETFs and Indexing 1, 35–53.
Greenwood, Robin, 2005, Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: Theory and evidence
on the dynamics of arbitrage. Journal of Financial Economics 75(3), 607–649.
Greenwood, Robin, and David Thesmar, 2011, Stock price fragility, Journal of Financial
Economics 102(3), 471–490.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2010, Limits of arbitrage: the state of the theory, Annual
Review of Financial Economics, 2, 251–275.
Grossman, Sanford Jay, 1989, An Analysis of the Implications for Stock and Futures Price
Volatility of Program Trading and Dynamic Hedging Strategies, NBER Working paper 2357.
Jones, Charles M., and Paul J. Seguin, 1997, Transaction costs and price volatility: evidence
from commission deregulation, The American Economic Review 87 (4), 728–737.
Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2012, Asset fire sales and
purchases and the international transmission of financial shocks, Journal of Finance 67(6),
2015–2050.
Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance 56(4),
1401–1440.
Lee, Charles M. C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the
closed-end fund puzzle, Journal of Finance 46(1), 75–109.
Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux, 2010, Regression discontinuity designs in economics,
Journal of Economic Literature 48(2), 281–355.
Lo, Andrew W., and Archie Craig MacKinlay,1988, Stock market prices do not follow random
walks: Evidence from a simple specification test, Review of Financial Studies 1(1), 41–66.
Lou, Dong, 2011, A flow–based explanation of returns predictability, Working paper, London
School of Economics.
Lou, Dong, and Christopher Polk, 2013, Comomentum: Inferring arbitrage activity from return
correlations, Working paper, London School of Economics.
McCrary, Justin, 2008, Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test, Journal of Econometrics 142(2), 698–714.
35

Madhavan, Ananth, 2011, Exchange-traded funds, market structure and the Flash Crash,
Working paper, BlackRock Inc.
Marshall, Ben R., Nhut H. Nguyen, and Nuttawat Visaltanachoti, 2010, ETF arbitrage, Working
paper, Massey University.
O’Hara, Maureen, and Mao Ye, 2011, Is market fragmentation harming market quality? Journal
of Financial Economics 100, 459–474.
Petajisto, Antti, 2013, Inefficiencies in the pricing of exchange-traded funds, Working paper,
NYU Stern School of Business.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1135–1151.
Ramaswamy, Srichander, 2011, Market structures and systemic risks of exchange-traded funds,
Working paper, Bank of International Settlements.
Richie, Nivine, Robert Daigler, and Kimberly C. Gleason, 2008, The limits to stock index
arbitrage: Examining S&P 500 futures and SPDRs, Journal of Futures Markets 28(12), 1182–
1205.
Roll, Richard, Eduardo Schwartz, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2007, Liquidity and the law of
one price: The case of the futures-cash basis, Journal of Finance 62 (5), 2201–2234.
Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance 41, 579–
590.
Stiglitz, Joseph E, 1989, Using tax policy to curb speculative short-term trading, Journal of
Financial Services Research, 3(2–3), 101–115.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1987, Informational externalities and welfare-reducing speculation, Journal of
Political Economy 95, 1123–1145.
Summers, Lawrence H . and Summers, Victoria P., 1989, When financial markets work too well:
a cautious case for a securities transactions tax, Journal of Financial Services Research, 3(2–3),
261–286.
Trainor, Jr., William J., 2010, Do leveraged ETFs increase volatility? Technology and Investment
1(3), 215–220.
Turnovsky, Stephen J., 1983, The Determination of Spot and Futures Prices with Storable
Commodities, Econometrica 51, 1363–1387.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2011, On the economic consequences of index-linked investing, in Gerald
Rosenfeld, Jay W. Lorsch, and Rakesh Khurana, eds.: Challenges to Business in the Twenty–
First Century (American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA).

36

Appendix. Variable Description
Variable
Daily Sample
ETF ownership

Description

Source
ThomsonReuters

Index (active)
mutual Fund
ownership

The sum of the ownership by all ETFs holding the stock, using the
most recent quarterly investment company reports for equity
ETFs.
The sum of the ownership by all index (active) mutual funds
holding the stock, using the most recent quarterly investment
company reports.

ThomsonReuters, CRSP
Mutual Fund,
and MFLinks
The logged market capitalization of the stock (in $ millions) at the CRSP
end of the day.
The inverse of the nominal share price at the end of the day.
CRSP
Absolute return scaled by dollar volume in $million.
CRSP
The quoted spread divided by the bid-ask midpoint.
CRSP
Standard deviation of second-by-second intraday returns.
TAQ
The ratio of 15-second log return variance divided by 3 times the TAQ
5-second log return variance minus 1.
Total share volume scaled by period-end shares outstanding, after CRSP
adjusting both volume and shares outstanding for splits and similar
events.
Stock-day level measure. Weighted average of the absolute TAQ,
percentage difference between the ETF Price and the NAV across Bloomberg,
the ETFs holding the stock (using the ETF price and NAV at 4:00 Compustat
pm). The weight is ETF ownership of the stock.
Stock-day level measure. Weighted average of the absolute Bloomberg,
percentage change in ETF shares outstanding across the ETFs Compustat
holding the stock. The weight is ETF ownership of the stock.
The total return of the stock between the close of t1 and the close CRSP
of t2.
Loan fee aggregated at the security level, 7-day average.
Markit

log(Mktcap)
1/Price
Amihud ratio
Bid-ask spread
Intraday volatility
Variance Ratio
Daily turnover
abs(ETF
mispricing)
abs(ETF flows)
Ret(t1, t2)
Lending Fee
Monthly Sample
ETF mispricing
volatility (within
the month)
ETF flow
volatility (within
the month)
log(Mktcap)
1/Price
Amihud
Bid-ask spread

Standard deviation of day-end ETF mispricing (using the ETF TAQ,
price and NAV at 4:00 pm).
Bloomberg,
Compustat
Standard deviation of the relative change in daily ETF shares Bloomberg,
outstanding during the month.
Compustat
The logged market capitalization of the stock (in $ millions) at the
end of the month.
The inverse of the nominal share price at the end of the month.
Absolute return scaled by dollar volume in $million, average.
The quoted spread divided by the bid-ask midpoint.

37

CRSP
CRSP
CRSP
CRSP

Table 1. ETF Ownership Statistics
The table presents descriptive statistics for ETF ownership of stocks. For each year, across months and stocks, we
average the number of ETFs, their assets under management (AUM), the weight of each stock in the ETF, and the
percentage of each stocked owned by ETFs. We present statistics for S&P 500 stocks (left columns) and for Russell
3000 stocks (right columns).

Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Average

#ETFs
2.45
13.45
15.47
15.95
21.40
24.74
25.80
36.04
50.61
53.19
52.04
52.77
48.59
30.43

S&P 500
Average
Average stock Average ownership
ETF AUM ($m) weight in ETF (%) of ETF in firm (%)
5627.93
0.64
0.27
2173.41
0.42
0.63
2798.87
0.45
0.88
3542.45
0.45
1.00
3451.84
0.47
1.06
3756.30
0.49
1.37
4337.34
0.51
1.68
4082.81
0.64
1.97
2980.85
0.69
2.69
2733.88
0.67
3.11
3261.34
0.68
3.16
3977.15
0.67
3.52
5026.84
0.68
3.78
3547.27
0.57
1.90

38

#ETFs
2.41
8.91
10.18
10.42
14.30
15.73
16.81
22.60
30.26
31.30
30.08
28.87
26.93
20.01

Russell 3000
Average
Average stock Average ownership
ETF AUM ($m) weight in ETF (%) of ETF in firm (%)
5129.91
0.53
0.30
1053.93
0.16
0.37
1185.35
0.14
0.71
1465.49
0.14
0.85
1702.26
0.14
1.11
2040.02
0.16
1.37
2447.86
0.17
1.85
2438.93
0.24
2.17
1789.13
0.28
2.81
1710.54
0.26
3.41
2311.04
0.27
3.60
2937.45
0.27
3.77
3434.84
0.26
3.82
2045.99
0.21
2.10

Table 2. Summary Statistics
The table presents summary statistics for the variables used in the study. Panels A and B show summary statistics
for the stock-day and for the stock-month samples, respectively. Panel C reports correlations for the daily sample,
while Panel D shows summary statistics for the return regressions (returns are in percentages). All panels distinguish
between the S&P 500 and the Russell 3000 samples.

Panel A: Daily Frequency Sample Statistics
S&P 500
Intraday volatility (%)
Intraday turnover (%)
ETF ownership
abs(ETF mispricing)
abs(ETF flows)
Variance Ratio
log(Mktcap ($m))
1/Price
Amihud
Bid-ask spread

N
1,480,640
1,480,640
1,480,640
1,480,640
1,480,640
1,440,053
1,480,640
1,480,640
1,480,640
1,480,640

Mean
0.022
0.970
0.019
0.002
0.008
0.179
9.270
0.041
0.0004
0.003

Std Dev
0.018
0.853
0.014
0.013
0.025
0.134
1.130
0.038
0.0009
0.006

Min
0.004
0.031
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
5.040
0.001
0.0000
0.000

Median
0.016
0.700
0.016
0.001
0.005
0.151
9.170
0.031
0.0002
0.001

Max
0.147
6.230
0.092
3.960
7.370
0.582
13.400
0.870
0.0315
0.098

N
7,712,862
7,712,862
7,712,862
7,712,862
7,712,862
7,586,475
7,712,862
7,712,862
7,712,862
7,712,862

Mean
0.025
0.874
0.021
0.009
0.013
0.110
7.000
0.081
0.020
0.004

Std Dev
0.020
0.875
0.018
0.055
0.080
0.109
1.540
0.117
0.055
0.006

Min
0.004
0.029
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.616
0.000
0.000
0.000

Median
0.019
0.596
0.016
0.001
0.006
0.076
6.760
0.050
0.003
0.002

Max
0.147
6.230
0.092
42.300
87.600
0.582
13.400
40.000
0.965
0.379

Mean
2.080
2.110
0.003
0.045

Std Dev
1.290
1.440
0.003
0.045

Min
0.612
0.050
0.000
0.001

Median
1.730
1.760
0.002
0.033

Max
10.800
9.360
0.021
0.433

Mean
2.610
2.320
0.003
0.062

Std Dev
1.490
1.730
0.003
0.055

Min
0.612
0.017
0.000
0.001

Median
2.240
1.880
0.003
0.047

Max
10.800
9.380
0.021
0.435

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility (%)
Intraday turnover (%)
ETF ownership
abs(ETF mispricing)
abs(ETF flows)
Variance Ratio
log(Mktcap ($m))
1/Price
Amihud
Bid-ask spread

Panel B: Monthly Frequency Sample Statistics
S&P 500
N
Daily stock volatility (%)
51,349
ETF ownership (%; average within the
51,349
month)
ETF mispricing volatility (within the month)
51,349
ETF flows volatility (within the month)
51,349
Russell 3000
N
Daily stock volatility (%)
311,079
ETF ownership (%; average within the
311,079
month)
ETF mispricing volatility (within the month)
311,079
ETF flows volatility (within the month)
311,079

39

Table 2. Summary Statistics (Cont.)
Panel C: Correlations for the Daily Sample
S&P 500
Intraday volatility Intraday turnover ETF ownership abs(ETF mispricing) abs(ETF flows) log(M ktcap) 1/Price Amihud

Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
ETF ownership
abs(ETF mispricing)
abs(ETF flows)
log(Mktcap)
1/Price
Amihud
Bid-ask spread

1.000
0.390
-0.011
0.046
0.026
-0.086
0.436
0.175
0.213

1.000
0.375
-0.006
0.023
-0.217
0.141
-0.076
-0.151

1.000
-0.071
-0.011
-0.067
-0.030
-0.192
-0.409

1.000
0.047
-0.022
0.013
0.031
0.048

1.000
0.008
-0.003
0.010
0.016

1.000
-0.391
-0.484
-0.167

1.000
0.393 1.000
0.199 0.403

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility Intraday turnover ETF ownership abs(ETF mispricing) abs(ETF flows) log(M ktcap) 1/Price Amihud

Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
ETF ownership
abs(ETF mispricing)
abs(ETF flows)
log(Mktcap)
1/Price
Amihud
Bid-ask spread

1.000
0.271
-0.070
-0.014
0.015
-0.273
0.440
0.271
0.279

1.000
0.180
-0.037
0.004
0.119
-0.044
-0.210
-0.177

1.000
-0.075
-0.016
0.006
-0.025
-0.157
-0.326

1.000
0.184
-0.068
0.003
0.011
0.082

1.000
-0.035
0.006
0.007
0.008

1.000
-0.393
-0.436
-0.256

1.000
0.419 1.000
0.312 0.478

Panel D: Summary Statistics for Return Regressions
S&P 500
Ret(t)
Ret(t+1,t+5)
Ret(t+1,t+10)
Ret(t+1,t+20)
net(ETF Flows)

N
1,415,085
1,415,085
1,415,085
1,415,085
1,415,085

Mean
0.056
0.206
0.384
0.742
0.001

Std Dev
2.115
4.518
6.130
8.618
0.010

Min
-9.459
-19.930
-23.891
-31.460
-0.060

Median
0.019
0.221
0.460
0.955
0.000

Max
10.403
21.345
25.242
33.696
0.063

N
6,954,903
6,954,903
6,954,903
6,954,903
6,954,903

Mean
0.060
0.178
0.351
0.688
0.001

Std Dev
2.478
5.240
7.052
9.958
0.014

Min
-9.459
-19.931
-23.895
-31.461
-0.060

Median
0.000
0.151
0.357
0.767
0.000

Max
10.405
21.348
25.259
33.698
0.063

Russell 3000
Ret(t)
Ret(t+1,t+5)
Ret(t+1,t+10)
Ret(t+1,t+20)
net(ETF Flows)

40

Table 3. ETF Ownership, Intraday Stock Volatility, and Turnover (Daily Sample)
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of intraday volatility and daily turnover on ETF ownership and
controls. In Columns (1) to (4), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks, and in Columns (5) to (8) the sample
consists of Russell 3000 stocks. The frequency of the observations is daily. Intraday stock volatility is computed
using second-by-second data from the TAQ database, and daily turnover is computed as daily volume from CRSP
divided by shares outstanding. Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at
the stock level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

Sample:
Dependent variable:
ETF ownership (t-1)

log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

S&P
Intraday volatility
(1)
(2)
0.333*** 0.243***
(9.613) (7.461)
0.003***
(8.781)
0.219***
(20.998)
-0.243
(-0.554)
-0.124
(-1.496)
No
Yes

0.004*** -0.171*** -0.194***
(5.356)
(-10.524) (-5.552)
0.195*** 2.826*** 1.202**
(12.929)
(6.106) (2.263)
-123.183***
-0.333 -158.086***
(-1.038)
(-7.861) (-7.548)
-0.119* -9.143*** -7.636***
(-1.872)
(-4.773) (-5.516)
Yes
Yes

1,472,346 1,472,346
0.425

500
Intraday turnover
(3)
(4)
18.869***11.631***
(7.976) (8.773)

0.466

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,472,346 1,472,346
0.282

0.464

41

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.009 0.069*** 7.624*** 4.026***
(-1.360) (8.883)
(14.875) (10.027)
-0.001*** -0.003*** 0.034*** 0.077***
(-12.372) (-10.781)
(6.106) (9.068)
0.059*** 0.032*** 0.534*** -0.044
(26.912) (12.631)
(12.861) (-1.048)
0.015*** 0.020*** -2.551*** -1.141***
(6.206) (8.656)
(-26.777) (-15.669)
-0.033
-0.006 -12.764***-10.096***
(-1.211) (-0.264) (-12.396) (-13.161)
No
Yes

Yes
Yes

7,687,652 7,687,652
0.367

0.451

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

7,687,652 7,687,652
0.123

0.381

Table 4. ETF Ownership and Daily Stock Volatility (Monthly Sample)
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of daily volatility on ETF ownership, ownership by mutual funds,
and controls. In Columns (1) to (3), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks, and in Columns (4) to (6), the sample
consists of Russell 3000 stocks. The frequency of the observations is monthly. Daily stock volatility is computed
using daily returns within a month. Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered
at the date and stock levels. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Dependent variable:
Sample:

Daily stock volatility (computed within the month)
S&P 500
Russell 3000
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
ETF ownership (average within the month) 0.146*** 0.142*** 0.137*** 0.044*** 0.036*** 0.033***
(8.039) (7.939) (7.675)
(7.542) (6.190) (5.810)
log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)
Mutual fund ownership
Index mutual fund ownership
Active mutual fund ownership

-0.164*** -0.177*** -0.181***
(-2.988) (-3.282) (-3.381)
6.464*** 6.345*** 6.286***
(7.153) (7.141) (7.083)
85.958*** 94.728*** 93.795***
(4.170) (4.521) (4.539)
28.025*** 28.522*** 29.511***
(2.904) (2.965) (3.098)
0.010***
(3.557)
0.027***
(3.063)
0.008***
(2.699)

-0.244***
(-11.448)
2.866***
(11.872)
0.879***
(2.885)
4.092
(1.154)

-0.270***
(-12.480)
2.917***
(12.125)
1.012***
(3.322)
6.442*
(1.833)
0.009***
(8.179)

-0.266***
(-12.294)
2.916***
(12.149)
0.979***
(3.220)
6.599*
(1.883)

0.021***
(6.018)
0.008***
(6.262)

Stock fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

49,947

49,947

49,947

292,699

292,699

292,699

0.630

0.631

0.631

0.560

0.561

0.561

Observations
Adjusted R

2

42

Table 5. ETF Ownership and Price Efficiency: Variance Ratios
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of Variance Ratios on ETF ownership and controls. In Columns
(1) and (2), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks, and in Columns (3) and (4) the sample consists of Russell 3000
stocks. The frequency of the observations is daily. The variance ratio is computed as the absolute value of the ratio
of the variance of fifteen-second log returns on day t and 3 times the variance of five-second log returns on day t,
minus 1 using data from the TAQ database. Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix. Standard errors are
clustered at the stock level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Dependent variable:
Sample:
ETF ownership (average within the month)

log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

Variance Ratio
S&P 500
Russell 3000
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
1.620*** 1.123***
0.122*** 0.277***
(8.578)
(6.888)
(2.938)
(8.824)
0.049***
(20.862)
1.234***
(16.271)
-10.250***
(-4.320)
-1.466***
(-4.063)

0.016***
0.026*** 0.012***
(3.435)
(33.885) (13.377)
0.531***
0.064*** 0.016***
(6.538)
(4.767)
(3.291)
-11.381***
-0.007
-0.009
(-6.969)
(-0.699) (-1.622)
-1.554*** -0.742*** -0.856***
(-5.951)
(-5.855) (-10.776)

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

1,422,282

1,422,282

0.245

0.352

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

7,657,065 7,657,065
0.149

0.284

Table 6. Price Reversals
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of one- and multi-day returns on ETF flows and controls. In
Columns (1) to (4), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks, and in Columns (5) to (8), the sample consists of Russell
3000 stocks. The frequency of the observations is daily. Returns are in percent. Variable descriptions are provided in
the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the stock level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Sample:
Dependent variable:
ETF flows (t)

log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

S&P 500
Ret(t)
Ret(t+1,t+5) Ret(t+1,t+10) Ret(t+1,t+20)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
12.418*** -2.749***
-4.464***
-5.643***
(19.318)
(-4.681)
(-5.509)
(-5.291)

Russell 3000
Ret(t)
Ret(t+1,t+5) Ret(t+1,t+10) Ret(t+1,t+20)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
5.138*** -1.224***
-0.231
-1.882***
(41.902)
(-6.697)
(-0.945)
(-5.846)

0.013***
(6.179)
-0.895***
(-9.405)
28.849***
(7.452)
2.106***
(3.577)

-0.034***
(-4.489)
1.039***
(2.840)
-19.909
(-1.630)
2.357
(1.039)

-0.067***
(-4.344)
2.070***
(2.802)
-39.320
(-1.553)
5.982
(1.338)

-0.121***
(-3.978)
5.625***
(3.954)
-37.478
(-0.825)
12.265
(1.450)

0.013***
(12.430)
-0.546***
(-19.299)
0.096***
(2.679)
2.455***
(6.926)

0.004
(1.569)
-0.403***
(-6.926)
-1.350***
(-12.341)
-1.359
(-1.185)

0.012**
(2.131)
-0.686***
(-6.296)
-2.539***
(-12.227)
-0.520
(-0.246)

0.025**
(2.328)
-0.627***
(-2.937)
-4.308***
(-10.718)
0.006
(0.001)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,427,667

1,427,667

1,427,667

1,427,667

7,084,196

7,084,196

7,084,196

7,084,196

0.326

0.300

0.279

0.279

0.279

0.249

0.223

0.221

44

Table 7. Regression Discontinuity Design around the Russell 1000/Russell 2000 cutoff
The table reports estimates from a design exploiting the discontinuity in ETF ownership around the cutoff between
the Russell 1000 and Russell 2000 indexes. The frequency of the data is monthly. Panel A has the regressions of
ETF ownership on a dummy for inclusion in the Russell 2000 for stocks in the Russell 1000 before index
reconstitution (Columns (1), (3), (5) and (7)) and regressions of ETF ownership on a dummy for inclusion in the
Russell 1000 for stocks in the Russell 2000 before index reconstitution (Columns (2), (4), (6) and (8)). Stocks are
ranked in terms of market capitalization and different ranges of this rank around the cutoff are used for inclusion in
the sample: 50 stocks on each side (Columns (1) and (2)), 100 stocks on each side (Columns (3) and (4)), 150 stocks
on each side (Columns (5) and (6)), and 200 stocks on each side (Columns (7) and (8)). The same stocks enter the
sample from June after index reconstitution to May of the next year, except if delistings occur. Panel B regresses
daily stock volatility (computed within a month) on instrumented ETF ownership. The instruments are either a
dummy for the inclusion in the Russell 2000 for stocks in the Russell 1000 before reconstitution (Columns (1), (3),
(5) and (7)) or a dummy for the inclusion in the Russell 1000 for stocks in the Russell 2000 before reconstitution
(Columns (2), (4), (6) and (8)). The same bandwidths around the cutoff are considered to restrict the sample as in
Panel A. The regressions in this panel, as well as in Panel A, include a linear specification of the ranking variable
(not reported). Panel C replicates the analysis in Panel B including instead a quadratic specification of the ranking
variable (not reported). The first stage is modified accordingly. Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix.
Standard errors are clustered at the date level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: First Stage Regressions
Dependent variable:
Sample:

In Russell 2000
In Russell 1000

ETF Ownership

± 50 stocks

± 100 stocks

± 150 stocks

± 200 stocks

around cuttoff
R1000
R2000
(1)
(2)
0.294***
(4.466)
-0.638***
(-8.585)

around cuttoff
R1000
R2000
(3)
(4)
0.508***
(9.553)
-0.402***
(-7.660)

around cuttoff
R1000
R2000
(5)
(6)
0.493***
(10.558)
-0.488***
(-9.268)

around cuttoff
R1000
R2000
(7)
(8)
0.475***
(9.898)
-0.457***
(-9.488)

log(Mktcap (t-1))

-0.748*** -0.526*** -0.666*** -0.373*** -0.617*** -0.276***
(-7.047) (-7.922)
(-8.702) (-7.667)
(-8.985) (-5.689)
1/Price (t-1)
-1.941*** -1.744*** -1.749*** -2.208*** -1.962*** -1.976***
(-8.005) (-4.890)
(-6.286) (-6.948)
(-7.516) (-7.350)
Amihud (t-1)
-0.764 -27.490*** -3.725** -3.215*** -4.982*** -4.527***
(-0.791) (-8.000)
(-2.377) (-4.001)
(-2.846) (-3.949)
Bid-ask spread (t-1) -13.560*** 10.834*** -10.248*** 2.723
-10.777*** -3.933
(-3.480) (4.733)
(-3.167) (1.210)
(-3.419) (-1.525)

-0.525***
(-9.061)
-1.589***
(-6.108)
-8.048***
(-3.581)
-9.636***
(-3.514)

-0.282***
(-6.472)
-1.854***
(-8.321)
-6.204***
(-4.190)
-4.581*
(-1.708)

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

3,745

4,854

7,328

9,947

11,191

15,090

15,347

19,807

0.457

0.673

0.467

0.628

0.481

0.608

0.481

0.594

Adjusted R

2

45

Table 7. Regression Discontinuity Design around the Russell 1000/Russell 2000 cutoff
(Cont.)
Panel B: Second Stage Regressions, First Degree Polynomial
Polynomial:
Dependent variable:
Sample:

Linear specification
Daily stock volatility (computed within the month)

± 100 stocks

± 150 stocks

± 200 stocks

around cuttoff
Instrument:
In R2000 In R1000
(1)
(2)
ETF ownership (instrumented)
1.993 0.218***
(1.636) (2.680)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(3)
(4)
0.647*** 0.355***
(2.925) (2.698)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(5)
(6)
0.824*** 0.215**
(4.083) (2.604)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(7)
(8)
0.726*** 0.192***
(4.355) (2.945)

log(Mktcap (t-1))

-0.844*** 0.157
(-4.628) (0.142)
5.177*** -23.376***
(8.478) (-6.311)
-3.105* -0.002***
(-1.918) (-3.088)
-1.999 -0.001**
(-0.254) (-2.059)

-0.823*** -1.096
(-4.882) (-1.074)
6.318*** -22.458***
(10.470) (-4.695)
-3.413** -0.002***
(-2.096) (-4.491)
2.980
-0.000
(0.447) (-0.340)

-0.910*** -0.879
(-6.270) (-0.914)
5.542*** -25.322***
(12.552) (-5.754)
-1.248 -0.002***
(-0.706) (-6.463)
3.638
0.000
(0.718) (0.503)

1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

± 50 stocks

-0.016
0.417
(-0.019) (0.099)
7.321*** -24.091***
(3.125) (-6.760)
-4.387** -0.003**
(-1.987) (-2.529)
16.191
0.000
(0.796) (0.074)

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

3,745

4,854

7,328

9,947

11,191

15,090

15,347

19,807

46

Table 7. Regression Discontinuity Design around the Russell 1000/Russell 2000 cutoff
(Cont.)
Panel C: Second Stage Regressions, Second Degree Polynomial
Polynomial:
Dependent variable:
Sample:
Instrument:
ETF ownership

Quadratic specification
Daily stock volatility (computed within the month)

± 50 stocks

± 100 stocks

± 150 stocks

± 200 stocks

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(1)
(2)
1.521
0.308***
(1.032)
(3.134)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(3)
(4)
0.711
0.248**
(1.089)
(2.577)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(5)
(6)
0.644*** 0.297***
(3.258)
(3.577)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(7)
(8)
0.688*** 0.220***
(3.858)
(2.874)

log(Mktcap (t-1))

-0.315 -1.184*** -0.801* -1.378*** -0.940*** -1.242*** -0.937*** -1.372***
(-0.299) (-7.975)
(-1.921) (-11.452) (-5.431) (-10.485) (-5.998) (-12.269)
1/Price (t-1)
6.500** 4.632*** 5.295*** 4.049*** 5.890*** 4.901*** 5.427*** 4.412***
(2.148)
(7.803)
(4.191)
(8.160)
(9.790) (10.811)
(12.100) (11.173)
Amihud (t-1)
-4.532**
3.108
-2.944
-0.142
-4.163*** -0.642
-1.459
-0.660
(-2.273) (0.724)
(-1.280) (-0.135)
(-2.701) (-0.617)
(-0.793) (-0.649)
Bid-ask spread (t-1) 16.171 -24.640*** -1.546 -23.222***
1.363 -21.857***
4.224 -25.181***
(0.611) (-6.821)
(-0.155) (-6.383)
(0.213) (-4.464)
(0.821) (-5.737)
Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

3,745

4,854

7,328

9,947

11,191

15,090

15,347

19,807

47

Table 8. Stock Volatility, ETF Ownership, and Arbitrage
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of intraday volatility and daily turnover on ETF ownership,
variables that proxy for ETF arbitrage, and controls. In Columns (1) to (4), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks,
and in Columns (5) to (8), the sample consists of Russell 3000 stocks. The frequency of the observations is daily.
Intraday stock volatility is computed using second-by-second data from the TAQ database, and daily turnover is
computed as daily volume from CRSP divided by shares outstanding. In Panel A, the variable of interest is the
interaction of lagged absolute ETF mispricing and ETF ownership. In Panel B, the variable of interest is the
interaction of lagged absolute ETF fund flows and ETF ownership. Variable descriptions are provided in the
Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the stock level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Effect of ETF Mispricing on Volatility and Turnover
Sample:
Dependent variable:

S&P 500
Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
ETF ownership (t-1)
0.186*** 0.090*** 10.371*** 2.811*** 0.068*** 0.052*** 4.005*** 0.334**
(5.814)
(5.691)
(8.038)
(4.876)
(8.633) (10.844)
(9.949)
(2.263)
× abs(ETF mispricing (t-1))42.035*** 18.879*** 896.893***321.296*** -0.113
-0.085
-2.660
-1.574
(9.876)
(8.530)
(6.860)
(6.300)
(-0.417) (-0.678)
(-0.350) (-0.543)
abs(ETF mispricing (t-1))
log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)
Dependent variable (t-1)
× ETF ownership (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

0.006***
0.000
0.207**
0.076
(2.749)
(0.139)
(2.459)
(1.533)
0.004*** 0.002*** -0.198*** -0.073***
(5.351)
(5.412)
(-5.658) (-5.586)
0.193*** 0.090***
1.145** 0.416**
(12.832) (10.536)
(2.148)
(2.053)
-0.306
-0.145 -122.456***-47.584***
(-0.960) (-0.952)
(-7.536) (-7.654)
-0.096
-0.033
-7.187*** -2.762***
(-1.595) (-1.195)
(-5.328) (-5.481)
0.531***
0.578***
(41.455)
(69.477)
-0.123
0.889***
(-0.216)
(3.397)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,471,139 1,455,418
0.470

0.614

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,471,139 1,455,418
0.465

48

0.659

-0.005
(-0.943)
-0.003***
(-11.660)
0.032***
(12.693)
0.020***
(8.404)
0.004
(0.187)

Yes
Yes

-0.002
-0.085
-0.031
(-0.895)
(-0.811) (-0.727)
-0.001*** 0.071*** 0.027***
(-12.542)
(8.253)
(7.951)
0.018***
-0.062 -0.054***
(19.253)
(-1.454) (-2.679)
0.009*** -1.153*** -0.497***
(8.336)
(-15.860) (-16.466)
-0.007
-9.967*** -4.319***
(-0.680)
(-13.096) (-13.772)
0.519***
0.558***
(116.564)
(170.937)
-0.734***
1.132***
(-4.635)
(11.621)
Yes
Yes

7,679,072 7,530,046
0.452

0.591

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

7,679,072 7,530,046
0.381

0.597

Table 8. Stock Volatility, ETF Ownership, and Arbitrage (Cont.)
Panel B: Effects of Fund Flows on Volatility and Turnover
Sample:
Dependent variable:
ETF ownership (t-1)
× abs(ETF flows (t-1))

abs(ETF flows (t-1))
log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

S&P 500
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.229*** 0.102*** 10.305*** 2.908***
(7.003)
(6.392)
(7.996)
(4.875)
3.197*** 1.321*** 232.101*** 75.085***
(5.861)
(5.371)
(5.988)
(5.823)

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.068*** 0.052*** 3.328***
0.146
(8.846) (11.013)
(8.269)
(0.991)
0.141*
0.066
70.306*** 23.407***
(1.688)
(1.609)
(8.298)
(7.954)

-0.009***
(-4.521)
0.004***
(5.240)
0.194***
(12.769)
-0.302
(-0.951)
-0.112*
(-1.792)

-0.000*
(-1.893)
-0.003***
(-11.581)
0.032***
(12.692)
0.020***
(8.458)
0.003
(0.119)

Dependent variable (t-1)

(41.375)
0.171
(0.313)

× ETF ownership (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

-0.003***
-0.090
-0.041
(-3.428)
(-1.491) (-1.555)
0.002*** -0.198*** -0.073***
(5.336)
(-5.709) (-5.634)
0.089***
1.120** 0.410**
(10.525)
(2.130)
(2.044)
-0.138 -121.598***-47.386***
(-0.908)
(-7.525) (-7.633)
-0.037
-7.565*** -2.890***
(-1.322)
(-5.532) (-5.644)
0.529***
0.579***

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,471,139 1,455,418
0.467

0.613

(69.764)
0.836***
(3.264)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,471,139 1,455,418
0.466

49

0.659

-0.000* -0.129*** -0.043***
(-1.669)
(-3.466) (-3.281)
-0.001*** 0.073*** 0.027***
(-12.448)
(8.520)
(8.178)
0.018***
-0.063 -0.054***
(19.244)
(-1.490) (-2.717)
0.009*** -1.137*** -0.491***
(8.386)
(-15.699) (-16.310)
-0.008
-9.946*** -4.311***
(-0.756)
(-13.088) (-13.757)
0.519***
0.558***
(116.566)
-0.742***
(-4.678)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

7,679,072 7,530,046
0.452

0.591

(171.125)
1.101***
(11.279)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

7,679,072 7,530,046
0.381

0.597

Table 9. Evidence from Limits-to-Arbitrage
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of intraday volatility and daily turnover on ETF ownership,
variables that proxy for ETF arbitrage, and controls. In Columns (1) to (4), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks,
and in Columns (5) to (8), the sample consists of Russell 3000 stocks. The frequency of the observations is daily.
Intraday stock volatility is computed using second-by-second data from the TAQ database, and daily turnover is
computed as daily volume from CRSP divided by shares outstanding. In Panels A and C, the variable of interest is
the interaction of lagged absolute ETF mispricing and ETF ownership. In Panels B and D, the variable of interest is
the interaction of lagged absolute ETF fund flows and ETF ownership. The sample is split by the lagged bid-ask
spread (Panels A and B) or the lagged stock lending fee (Panels C and D). Variable descriptions are provided in the
Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the stock level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Mispricing and Bid-Ask Spread
Sample:
Dependent variable:
Bid-ask spread (t-1):

S&P 500
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
ETF ownership (t-1)
0.142*** 0.168*** 10.017*** 8.286***
(4.833)
(4.169)
(7.050)
(5.462)
× abs(ETF mispricing (t-1)) 50.828*** 17.244*** 750.869***764.789***
(12.241) (5.869)
(5.204)
(5.591)

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.094*** 0.066*** 3.564*** 4.195***
(8.944)
(7.257)
(6.480)
(9.764)
0.736*** -0.197 21.775** -11.773*
(3.767) (-0.955) (2.227) (-1.956)

abs(ETF mispricing (t-1))

-0.016***
(-4.880)
0.000*
(1.780)
0.062***
(10.606)
0.048***
(7.150)
-0.685***
(-8.990)

-0.003
(-0.753)
-0.005***
(-15.029)
0.026***
(10.371)
0.014***
(6.353)
0.081***
(3.718)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

0.003
(1.388)
0.005***
(4.044)
0.082***
(3.555)
-0.467
(-0.866)
-0.641***
(-5.013)

0.001
0.204**
-0.266
(0.189)
(2.149) (-1.487)
0.002** -0.186*** -0.295***
(2.541)
(-5.012) (-7.028)
0.190*** -0.985
0.363
(12.505) (-1.327) (0.679)
-0.222 -213.891***-98.507***
(-0.524) (-7.192) (-6.234)
0.119** -14.885*** -3.711**
(2.500)
(-5.906) (-2.471)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

735,570

735,569

735,570

735,569

0.488

0.522

0.544

0.436

50

-0.429*** -0.007
(-3.018) (-0.118)
-0.037*** 0.083***
(-2.982) (8.354)
-1.590*** 0.028
(-6.486) (0.804)
-3.218*** -0.937***
(-10.700) (-16.194)
-10.460*** -6.150***
(-4.387) (-9.479)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

3,839,536 3,839,536 3,839,536 3,839,536
0.407

0.474

0.401

0.362

Table 9. Evidence from Limits to Arbitrage (Cont.)
Panel B: Fund Flows and Bid-Ask Spread
Sample:
Dependent variable:
Bid-ask spread (t-1):
ETF ownership (t-1)
× abs(ETF flows (t))

abs(ETF flows (t))
log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

S&P 500
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.205*** 0.169*** 9.918*** 7.760***
(6.813)
(4.262)
(6.834)
(5.344)
4.231*** 2.648*** 275.046***197.370***
(7.632)
(4.580)
(9.243)
(4.609)

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.099*** 0.064*** 3.023*** 3.562***
(9.495)
(7.130)
(5.581)
(8.188)
-0.096
0.239** 74.942*** 55.122***
(-0.979) (2.456) (12.255) (6.068)

-0.010***
(-4.051)
0.005***
(3.997)
0.086***
(3.633)
-0.484
(-0.868)
-0.683***
(-5.086)

0.000*
(1.691)
0.001*
(1.898)
0.062***
(10.610)
0.047***
(7.068)
-0.695***
(-9.083)

-0.001***
(-2.949)
-0.005***
(-14.978)
0.026***
(10.370)
0.014***
(6.410)
0.080***
(3.689)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.004**
-0.095
-0.037
(-2.004) (-1.606) (-0.404)
0.002** -0.186*** -0.294***
(2.547)
(-5.094) (-7.066)
0.190*** -0.949
0.338
(12.430) (-1.284) (0.637)
-0.204 -213.397***-97.238***
(-0.481) (-7.212) (-6.185)
0.116** -15.357*** -3.831**
(2.440)
(-5.970) (-2.569)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

735,568

735,571

735,568

735,571

0.482

0.522

0.545

0.438

51

0.018 -0.133***
(1.536) (-9.671)
-0.034*** 0.084***
(-2.725) (8.478)
-1.590*** 0.026
(-6.478) (0.764)
-3.147*** -0.928***
(-10.486) (-16.103)
-10.444*** -6.132***
(-4.357) (-9.464)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

3,839,536 3,839,536 3,839,536 3,839,536
0.407

0.474

0.401

0.362

Table 9. Evidence from Limits to Arbitrage (Cont.)
Panel C: Mispricing and Lending Fees
Sample:
Dependent variable:
Rebate rate:

S&P 500
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
ETF ownership (t-1)
0.085***
0.026*
6.587***
5.601***
(5.327)
(1.854)
(5.845)
(5.076)
× abs(ETF mispricing (t-1)) 21.480*** 18.856*** 1,467.626*** 783.211***
(5.072)
(4.503)
(5.320)
(3.807)

abs(ETF mispricing (t-1))
log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.037*** 0.044*** 2.813*** 1.969***
(8.026)
(7.162)
(6.827)
(4.164)
2.221*** -0.536*** 324.516*** -2.942
(2.606)
(-2.767)
(3.950)
(-0.557)

-0.157* -0.224*** -16.278***
-8.800**
-0.035*
(-1.657)
(-2.952)
(-2.904)
(-2.084)
(-1.772)
0.000
0.001
-0.464***
-0.566*** -0.004***
(0.525)
(1.214)
(-11.998)
(-10.087)
(-14.197)
0.187*** 0.204***
0.038
1.338
0.035***
(13.798) (15.204)
(0.058)
(1.254)
(12.870)
-0.491
-0.662
-273.758*** -407.072*** -0.010***
(-0.693)
(-0.848)
(-5.798)
(-6.412)
(-3.445)
1.777*** 2.183***
47.114***
44.975*** 1.026***
(3.117)
(4.903)
(4.595)
(3.088)
(11.298)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

366,618

366,618

366,618

366,618

0.518

0.582

0.504

0.524

52

Yes
Yes

0.002***
(3.862)
-0.006***
(-16.838)
0.015***
(5.077)
-0.018***
(-5.086)
1.372***
(13.376)

-7.344***
(-3.835)
-0.007
(-0.391)
-0.416***
(-4.354)
-1.437***
(-10.874)
-13.974***
(-6.540)

0.019
(1.079)
0.033*
(1.772)
-0.064
(-1.058)
-1.435***
(-10.162)
-15.849***
(-5.944)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

2,088,566 2,088,563
0.477

0.520

2,088,566 2,088,563
0.458

0.428

Table 9. Evidence from Limits to Arbitrage (Cont.)
Panel D: Fund Flows and Lending Fees
Sample:
Dependent variable:
Rebate rate:
ETF ownership (t-1)
× abs(ETF flows (t))

abs(ETF flows (t))
log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Stock fixed effects
Day fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

S&P 500
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.107*** 0.047***
7.899***
6.312***
(6.442)
(3.128)
(7.013)
(5.739)
0.953
0.263
98.639**
48.965
(1.639)
(0.753)
(2.485)
(1.234)
0.039**
(2.560)
0.000
(0.404)
0.187***
(13.694)
-0.474
(-0.665)
1.764***
(3.068)

0.046***
(4.979)
0.001
(1.257)
0.204***
(15.195)
-0.627
(-0.795)
2.154***
(4.840)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

366,618

366,618

366,618

366,618

0.518

0.582

0.503

0.524

Russell 3000
Intraday volatility
Intraday turnover
Low
High
Low
High
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.034*** 0.040*** 2.321*** 1.200**
(7.370)
(6.541)
(6.005)
(2.510)
0.684*** 0.375*** 100.294*** 83.037***
(7.212)
(4.292)
(12.066)
(6.767)

1.079
2.848***
-0.002
(0.977)
(2.781)
(-0.612)
-0.467***
-0.564*** -0.004***
(-12.144)
(-10.088)
(-14.128)
0.015
1.323
0.035***
(0.023)
(1.248)
(12.857)
-272.455*** -404.583*** -0.010***
(-5.891)
(-6.440)
(-3.409)
46.079***
42.960*** 1.026***
(4.403)
(2.967)
(11.271)

53

Yes
Yes

-0.001***
(-3.837)
-0.006***
(-16.803)
0.015***
(5.076)
-0.018***
(-5.074)
1.374***
(13.377)

-0.856***
(-3.278)
-0.005
(-0.305)
-0.411***
(-4.336)
-1.430***
(-10.902)
-14.022***
(-6.622)

-0.250***
(-7.415)
0.036*
(1.948)
-0.064
(-1.059)
-1.433***
(-10.234)
-15.321***
(-5.800)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

2,088,566 2,088,563
0.477

0.520

2,088,566 2,088,563
0.459

0.429

Appendix Table A1. Regression in First Differences
The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of changes in volatility on changes in ETF ownership. In Column
(1), the sample consists of S&P 500 stocks, and in Column (2), the sample consists of Russell 3000 stocks. The
frequency of the observations is monthly. Daily stock volatility is computed using daily returns within a month. The
changes are computed month on month. Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix. Standard errors are
clustered at the date and stock levels. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Dependent variable:
Sample:

Change in volatility
S&P 500
Russell 3000
(1)
(2)
0.055**
0.060***
(2.227)
(6.509)

Change in ETF ownership

log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

Month fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R

2

54

-0.022***
(-6.629)
-0.147
(-1.345)
-37.318***
(-3.369)
-9.046***
(-3.823)

-0.013***
(-15.439)
-0.014
(-0.525)
-0.656***
(-9.297)
-4.648***
(-4.987)

Yes

Yes

48,466

293,581

0.278

0.173

Appendix Table A2. Regression Discontinuity Design with Mutual Fund Controls
(Second Stage)
The table reports estimates from a design exploiting the discontinuity in ETF ownership around the cutoff between
the Russell 1000 and Russell 2000 indexes, controlling for ownership by active and index funds. The frequency of
the data is monthly. The table has the second stage regressions of stock volatility on ETF ownership. ETF ownership
is instrumented using a dummy for inclusion in the Russell 2000 for stocks in the Russell 1000 before index
reconstitution (Columns (1), (3), (5) and (7)) and regressions of ETF ownership on a dummy for inclusion in the
Russell 1000 for stocks in the Russell 2000 before index reconstitution (Columns (2), (4), (6) and (8)). Stocks are
ranked in terms of market capitalization and different ranges of this rank are used for inclusion in the sample: 50
stocks on each side (Columns (1) and (2)), 100 stocks on each side (Columns (3) and (4)), 150 stocks on each side
(Columns (5) and (6)), and 200 stocks on each side (Columns (7) and (8)). The same stocks enter the sample from
June after index reconstitution to May of the next year, except if delistings occur. The regressions include a linear
specification of the ranking variable (not reported). Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix. Standard
errors are clustered at the date level. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Polynomial:
Dependent variable:
Sample:
Instrument:
ETF ownership (instrumented)

log(Mktcap (t-1))
1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)
Index mutual fund ownership
Active mutual fund ownership

Linear specification
Daily stock volatility (computed within the month)

± 50 stocks

± 100 stocks

± 150 stocks

± 200 stocks

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(1)
(2)
2.173
0.307***
(1.459)
(3.489)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(3)
(4)
0.676*** 0.486***
(3.026)
(3.657)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(5)
(6)
0.868*** 0.307***
(3.925)
(3.935)

around cuttoff
In R2000 In R1000
(7)
(8)
0.776*** 0.255***
(4.063)
(3.852)

-0.008
(-0.009)
7.763***
(2.712)
-4.081*
(-1.806)
20.131
(0.867)
-15.150
(-1.153)
4.006*
(1.769)

-1.166*** -0.843*** -1.332*** -0.829*** -1.266*** -0.917*** -1.378***
(-8.582)
(-4.517) (-10.685)
(-4.737) (-10.619)
(-5.992) (-12.260)
4.453*** 5.306*** 4.608*** 6.494*** 5.114*** 5.698*** 4.647***
(7.840)
(8.428)
(9.286)
(10.096) (12.058)
(12.024) (13.073)
14.874***
-2.500
1.766
-3.473**
0.819
-0.790
1.664
(3.628)
(-1.636) (1.636)
(-2.326) (0.796)
(-0.481) (1.620)
-24.448***
-0.736 -22.276***
2.938 -20.396***
3.157 -22.142***
(-6.822)
(-0.097) (-5.596)
(0.446) (-3.966)
(0.616) (-4.718)
0.784
-1.448
-1.790
-5.655** -0.577
-5.799**
0.064
(0.517)
(-0.548) (-1.014)
(-2.013) (-0.457)
(-2.352) (0.053)
2.469*** 1.254*** 1.977*** 1.338*** 1.975*** 1.174*** 2.179***
(7.511)
(2.821)
(7.103)
(4.186)
(8.703)
(4.910) (10.058)

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

3,725

4,838

7,292

9,907

11,137

15,017

15,281

19,714

55

Appendix Table A3. Regression Discontinuity Design for Variance Ratios (Second Stage)
The table reports estimates from a design exploiting the discontinuity in ETF ownership around the cutoff between
the Russell 1000 and Russell 2000 indexes. The frequency of the data is monthly. The table has the second stage
regressions of stock-level Variance Ratio on ETF ownership. The variance ratio is computed as the absolute value of
the ratio of the variance of fifteen-second log returns on day t and 3 times the variance of five-second log returns on
day t minus 1 using data from the TAQ database, then it is averaged within a month. ETF ownership is instrumented
using a dummy for inclusion in the Russell 2000 for stocks in the Russell 1000 before index reconstitution. Stocks
are ranked in terms of market capitalization and different ranges of this rank are used for inclusion in the sample: 50
stocks on each side (Column (1)), 100 stocks on each side (Column (2)), 150 stocks on each side (Column (3)), and
200 stocks on each side (Column (4)). The same stocks enter the sample from June after index reconstitution to May
of the next year, except if delistings occur. The regressions include a linear specification of the ranking variable (not
reported). Variable descriptions are provided in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the date level. tstatistics are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Polynomial:
Dependent variable:
Sample:

Linear specification
Intraday Variance Ratio (averaged within the month)
± 50 stocks
± 100 stocks
± 150 stocks
± 200 stocks
around cuttoff around cuttoff around cuttoff around cuttoff
Instrument:
In R2000
In R2000
In R2000
In R2000
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
ETF ownership (instrumented)
0.075*
0.025**
0.027***
0.021***
(1.743)
(2.493)
(3.657)
(3.344)
log(Mktcap (t-1))

0.056*
(1.844)
0.456***
(5.541)
-0.701***
(-6.120)
-0.550
(-0.834)

0.025***
(3.374)
0.437***
(9.978)
-0.917***
(-6.249)
-1.503***
(-4.042)

0.025***
(4.606)
0.486***
(11.227)
-0.996***
(-6.745)
-1.613***
(-4.556)

0.016***
(3.082)
0.456***
(12.329)
-0.996***
(-6.775)
-1.418***
(-5.230)

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

3,745

7,328

11,191

15,347

1/Price (t-1)
Amihud (t-1)
Bid-ask spread (t-1)

56

Figure 1: Illustration of the Propagation of Non-fundamental Shocks Via Arbitrage

ETF
ETF

NAV

NAV

Fundamental Value

Fundamental Value

Figure 1a. Initial equilibrium

ETF

Figure 1b. Non-fundamental shock to ETF

NAV
ETF
Fundamental Value

Figure 1c. Initial outcome of arbitrage:
the non-fundamental shock is propagated
to the NAV, and the ETF price starts
reverting to the fundamental value.

NAV
Fundamental Value

Figure 1d. Re-establishment of equilibrium:
after some time, both the ETF price and the
NAV revert to the fundamental value.

57

Figure 2: Illustration of the Propagation of a Fundamental Shock with Price Discovery
Occurring in the ETF Market

New Fundamental Value

ETF

NAV

ETF

NAV

Fundamental Value

Figure 2a. Initial equilibrium

ETF

Figure 2b. Shock to fundamental value

New Fundamental Value

ETF

NAV

New Fundamental

NAV

Figure 2c. Price discovery takes place in
the ETF market. The ETF price moves to
the new fundamental value.

Figure 2d. After a delay, the NAV
catches up with the new fundamental.

58

