                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHAT IS DRIVING THE ‘AFRICAN GROWTH MIRACLE’?

                                      Margaret S. McMillan
                                       Kenneth Harttgen

                                       Working Paper 20077
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20077


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2014




This is a revised version of a paper that was prepared as a background paper for the African Economic
Outlook 2013. We thank Matthew Johnson and Inigo Verduzco-Gallo for excellent research assistance
and Rodrigo Garcia-Valdes, Alun Thomas, Doug Gollin, David Lagakos and Michael Waugh for providing
data. The authors would also like to thank Adam Storeygard, Xinshen Diao, Doug Gollin, Remi Jedwab,
William Masters, Jan Rielander, Dani Rodrik, Abebe Shimeles, Erik Thorbecke and Enrico Spolaore for
helpful comments. We would also like to gratefully acknowledge financial support from the DFID-
ESRC Growth Research Programme (DEGRP) project titled ‘Structural change and productivity
growth in Africa.’ The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Margaret S. McMillan and Kenneth Harttgen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What is driving the ‘African Growth Miracle’?
Margaret S. McMillan and Kenneth Harttgen
NBER Working Paper No. 20077
April 2014
JEL No. O13,O4,Q16

                                            ABSTRACT

We show that much of Africa’s recent growth and poverty reduction can be traced to a substantive
decline in the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture. This decline has been accompanied by
a systematic increase in the productivity of the labor force, as it has moved from low productivity
agriculture to higher productivity manufacturing and services. These declines have been more rapid
in countries where the initial share of the labor force engaged in agriculture is the highest and where
commodity price increases have been accompanied by improvements in the quality of governance.


Margaret S. McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu

Kenneth Harttgen
ETH Zurich NADEL
Center for Development and Cooperation
kenneth.harttgen@nadel.ethz.ch
          Even if you don’t believe in miracles, it cannot be denied that Africa has come a long way
over the past 15 years. As recently as 2000, the front cover of the Economist proclaimed Africa “the
hopeless continent” (Economist, 2000). Yet recent evidence suggests that the continent is anything
but hopeless. The share of the population living on less than $1.25 a day fell from 58 percent in
2000 to 48 percent in 2010, infant mortality rates declined significantly, and access to education
generally improved (Page and Shimeles, 2014). Average growth rates have been positive for the first
time in decades and, in some of the fastest growing economies, have exceeded 6 percent per annum;
moreover, these growth rates are likely to be underestimated. Young (2012) finds that real
consumption in Africa has been growing between 3.4 and 3.7 percent per year or three to four times
the 0.9-1.1 percent growth reported using national accounts data; he dubs this an ‘African Growth
Miracle’.


          The reasons behind this success are not well understood. The main contribution of this
paper is to show, for the first time, that the ‘African Growth Miracle’ can be traced to a significant
decline in the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture. Previous researchers have shown that
agriculture is by far the least productive sector in Africa (McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and Gollin,
Lagakos and Waugh (2014)) and that income and consumption are lower in agriculture than in any
other sector (McMillan and Verduzco (2012) and Gollin, Lagakos and Waugh (2014)). Researchers
have also noted that real consumption is growing in Africa (Young (2012)) and that poverty is falling
(Shimeles and Page (2014)). To our knowledge, this paper is the first to connect these improvements
in living standards to important occupational changes.


          We show that, between 2000 and 2010, in Sub-Saharan Africa, the share of the labor forced
employed in agriculture declined by roughly 10 percentage points. 1 The decline in the share of
employment in agriculture has been matched by a 2 percentage point increase in the share of the
labor force engaged in manufacturing and an 8 percentage point increase in services.


          The results above are consistent with the early work by the prominent scholars Theodore
Schultz and Arthur Lewis. In 1979, Schultz and Lewis received the Nobel Prize for their work
explaining how and why agriculture often remains a relatively low-productivity sector, despite

1
 This estimate is based on a sample of more than 24 countries and is robust to the source of data. In particular, we verify estimates
based on census and labor force surveys using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS).

                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 51
growth in average national income and productivity levels. And although they differed in their
prescriptions for developing countries, both viewed the persistence of low productivity in agriculture
as a root cause of poverty. In Lewis’ principal model, low farm productivity persists until non-farm
employment expands enough to absorb rural population growth, while Schultz’s main contributions
address how to raise the productivity of those workers who remain in agriculture.


       There has been very little evidence on how structural change — that is, the reallocation of
economic activity away from agriculture to more productive sectors — has evolved in Africa since
independence across the continent was achieved half a century ago. A major reason for this has
been the quality and frequent absence of rigorous economic data for many African countries. A
deeper reason is poverty itself. Until recently, few African countries have enjoyed the sustained
economic growth needed to trace out the patterns of structural transformation achieved in earlier
decades elsewhere.


       The start of the 21st century saw the dawn of a new era in which African economies grew as
fast, or faster, than the rest of the world. Examining the recent process of structural change in
Africa, and its role in economic growth can yield enormous benefits. For one, the theory and
stylized facts of structural change offer several predictions about the allocation of the factors of
production for countries at different stages of development. As Sub-Saharan Africa is now by far
the poorest region of the world, including African countries in the analysis can enrich the current
understanding of how structural change has recently played out around the world. Perhaps more
importantly, and most pertinent to this paper, is that such an analysis can offer insights into the
distributional implications of the continent’s recent economic performance.


       We begin our analysis by asking whether it is reasonable to compare structural change in
Africa to other regions during the same time period. Average incomes in Africa are significantly
lower than in East Asia, Latin America and all other regions. If countries at different stages of
development tend to exhibit different patterns of structural change, the differences between Africa
and other developing regions may be a result of their different stages of development. Motivated by
this possibility, we explore how the level of employment shares across sectors in African countries
compare to those in other countries, controlling for levels of income. We find that African countries
appear to fit seamlessly into the pattern observed in other countries. In other words, given current

                                                                                        Page 4 of 51
levels of income per capita in Africa, the share of the labor force in agriculture, manufacturing, and
industry is roughly what we would expect.


           Having confirmed that African countries were characterized by very high employment shares
in agriculture in 1990, we turn to an investigation of changes in agricultural employment shares. For
a sample of 19 African countries, we find that for the period 2000-2010:


   (i)        the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture declined by an average of 10.61
              percentage points;
   (ii)       the share of the labor force engaged in manufacturing expanded by an average of 2.15
              percentage points;
   (iii)      the share of the labor force engaged in services increased by an average of 8.23
              percentage points;
   (iv)       the share of the labor force engaged in mining did not change.


Combining these data on employment shares with data on value-added, we show that for the period
2000-2010, structural change accounted for roughly half of Africa’s growth in output per worker.


           The results above are encouraging, but how much can the estimates be trusted? Even if the
quality of the surveys is strong, there are differences in methodology and definitions across surveys
and across countries that can contaminate the estimates. Thus, an additional goal of this paper is to
verify the robustness of our employment share estimates (and the changes in employment shares)
using the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). The DHS are nationally representative surveys
designed to collect detailed information on child mortality, health, and fertility, as well as on
household’s durables and quality of the dwelling. In addition, the DHS include information on
gender, age, location, education, employment status and occupation of women and their partners
between the ages of 15 and 49. Importantly, the design and coding of variables (especially on the
type of occupation, educational achievements, households assets, and dwelling characteristics) are
generally comparable across countries and over time. Finally, the sample includes considerable
regional variation. 90 surveys are available for 31 African countries and, for most countries, multiple
surveys (up to six) have been conducted between 1993 and 2012.



                                                                                         Page 5 of 51
     Using the DHS we find that the changes in employment shares are consistent with the results
described above. In particular, we show that the share of the labor force in agriculture increased by
around 2 percentage points between 1990 and 1999, and fell by a little under 10 percentage points
from 2000 onward. We also show that there is a significant degree of cross-country heterogeneity in
the changes in agricultural employment shares, with the most rapid decline occurring in Burkina
Faso and the smallest decline occurring in Lesotho.


       Having documented a meaningful decline in the share of the labor force engaged in
agriculture over the past decade, we explore potential explanations for the decline. We find that:


       (i)        the agricultural employment share is falling faster in countries that started with a
                  higher share of the labor force engaged in agriculture;
       (ii)       in countries with higher population growth rates, the share of the labor force is
                  falling faster in agriculture, and this correlation is strongest for rural males;
       (iii)      in countries where the rise in commodity prices coincided with a relatively higher
                  quality of governance, the female share of the labor force fell more rapidly;
       (iv)       countries that have achieved at least one of the Comprehensive African
                  Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) targets have experienced more rapid
                  declines in the agricultural employment share;
       (v)        and rural schooling is correlated with small declines in agricultural employment
                  shares in the subsequent period.


       Our work is related to work by Gollin, Lagakos and Waugh (2014). Using contemporary data
for 151 developing countries including several from Africa, they confirm the persistence of a
sizeable agricultural productivity gap as well as a gap in income and consumption. Based on these
results they conclude that there should be large economic gains associated with a reduction in the
share of employment in agriculture. Our paper differs in that we take as given the agricultural
productivity gap and show that movement out of the agricultural sector has been responsible for
growth and poverty reduction in Africa.


       Our work is also related to work by Herrendorf et al (2012) and Duarte and Restuccia
(2010), who find that structural change is a fundamental feature of economic growth (Herrendorf et

                                                                                             Page 6 of 51
al (2012)), Duarte and Restuccia (2010)) 2. This structural transformation continues until farm and
nonfarm productivity converge, which typically occurs only at very high levels of per-capita income;
in the United States, for example, the exodus of labor from agriculture did not end until the mid-
1990s. At lower levels of income, countries that pull themselves out of poverty also exhibit positive
structural change.3 The main difference relative to the present paper is that neither of these two
studies include Africa in the analysis.


         Most closely related to the present paper are recent studies by McMillan and Rodrik (2011)
and McMillan, Rodrik and Verduzco (2014). Like Gollin, Lagaokos and Waugh (2014), these two
studies document a significant gap in productivity between agriculture and other sectors of the
economy. The latter study shows that structural change in Africa contributed negatively to growth
during the 1990s and then positively to growth during the period 2000-2005. However, these studies
have two important limitations. First, the sample of African countries used in these papers is not
representative of the poorest African countries: the countries are on average richer and the
populations are more educated and healthier when compared to the rest of SSA. Second, the data in
these studies do not paint an accurate picture of the most recent economic activity in Africa, because
the sample stops in 2005.


         Finally, our research is also related to work by Young (2012), who points out the numerous
problems associated with measuring progress in Africa using national accounts data. To get around
this problem, he uses DHS data to construct a proxy for consumption growth based on growth in
asset indices. He finds that real consumption has grown rapidly in Africa over the past two decades.
Our paper provides the missing explanation for his important results.


         In summary, we begin in Section 2 by documenting a number of stylized facts to situate
Africa within the recent literature on structural change, and to show that countries in Africa are
where we would expect them to be, given their current levels of income. Section 3 then outlines our
methodology and the data we use for measuring structural change, and describes recent patterns


2See Herrendorf and Rogerson (2011) for an overview of and many references on this subject.
3The converse is not true, however: all countries with structural change do not also achieve poverty reduction.
Structural change into protected or subsidized sectors comes at the expense of other activities, and is therefore not
associated with sustained growth out of poverty for the population as a whole. Structural change is effective at reducing
poverty only when people move from lower into higher productivity activities.

                                                                                                          Page 7 of 51
across regions and countries. Section 4 describes the DHS and goes on to use these data to explore
the robustness of the results presented in Section 3. Section 5 is a discussion and empirical
investigation into possible explanations for the decline in the agricultural employment share in SSA.
Section 6 concludes.



2. Fitting Africa Into the Recent Literature on Structural Change

         The process of structural change out of agriculture is integral to the ability of developing
countries to pull themselves out of poverty, and was recognized as such by early development
economists such as Lewis (1955). Lewis and others observed the historical reallocation of workers
from traditional agriculture to “modern” industry in Europe, North America and East Asia, and
predicted that other regions would follow the same development process. Duarte and Restuccia
(2010) find that structural change has indeed played a substantial role in the productivity catch-up of
developing countries in their sample – relative to the U.S. – over their sample period. As predicted,
the gains are particularly dramatic in the sectors with international trade. They find in their sample
that productivity differences in agriculture and industry between the rich and developing countries
have narrowed substantially, while productivity in services has remained significantly lower in the
developing countries relative to rich countries. Thus, developing countries with the most rapid
growth rates have typically reallocated the most labor into high-productivity manufacturing, allowing
aggregate productivity to catch up.4 Duarte and Restuccia (2010) conclude that rising productivity in
industry, combined with structural change out of agriculture and into industry, explains 50% of the
catch-up in aggregate productivities among developing countries over their sample period of 1950-
2006.


         More recent work by Rodrik (2012) underscores the importance of this type of structural
change. Using a large panel of countries, he finds that since 1960 manufacturing industries have
exhibited unconditional convergence in labor productivity regardless of country- or regional-level
factors. This finding is important because it suggests that the destination sector in which less



4Conversely, where the manufacturing sector stagnates and structural transformation involves primarily reallocation of
workers into lower productivity sectors, aggregate productivity is slower, especially among developing countries whose
productivity in services remains low—both relative to agriculture in other countries and to other sectors within the
country.

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 51
developed countries eventually catch up with the productivity levels of developed countries is
manufacturing.


         Some stylized facts of the pattern of structural change over the course of development have
emerged from this literature. As countries grow, the share of economic activity in agriculture
monotonically decreases and the share in services monotonically increases. The share of activity in
manufacturing follows an inverted U-shape: increasing during low stages of development as capital
is accumulated, then decreasing for high stages of development where higher incomes drive demand
for services and labor costs make manufacturing difficult. Herrendorf et al (2012) document this
pattern for a panel of mostly developed countries over the past two centuries, and Duarte and
Restuccia (2010) document a similar process of structural change among 29 countries over the
period 1956-2004.


         With this insight in mind, it may be instructive to look at the evolution of the distribution of
employment between sectors across levels of income experienced in Africa and how it compares to
the patterns seen historically in other regions over the course of development. If we use the
patterns seen in other regions historically as a baseline, this exercise can help me to gauge the extent
to which structural change in Africa compares to what we would “expect” based on its income
levels. To this end, and following Duarte and Restuccia (2010) we start by aggregating the 9 sectors
in my database into Agriculture, Industry and Services ” by adding manufacturing, mining,
construction, and public utilities to make “Industry”, adding wholesale and retail trade, transport and
communication, finance and business services, and finally community, social, personal, and
government services to create “Services,“ and leaving “Agriculture” as-is.5 Our measure of
“development” is log GDP per capita in international dollars from Maddison (2010).


         In Figure 1 we plot employment shares in agriculture, industry and services, respectively, on
the y-axis and log GDP per capita on the x-axis for the 19 African countries in my sample for the
years 1990 and 2005. The share of employment in agriculture decreases, and that in services
increases, monotonically with income, and the share in manufacturing also monotonically increases.
In other words, recent patterns of structural change in Africa fit into the stylized facts of other

5This aggregation is consistent with that used in Duarte and Restuccia (2010), who also use the GGDC database (along
with other sources) to construct their dataset.

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 51
regions’ historical development. Note that Industry does not follow the inverted-U shape
documented in Herrendorf et al (2011) and Duarte and Restuccia (2010), but this is because each
country’s GDP per capita is below the threshold at which the rate of change of Industry’s
employment share changes from positive to negative.6


         Though Figure 1 suggests the patterns of reallocation between agriculture, industry and
services are qualitatively similar to the stylized facts based on the experience of other regions, it may
be that they differ quantitatively. For instance, though Figure 1 confirms that the agricultural
employment share and services employment share in Africa decrease and increase, respectively, with
the level of income, it could be that the level of agricultural or services employment in Africa is
higher than in other regions (the latter being argued in Badiane 2011), perhaps because of resource
endowments or productivity levels. To investigate this question, we obtained data used in Duarte
and Restuccia (2010) which contains shares of hours worked in the three broad sectors for a panel
of 29 countries (none of which are in Africa) from 1950-2006.7 8 Again we obtained GDP per capita
for these countries from Maddison (2010). By directly comparing the relationship between income
levels and the distribution of employment in Africa in recent years with other regions over the last
several decades, we can get an idea of whether the process of structural change in Africa is playing
out differently than we would expect given current levels of income.


         Figure 2 again plots employment shares in agriculture, industry and services, respectively, on
the y-axis and log GDP per capita on the x-axis simultaneously for our sample of African countries
and for those in Duarte and Restuccia (2010). Each country in my sample again has two data points
(1990 and 2005) and each country in the Duarte and Restuccia (2010) sample has all available data
points. Two things are immediately evident from the figure. First, per capita incomes in recent years
in most African countries in my sample are lower than those seen in most of the world since 1950.
Second, the distributions of employment among the African countries fit almost seamlessly into
those seen over the past six decades in other regions. In other words, controlling for income, the


6 Herrendorf et al (2011) note that this peak in Industry’s employment share occurs at a log GDP per capita of about 9.
Mauritius, whose GDP per capita is the highest in our sample and was about 9 in 1990, fits into this peak: its log GDP
per capita increased to roughly 9.5 in 2005 and its share of employment in Industry decreased (second panel of Figure
XXa).
7 Data were downloaded from Margarida Duarte’s website on 7/24/2012.
8 Note that the Duarte and Restuccia (2010) data measure share of hours worked, whereas our data measure share of

total employment.

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 51
quantitative patterns of structural change in Africa are roughly what we would expect based on what
has transpired elsewhere.


        Figure 3 illustrates that, among the 9 African countries in the original M&R (2011) sample,
the productivity gaps are indeed enormous across sectors. In the figure, each bin corresponds to one
of the 9 sectors in our dataset, with the width of the bin corresponding to the sector’s share of total
employment, and the height corresponding to the sector’s labor productivity level as a fraction of
average labor productivity. Agriculture—at 36 percent of average productivity—is by far the sector
with the lowest productivity; manufacturing productivity is 6 times as high, and that in mining is
nearly 60 times as high. Furthermore, the figure makes evident that the majority of employment in
our African sample is in the most unproductive sectors, with roughly three-quarters of the
population in the two sectors with below-average productivity (Agriculture and Wholesale and Retail
Trade). Based on this figure, it appears that the potential for reallocation of labor from low to high
productivity sectors to increase growth appears to be quite large.


        The productivity gaps described here refer to differences in average labor productivity. When
markets work well and structural constraints do not bind, it is productivities at the margin that should
be equalized. Under a Cobb–Douglas production function specification, the marginal productivity of
labor is the average productivity multiplied by the labor share. So, if labor shares differ greatly across
economic activities, then comparing average labor productivities can be misleading. The fact that
average productivity in mining is so high, for example, simply indicates that the labor share of value
added in this capital-intensive sector is quite small. In the case of other sectors, however, there does
not appear to be a clearly significant bias. Once the share of land is taken into account, for example,
it is not obvious that the labor share in agriculture is significantly lower than in manufacturing
(Mundlak, Butzer, and Larson 2008). So, the sixfold difference in average labor productivity between
manufacturing and agriculture does point to large gaps in marginal productivity.


        An additional concern with the data presented in Figure 3 is that the productivity gaps may
be mis-measured. For example differences in hours worked or human capital per worker could be
driving the observed productivity gaps. However, in a recent paper Gollin et al (2012) use micro
data to take into account sectoral differences in hours worked and human capital as well as
alternative measures of sectoral income and they still find large differences in productivity between

                                                                                           Page 11 of 51
agriculture and other sectors of the economy. The agricultural productivity gaps for Sub-Saharan
Africa are presented by country in Appendix 3 and range from a low of 1.14 in Lesotho all the way
to 8.43 for Gabon.


       Thus, our preliminary analysis reveals three important stylized facts about countries in
Africa. First, when we compare the levels of employment in Africa alongside other regions across
levels of development, the pattern among our sample of African countries appears to fit seamlessly
into that experienced by other regions. Second, Africa is still by far the poorest region of the world.
And third, structural change in Africa has not yet been a significant driver of growth.


       There are a number of reasons to believe that structural change might have been delayed in
much of Africa. And it is only relatively recently that much of Africa has begun to grow rapidly. Part
of this has to do with the rise in commodity prices that began in the early 2000s. But it may also be
that Africa is starting to reap the benefits of economic reforms and improved governance. To
explore the nature of Africa’s recent growth, we turn our attention to an investigation of structural
change in Africa including the most recent period in history for which data are available: 2000-2010.
This most recent period is important because this is the period over which Africa experienced the
strongest growth in four decades. The key question is whether growth in this period was
accompanied by structural change.



3. Patterns of Structural Change Across Regions and Countries

       We begin this section by describing the data and methodology we use to measure structural
change. This is followed by a description of patterns of structural change across the following
regions for the periods 1990-1999 and 2000-2005: Africa, Asia, Latin America and the OECD
countries. We conclude this section by expanding the Africa database to cover an additional 10
countries and report patterns of structural change for the expanded Africa sample for the period
2000 onward.

Data Used to Measure Structural Change

       To further analyze the patterns of structural change in Africa in recent years, we employ data
from several sources. Our initial analysis uses the sample of countries used by McMillan and Rodrik

                                                                                          Page 12 of 51
(2011) and consists of sectoral and aggregate labor productivity statistics for nine African countries.
The data for Africa were compiled by the authors and the details are available in the data appendix
to their paper. Data for Ghana were updated and cross-checked by Jedwab and Osei (2012) and data
for Nigeria were updated and cross-checked by Vollrath et al (2012).


         We collected data on value added and employment shares for an additional 10 African
countries to expand the Africa sample. In general, we follow the methodology used by researchers at
the Groningen Growth and Development Center (GGDC), which provides employment and value-
added statistics for 27 countries divided into 10 sectors9. Measures of sectoral and aggregate value-
added came from national accounts from respective national statistics offices whenever possible and
were complemented with the UN’s national accounts whenever national sources were incomplete or
found to be inconsistent. To measure sectoral-level employment, we relay primarily on population
censuses, which Timmer and de Vries (2007, 2009) explain are the most reliable sources of sectoral
employment for many developing countries, to get employment levels and distributions for census
years. Following Timmer and de Vries, we use use labor force surveys and household surveys to
when census data are not available. A detailed description of data sources by country is provided in
Appendix 1.


         As previously noted, we would of course like to have data for more African countries. In the
absence of additional data for Africa, we report in Table 1 the characteristics of the African
countries in our sample and compare them to the characteristics of all countries in SSA. Our sample
includes 16 out of 47 countries from Sub-Saharan Africa and 3 out of 6 countries from North
Africa. Overall, the countries in both our SSA and our NA sample are slightly poorer than average
as measured by GDP per capita. The statistics in column (2) of Table 1 indicate that the 9 countries
in the original M&R (2011) sample have significantly lower infant mortality rates and higher years of
primary and secondary schooling. The statistics in column (4) of Table 1 indicate that once the
additional countries are added to the M&R (2011) sample, there are no significant differences in
income per capita, infant mortality rates, years of schooling, dependence on natural resource
exports, exchange rate policy or share of the population engaged in agriculture. The sample


9
  Since writing this paper, I received a grant from the Economic and Social Research Council of the UK that helped
fund the Africa Sector Database (ASD). The ASD contains value added and employment for 11 African countries for
the period 1960-2010 and is publicly available on the GGDC’s website.

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 51
described in column (4) accounts for 68 percent of the population of SSA. We postpone a
discussion of the DHS sample to section 4 of the paper.


         In Table 2, we report summary statistics for all of the countries used to compute measures
of structural change. The top three panels report the statistics for the non-African countries used in
the original M&R (2011) analysis. The bottom panel reports statistics for all of the African countries
used in the analyses – the countries in the original M&R (2011) sample are marked with a triple
asterisk. To the original sample of 9 used in M&R (2011) I added: Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Angola,
Cameroon, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Mali. Countries are ranked in terms of real value
added per worker in 2000 ppp dollars and in the final year for which data were available. The last
column on the right side of the table indicates the period for which we had survey data for the
period 2000 onward. Almost without exception, labor productivity is the highest in mining and the
lowest in agriculture.



         In Table 3, we report sectoral coverage. For the additional African countries, we restrict our
analysis to the following four sectors: (i) agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; (ii) mining and
quarrying (note that mining includes all natural resource extraction); (iii) manufacturing and; (iv)
tertiary (or services). The developed countries have the highest labor productivity across all four
sectors and countries in SSA have the lowest productivity levels across all four sectors.

Measuring Structural Change

      Labor productivity growth can be achieved in one of two ways. First, productivity can grow
within existing economic activities through capital accumulation or technological change. Second,
labor can move from low-productivity to high-productivity activities, increasing overall labor
productivity in the economy. This can be expressed using the following decomposition:

(1)                      Pt         i , t  k  p i ,t      p     i ,t   i , t
                                 i n                            i n



where Pt and pi ,t refer to economy-wide and sectoral labor productivity levels, respectively, and  i,t

is the share of employment in sector i. The Δ operator denotes the change in productivity or
employment shares between t-k and t. The first term in the decomposition is the weighted sum of


                                                                                            Page 14 of 51
productivity growth within individual sectors, where the weights are the employment share of each
sector at the beginning of the time period. Following M&R (2011), we call this the “within”
component of productivity growth. The second term captures the productivity effect of labor re-
allocations across different sectors. It is essentially the inner product of productivity levels (at the
end of the time period) with the change in employment shares across sectors. When changes in
employment shares are positively correlated with productivity levels, this term will be positive.
Structural change will increase economy-wide productivity growth. Also following M&R (2011), we
call this second term the “structural change” term.


        The second term in equation (1) could be further decomposed into a static and dynamic
component of structural change as in de Vries et al (2014). Like in McMillan and Rodrik (2011), we
choose not to do this for the following reason. The ‘dynamic’ structural change component of the
structural change term is often negative but difficult to interpret. For example, when agricultural
productivity growth is positive and the labor share in agriculture is falling, the term is negative even
though on average the movement of workers out of agriculture to other more productive sectors of
the economy makes a positive contribution to structural change and economywide labor
productivity growth. Moreover, structural change is by its’ very nature a dynamic phenomenon and
so we find it counter-intuitive to label a part of structural change static.


        This decomposition clarifies how partial analyses of productivity performance within
individual sectors (e.g., manufacturing) can be misleading when there are large differences in labor
productivities ( pi ,t ) across economic activities. In particular, a high rate of productivity growth

within an industry can have quite ambiguous implications for overall economic performance if the
industry’s share of employment shrinks rather than expands. If the displaced labor ends up in
activities with lower productivity, economy-wide growth will suffer and may even turn negative.


        This decomposition can be used to study broad patterns of structural change within a
country and across countries. An example of this type of analysis can be found in M&R (2011).
Individual components of the decomposition such as labor shares and within sector changes in
productivity can also be used at the country level to dig deeper into where structural change is or is
not taking place and to gain a deeper understanding of the country specific factors that drive
structural change. For example, if we know that the expansion of manufacturing is a characteristic of

                                                                                            Page 15 of 51
structural change in a particular country, we could use more detailed data on manufacturing to
pinpoint which specific industries expanded, how many people were employed, and whether or not
specific events or policies contributed to the expansion or contraction of a particular sector.



Structural Change in Africa in Comparison to Latin America and Asia

        The previous discussion indicated that the distribution of employment levels across sectors in
our Africa sample is what we would “expect” based on current levels of income. In this section we
investigate the changes in employment shares within African countries and their effect on
economywide labor productivity. We begin our analysis using the original sample used byM&R
(2011) but breaking the period into two: 1990-99 and 2000-2005. As previously noted, by looking at
the period 1990-2005 as a whole, we may miss important changes in Africa. The early 1990s in
Africa were still a period of adjustment. The period starting around 2000 marks the beginning of
Africa’s ‘Growth Miracle’.


        Figure 4 presents our central findings on patterns of structural change. Simple averages and
employment weighted averages are presented for the periods 1990–1999 and 2000-2005 period for
four groups of countries: Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and high-income countries. For
comparability with the results in M&R (2011) we restrict our sample of African countries here to the
9 countries in their original sample. The most striking result that jumps out from Figures 4.a-4.d is
Africa’s turnaround. Between 1990 and 1999, structural change was a drag on economy-wide
productivity in Africa: in the unweighted sample overall growth in labor productivity was negative
and largely a result of structural change. But from 2000 to 2005, structural change contributed
around 1 percentage point to labor productivity growth in both the weighted and the unweighted
sample. Moreover, overall labor productivity growth in Africa was second only to Asia where
structural change continued to play an important positive role.


        Like M&R (2011), we find that structural change has made very little contribution (positive
or negative) to the overall growth in labor productivity in the high-income countries in my sample.
This result is as expected, since intersectoral productivity gaps tend to diminish during the course of
development. Even though many of these advanced economies have experienced significant
structural change during this period, with labor moving predominantly from manufacturing to

                                                                                         Page 16 of 51
service industries, this (on its own) has made little difference to productivity overall. What
determines economywide performance in these economies is, by and large, how productivity fares in
each individual sector.


         Breaking the period into two also reveals something interesting about Latin America. It is
only in the more recent period – 2000 to 2005 – that structural change has played a significant role
in Latin America’s overall productivity growth. In the unweighted sample, structural change reduces
overall labor productivity growth by almost 1 percentage point. But when countries are weighted by
employment, the contribution of structural change becomes minimal. Overall, it is Latin America’s
poor within sector productivity growth that seems to be a drag on the region’s productivity in recent
years.


         We can gain further insight into our results by looking at the sectoral details for specific
countries. We note that growth-reducing structural change indicates that the direction of labor flows
is negatively correlated with (end-of-period) labor productivity in individual sectors. So, for each

region, we plot the (end-of-period) relative productivity of sectors ( yi , t   / Yt ) against the change in
their employment share (  i, t ) between 2000 and 2005. The relative size of each sector (measured

by employment) is indicated by the circles around each sector’s label in the scatterplots. The four
panels in Figure 5 show sectoral detail for each region in our sample: Latin America, Africa, Asia and
high income countries.


         The results indicate that in many ways, Latin America looks a lot like the high income
countries in my sample. In both regions the share of labor in manufacturing and agriculture shrank
while the share of labor in services expanded the major difference being the relatively larger share of
the labor force in agriculture in Latin America. By contrast in both Africa and Asia, structural
change was driven by increases in the share of employment in manufacturing and services. There is
though an important difference between the two regions: the share of employment in manufacturing
in Asia is roughly double the share of employment in manufacturing in Africa.

Expanding the Africa Sample



                                                                                             Page 17 of 51
        So far we have been working with data for only 9 African countries. To get a better sense for
what is happening across the continent, we examine data for an additional 10 African countries
leaving me with a sample of 19 African countries. For each of the additional countries, we use the
most recent data available. Thus, the time horizon is country specific and spans 1995-2009. For this
expanded sample, the contribution of structural change to growth in output per worker is .89
percent. Individual country results for this expanded sample are reported in Table 5.


        Needless to say, there is heterogeneity across countries in Africa. To get a better handle on
the heterogeneity in country experiences across Africa, we divide Africa’s 54 countries into four
distinct groups based on the level of development, structure of the economy and growth trajectory.
Broadly: resource driven economies are economies where extractive resources such as oil and
minerals represent at least 30 percent of GDP, diversified established economies have relatively
high levels of per capita income, and low exposure to extractive resources and agriculture as a share
of GDP, by contrast the emerging economies have relatively low levels of GDP per capita, rapid
growth rates and a high share of GDP coming from agriculture, the pre-transition countries have the
lowest per capita incomes and growth in these countries remains low. In Figure 6, we use the most
recent survey data available to examine the nature of structural change in one African country from
each of these four categories to illustrate the wide variety of country experiences across Africa.


        Figure 6.a shows that structural change in Mauritius between 2000 and 2007 was growth
enhancing and driven by the highly productive service sector. Mauritius is a well known African
success story and its’ economy is highly diversified. The size of the circles indicate that agriculture
and mining are relatively unimportant compared to manufacturing and services in Mauritius. Like
many of the developed countries in my sample, the manufacturing sector has contracted in
Mauritius. However, unlike some of the other more advanced economies in Africa and elsewhere,
Mauritius has managed to grow its tertiary sector based on high productivity activities that absorb
significant amounts of labor. Thus, structural change in Mauritius has been growth enhancing and
based on services but the story of Mauritius is atypical of Sub-Saharan Africa.


        Figure 6.b shows that in the resource driven economy of Nigeria, structural change has
played a positive but much less significant role in increasing economy-wide productivity: the changes
in employment shares in Nigeria are tiny compared to the changes in Mauritius. The main driver of

                                                                                           Page 18 of 51
this structural change has been a movement of labor out of agriculture and services into
manufacturing. Notably though, the differences in productivity across these three sectors are not
that large. This is probably due to the high degree of informality in all three sectors of the economy.


        Figure 6.c shows remarkable changes in the emerging economy of Uganda. Between 1999
and 2009 the share of the labor force in agriculture fell by more than 10 percent while the share of
the labor force in manufacturing and services increased by around the same amount. Unlike Nigeria,
productivity in manufacturing and services is significantly higher than productivity in agriculture,
Thus, the structural changes in Uganda contributed significantly to Uganda’s overall growth in
output per worker.


        And finally, Figure 6.d shows limited but positive progress in the pre-transition economy of
Malawi. In many ways the structure of the economy is similar to that of Uganda: the majority of
workers are in the agricultural sector, services comes second, manufacturing third and mining last.
The main difference is that there have been significant structural changes in the economy of Uganda
while there has been very little movement in Malawi. The share of the labor force in agriculture fell
by around 1.5 percent and the share of the labor force in services fell by around .002 percent. These
reductions in employment shares in agriculture and services were matched by a tiny increase in the
share of the labor force in manufacturing.



        So far, our analysis has revealed that structural change has become growth enhancing in
Africa for the latter period and that the analysis for the other three regions remains largely intact.
For the 9 countries in the original M&R(2011) Africa sample, labor productivity grew by an
(unweighted) average of 2.13 percent, and structural change contributed an (unweighted) average of
0.92 percentage points to overall labor productivity growth. For the expanded set of countries, labor
productivity grew by an (unweighted) average of 2.18 percent, and structural change contributed an
(unweighted) average of 0.87 percentage points to overall labor productivity growth. Moreover, the
results in Table 5 indicate that structural change contributed positively to growth in 17 of the 19
African countries in the expanded sample. This positive contribution of structural change to
economywide growth paints a somewhat more optimistic picture of growth in Africa than did the
results in M&R(2011). In the remaining sections of this paper, we dig into the robustness of these


                                                                                           Page 19 of 51
results using an alternative source of data for employment shares, the Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS). We then turn to exploring possible explanations for the turnaround in Africa.

4. Using the DHS to Understand Structural Change
          This section of the paper is devoted to assessing the robustness of the changes in
employment shares we uncovered in Section 4 to using an alternative source of data. We begin this
section with a description of the DHS data. We then turn to describing trends in occupational
shares.


The DHS Data
          Although the DHS is not naturally designed as a labour force survey, it does contain a
module on employment status and occupation for women and men between the ages of 15 and 49
(sometimes between 15 and 59). Information on men is not provided for all DHS countries and
survey rounds. In total, our sample contains information for about 750,000 women and 250,000
men. Because the samples are nationally representative, they include employment in both formal and
informal sectors. The data do not appear to be well suited to making this distinction since many of
the questions that could be used to do this are left unanswered.


     An advantage of the DHS for analysing determinants and trends of occupation types across
countries and over time is that the design and coding of variables (especially on type of occupation,
educational achievements, households assets and dwelling characteristics) are generally comparable
across countries and survey rounds. At the household level, the DHS provides information on
household socioeconomic characteristics, household structure and family composition, enabling
analysis of the distribution and determinants of occupation types by socioeconomic characteristics
and of changes in the distribution over time. Note that this does not mean there are not ‘recode’
errors in the original DHS files. These kinds of errors were corrected by me and details of this
procedure are available upon request.


     A second and important advantage of the DHS data is that in addition to an individual’s
occupation, the data contains information on the individual’s gender, age, educational status and
location. Thus, for example, it allows me to examine changes in occupational status for rural and
urban youth separately and for men and women separately.


                                                                                         Page 20 of 51
         A disadvantage of DHS data is that household income and expenditures are not included, but
available information on household assets can be used to construct an asset index to proxy for
individual or household welfare. Additionally, measures of nutrition, health and education can be
combined with information on assets to gain a more complete measure of wellbeing.


         For the purposes of this paper, we restrict the sample to African countries for which at least
two DHSs are available, allowing me to analyse trends over time. The large coverage of countries
and survey years leaves us with a sample size of 24 African countries, capturing the period between
1993 and 2011. As we did for the analysis in Section 3, in Table 1, we compare the countries in the
DHS sample to all countries in SSA to assess whether my sample is somehow biased towards, for
example, towards richer countries. We find that our sample of African countries covers 76 percent
of the population in Sub-Saharan Africa. When we compare average infant mortality rates and
education levels, we find no statistical difference between the countries in the DHS sample and the
rest of Sub-Saharan Africa. However, the countries in the DHS sample have an average level of
GDP per capita which is significantly lower than the excluded countries and a slightly higher share
of the labor force engaged in agriculture. These latter differences are not surprising given that the
DHS are funded by the United States Agency for International Development and that the mandate
is to focus on the poorest countries in the world.


         As noted by Young (2012), the raw DHS files include coding errors and so the data need to be
examined on a country by country basis to ensure accuracy. The most glaring coding error that we
found was for Mali in 2006 when agricultural workers were accidentally classified as military
workers. Coding errors like this indicate that it is not a good idea to take the aggregate statistics
provided by DHS on the internet at face value. It also explains why, for example, some researchers
have found the aggregate data on occupational shares published on the website unreliable. A detailed
description of the way in which we arrived at our final sample is provided in Appendix 2.


         To assign individuals to occupational categories, we rely on the question on occupation for
women and men. The DHS provides a grouped occupation variable that relies on the question that
asks what the respondent mainly does for work.10 The respondent’s response is grouped into one of
nine categories: not working; professional/technical/managerial; clerical; sales; agricultural – self

10   Variable v717: What is your occupation, that is, what kind of work do you mainly do?

                                                                                            Page 21 of 51
employed; agricultural – employee; household and domestic services; skilled manual; and unskilled
manual. We further combine the groups of clerical, sales and services into one group. As an
additional category, we combine women and men from agricultural self-employment and agricultural
employees into an overall group of agricultural occupation. Finally, we include a category ‘in school’,
both to account for differences between the young and old and to establish trends in schooling over
time. Thus, we are left with six ‘occupational’ categories for adults: agriculture; services; skilled
manual labour; unskilled manual labour; professional; and not working. For youth – those aged 16-
24 years – we add the category ‘in school’ to make it seven ‘occupational’ categories in total.


     Table 6 lists the 24 countries from Sub-Saharan Africa for which we have at least two rounds
of DHS surveys. The columns labelled DHS Survey Years identifies the years that surveys are
available and in parentheses we note whether the survey includes both men and women – (f&m) –
or whether it just includes women - (f). All of what is reported in the following analysis is based on
the countries listed in Table 6. For some parts of the analysis, we restrict the sample to those
countries for which data are available for both genders for the 1990s, 2000-2005 and 2006-2012.


Changes in Occupational Structures Over Time and Across Countries in Africa
     Our first goal in this sub-section of the paper is to check whether the changes in employment
shares reported in Section 4 are also apparent in the DHS data. Since the DHS occupational
categories do not correspond directly to those reported in the survey data used in section 4, we start
by focusing on the share of the population engaged in agriculture. Table 7 reports the percentage of
the population who report that their primary occupation is agriculture by country, time period and
gender. Since the surveys were done in waves but in different years for different countries, we break
the time periods into three intervals that correspond roughly to Waves 1 and 2, 3 and 4, and 5 and 6
respectively. In the rare event that two surveys were conducted in one of the sub-periods, the
employment shares represent a simple average across survey years. Results are broken out by gender
because women very often report that they are not working. Also for this exercise, we focus on
workers age 25 and above so as not to confound the results by children who may be in school.


     We begin by drawing the reader’s attention to the averages at the bottom of Table 7. Average
One is the average for all countries for which data is available for all three periods. For these
countries, the share of the labor force in agriculture rises by a little under 1 percentage point

                                                                                            Page 22 of 51
between the 1990s and the early 2000s. The averages in columns (1) and (2) indicate that this trend is
driven by an increase in the share of the female labor force who report that they work in agriculture.
By contrast, the share of the labor force working in agriculture fell by a little under 10 percentage
points between 2000-2005 and 2006-2012. These results are consistent with the results obtained
using the M&R (2011) sample plus the additional 10 countries. These results are also remarkably
consistent with work by de Vries et al (2014) who report for a subset of 11 Sub-Saharan African
countries that the share of employent in agriculture fell from 61.6 percent in 1990 to 49.8 percent in
2010. Unfortunately, not enough DHS surveys were conducted over time in the same countries in
the 1990s to say anything meaningful with the DHS about the trends between 1990 and 1999.
Nevertheless, we can conclude with some degree of confidence, that there has been a sizable decline
in the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture in Africa over the past decade.


     The second thing that Table 7 makes clear is the enormous cross-country heterogeneity in
employment shares in agriculture and in changes in employment shares in agriculture. For example,
focusing on the most recent period 2006-2012, the share of females engaged in agriculture in
Rwanda was 84% while the share of females engaged in agriculture in Senegal was only 20.6 percent.
The differences are equally striking for males; the share of the male population working in
agriculture was 74.8 percent in Ethiopia while it was only 25.7 percent in Senegal. And while in
almost all countries the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture fell, in Madagascar the share
of the labor for engaged in agriculture increased for both women and men. While not the central
focus of this paper, it is worth noting that the cross-country heterogeneity has important policy
implications some of which have been described in recent work by Dercon and Gollin (2014).


     There is also a fair degree of heterogeneity across sub-groups of the population. In Table 8, we
report shares for the following occupations: (i) agriculture, (ii) professional services, (iii) other
services, (iv) unskilled manual labor, (v) skilled manual labor, (vi) not working and for the young,
(vii) in school. The shares are reported for each country for the year in which the initial survey was
conducted. The shares in columns (1) through (5) are calculated with respect to the total number of
individuals in the sub-sample who are currently working and not in school. The shares in column (6)
are calculated based on the total in the sub-sample who are currently not in school and shares in
column (7) are calculated based on the total number of individuals in the sub-sample. The shares in
columns (8) to (13) are calculated in a similar fashion.

                                                                                             Page 23 of 51
     Before going on to describe the trends, we make more explicit the types of jobs included in
each occupation category. Agriculture includes subsistence farmers plus commercial farmers. Ideally
we would like to separate these categories but the data do not permit such a disaggregation. Like
agriculture, all other occupations include both formal and informal sector workers. Clerical, sales
and services includes but is not limited to: secretaries and typists, sales clerks, street vendors, drivers
and traditional healers. Unskilled manual labor includes but is not limited to: garbage collectors,
construction workers and factory workers. Skilled manual labor includes but is not limited to:
masons, mechanics, blacksmiths, telephone installers and tailors. Finally professional occupations
include but are not limited to: business owners, engineers, financiers, teachers, doctors, health
professionals, lawyers and civil servants. Unfortunately, details about occupations are not provided
on a consistent enough basis to create more disaggregated occupation codes.


     Figures 7.a-7.f describes decadal changes in the share of the population working in each
occupation by population sub-group. Since the interval between countries varies, and because we are
interested in describing general trends, we use the following procedure to obtain estimates of the 10
year change in employment shares. For each country, we run a country-specific regression of
occupation on time dummies with the first survey year excluded; we then use the coefficient on the
final year dummy to obtain average annual changes in occupational shares over time. These
annualized changes are then multiplied by 10 to get the predicted 10 year change. The blue bars
represent males, the pink bars represent females and the grey bars are for the total population and
are a population weighted average of the results for males and females.


     The patterns that emerge are generally consistent with the patterns described in Section 4 but
with some additional nuances for population sub-groups. For example, we can see from Figures 7.a-
7.c that the declines in the share of men and women working in agriculture are consistent with the
changes in means reported in Table 7. However, we can also see that for the rural population
(Figure 7.b) the declines in the share of the population engaged in agriculture are more pronounced
while there are slight increases in the share of the population engaged in agriculture in urban areas
and this is equally true for men and women.


     A second pattern that emerges which is consistent with the patterns reported in Section 4 is
the rise in services. However, the results in Figures 7.b and 7.c paint a more nuanced picture than

                                                                                            Page 24 of 51
that which was described in Section 4. In particular, the rise in services is generally a rise in clerical,
sales and other services in rural areas while in urban areas the occupation share in these types of
services has declined. In urban areas, the share of the population engaged in professional services
has risen.


     The trends in occupational shares for skilled and unskilled manual labor cannot be neatly
classified. In urban areas and for the old, the young, males and females alike, there is a decline in the
share of the population engaged in skilled manual labor. On the other hand, there is a slight increase
in the share of rural men – young and old - engaged in skilled manual labor. In urban areas for
women only, there is an increase in the share of the population reporting that they work in unkilled
manual labor while in rural areas and for men only, there is a similar increase in the share of the
population working in unskilled manual labor.


     Across all sub-groups, there was a decline in the share of the population who report that they
are not working. In other words, labor force participation by men, women, the young and the old
alike appears to have risen over the past decade. And finally, there is an increase in the share of the
young (aged 15-24) in school. While it is fairly well known that more children in Africa are going to
school, the less well known fact that we document here is that this is not just an urban phenomenon.
The share of rural young women in school increased by almost 6 percentage points over the last
decade and the share of rural young men in school increased by a little under 13 percentage points
over this same decade.


5. Digging Deeper: Why the Reversal?
        So far we have used data from at least two sources for each country to argue that (i)
structural change in Africa was largely growth reducing between 1990 and 1999; (ii) structural
change in Africa was largely growth enhancing from 2000 onward (with the exact cutoff date
depending on the country in question) ; (iii) the reason that structural change in the most recent
period was growth enhancing is largely on account of the decline in the share of the population
working in agriculture and; (iv) although structural change has been growth enhancing, it cannot be
characterized by a rapid expansion in labor intensive manufacturing. These stylized facts naturally
lead one to wonder what is driving these changes. This section of the paper is devoted to a
discussion of plausible explanations for the decline in the employment share in agriculture. The

                                                                                             Page 25 of 51
discussion is followed by an empirical investigation into the correlates of changes in employment
shares in agriculture.


Explanations for the Decline in the Agricultural Employment Share
         A likely suspect is agricultural productivity growth. Although opinions vary on the extent of
agricultural productivity growth in Africa, there does seem to be a consensus that it is finally
growing. For example, Fuglie and Rada (2013) of The United States Department of Agriculture
report that for the first time in decades, total factor productivity growth in African agriculture is
rising. Progress is slow at roughly 1 percent per year but this is the first time in decades that
agricultural productivity growth in Africa has been positive.


        The relationship between agricultural productivity and the employment share in agriculture is
the subject of a large literature. In one group of models that assume non-homothetic preferences
and a closed economy (e.g., Matsuyama 1992, Gollin, Parente and Rogerson 2002, 2007), a rise in
agricultural productivity releases labor for the modern sector. As people get richer, they spend more
on manufactured goods and services. This pushes up wages in these sectors and attracts rural
migrants. In a second group of models assuming homothetic preferences and a constant elasticity of
substitution below one (e.g., Ngai and Pissarides 2007), any relative increase in the productivity of a
sector leads to a relative decrease in its employment share because its relative price decreases. Thus,
in a closed economy, the agricultural sector shrinks as productivity increases. In a third class of
models that allow for countries to be open to international trade, a rise in agricultural productivity
can increase the employment share in agriculture if the rise in productivity gives the country a
comparative advantage in this sector. Taken together, these models certainly leave open the
possibility that in Africa, the long period of decline in agricultural productivity was associated with
increases in employment in agriculture and that the recent uptick in agricultural productivity could
be part of what is driving the decline in the labor share in agriculture.


        A second possibility is that demographic trends are driving some of the decline in the
employment share in agriculture. During the 1980s and 1990s, African countries’ rural population
growth rates rose higher for a longer period of time than ever before in other regions, which means
there were a lot of new young people in the rural sector at that time. Africa’s towns and cities also
grew at some of the fastest growth rates ever seen elsewhere in the world, but they started from a

                                                                                           Page 26 of 51
small enough base that their growth could not absorb all of the children of farmers. As a result,
many rural people had no choice but to remain in the agricultural sector, driving down the
availability of land and other natural resources per worker. Other regions had similar growth in their
agricultural populations during the early stages of urbanization and structural transformation. The
main differences between Africa and other continents in this regard is the timing and magnitude of
these demographic trends, which were more severe for Africa from the mid-1970s through the
1990s than in other regions where the rural demographic transition happened earlier. Only now are
rural areas starting to experience declines in population growth rates relative to urban areas.


         A third reason for the decline in the agricultural employment share may be the decline in the
incidence of violence in SSA. Figure 9, reproduced with the permission of Strauss (2012), displays
data from the Uppsala Armed Conflict Program and shows that major forms of large scale
organized political violence are on the decline in Sub-Saharan Africa; African civil wars in the late
2000s were about half as common compared to the mid-1990s. The decline in violence could have a
direct effect on the labor share in agriculture by making it safer for workers to move around the
country. It could also have an indirect effect on the labor share in agriculture by making investments
in labor intensive modern services and manufacturing more likely. For example, Asiedu (2006) finds
that political instability has been a deterrent to foreign direct investment in Sub-Saharan Africa.


         A fourth reason for the decline in the agricultural employment share might be increases in
the quality of governance. Using the Polity IV database, we confirm in Figure 10 a general trend
towards improved governance across Africa. Figure 10 plots the population weighted average Polity
IV score for 46 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa between 1960 and 2011.11 To determine whether the
trend in the Polity IV score is driven by changes in the composition of the sample – depending on
which countries have data for a particular year – we note that the scores for most countries appear
in the dataset around the 1960s and 1970s and, as soon as a country shows up in the data, all
observations for subsequent years are non-missing. Hence, the sample of countries for a particular
year can change only if a new country is added to the dataset, possibly because that country gained
independence in that year. Of the 46 Sub-Saharan Africa countries in the Polity IV dataset, 23
countries have data starting in 1960. An additional 9 have data starting between 1961 and 1965; 11
11Polity IV has a particular coding for certain variables. These special codes can take values such as -66, -77 or -88. In
order to obtain scores that were not affected by these coding issues, we changed these to missing values when calculating
the average scores.

                                                                                                        Page 27 of 51
have data starting between 1966 and 1975; and 3 start having data from 1990. The upward trend in
the quality of governance is unmistakable regardless of the sample.


        There are several mechanisms through which improvements in the quality of governance
could reduce the share of the labor force in agriculture. First, Bates and Block (2012) find that
increased political competition across Africa is a strong empirical predictor of increases in
agricultural productivity. They argue that the emergence of electoral competition has altered political
incentives resulting in both sectoral and macroeconomic reforms that benefit farmers. Second,
increases in the quality of governance are typically associated with increases in educational
attainment. Access to education has improved significantly in rural areas (McMillan, 2013); armed
with a better education, folks in rural areas are better placed to move out of agriculture.



        Finally, there is the recent surge in both agricultural and non-agricultural commodity prices
(see Figure 11). The boom in commodity prices is likely to have both direct and indirect effects on
the share of employment in agriculture. Directly, the increase in agricultural commodity prices
makes farming more profitable. This alters the incentives to work in agriculture and the direction of
the effect is unclear. On the one hand, the increase in prices makes farming more profitable creating
an incentive to work in agriculture. On the other hand, the increase in income associated with the
rise in agricultural prices increases family income making it easier to send children to school.
Indirectly, the increase in commodity prices provides governments with more revenue to spend on
education in rural areas.

Empirical Correlates of the Decline in the Agricultural Employment Share

        In Table 10, we investigate these hypotheses empirically. These regressions are similar in
spirit to those presented in Gollin et al (2014) and should not be interpreted causally. The idea is
that these correlations can help us to begin to understand what is driving observed declines in the
share of agricultural employment across Sub-Saharan Africa. An important next step will be to
investigate these hypotheses in more detail at the country level using more detailed information
about local labor markets, conditions in the agricultural sector and government policies to uncover
causal relationships.



                                                                                          Page 28 of 51
        The first step in this empirical investigation into the correlates of the decline in the labor
share in agriculture involves finding a way to quantify each of the potential explanations. Since
agricultural productivity is a function of the number of workers engaged in agriculture and because
agricultural productivity is notoriously difficult to measure, we construct a proxy for agricultural
productivity using country compliance with the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development
Program (CAADP). CAADP is an Africa led and owned agenda that serves to provide a common
framework for policy and partnership renewal in the agricultural sector. CAADP’s primary
objectives are to increase investment in agriculture and improve agriculture policy and strategy
design and implementation. Through these outcomes, CAADP is designed to help meet the goals
of higher growth, poverty reduction, and food and nutrition security. Specific benchmarks for
participating countries are to allocate at least 10 percent of the national budget to the agricultural
sector and achieve an annual agricultural growth rate in the agricultural sector of 6 percent.


        Since the Programme’s implementation in 2003, 30 countries and one regional economic
community, ECOWAS, have held round tables and signed CAADP compacts. Countries have
demonstrated strong ownership and leadership through multi-level participation in CAADP
processes. Diverse stakeholder participation and ministerial level commitment across most
countries represents widespread commitment to the CAADP agenda. Fifteen countries have
convened high-level business meetings in order to increase agricultural investments (Diao et al,
2012). Using this information, we constructed a measure of compliance with the CAADP compact
by constructing a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if a country reached either the agricultural
spending target or the agricultural growth target and 0 otherwise.


        In order to get country-specific indicators of commodity price shocks we calculate country-
specific price indices following Henderson, Roberts and Storeygard (2013). These indices summarize
the individual commodity price environment each country faces by appropriately weighting the
different prices of commodities exported by each country. The intuition behind this is that a
country’s geographic characteristics determine the long-term export bundles each country exports.
In turn, the commodity price environment each country faces depends on the individual prices of
each country’s export bundle.




                                                                                           Page 29 of 51
        Following Bruckner and Ciccone (2010) and Collier and Goderis (2009), Henderson,
Roberts, and Storeygard (2013) define the commodity price index as a geometrically weighted index:


                       [∏                   ]                       ∑


Where k indicates commodity (with a total of n commodities), t indicates year, and i indicates
country. The weights aki, 1962-69 correspond to the share of commodity k in country’s i total
commodity exports in the 1962 to 1969 period calculated using data from Feenstra et al (2005). For
each country, the commodity weights sum to unity. Commodity prices, pkt, are normalized
international prices in current US dollars. We deflated nominal commodity prices by the United
States’ CPI index to get real prices in 2005 US dollars. We first calculated country-specific price
indices using all 37 agricultural and non-agricultural commodities in Henderson, Roberts, and
Storeygard (2013). Using a similar methodology, we calculated two other indices: one for agricultural
commodities and another for non-agricultural commodities.


        We measure the quality of governance using data from the Polity IV database. To measure
conflict, we follow Strauss (2012) and use data from the Uppsala Armed Conflict Data Program. As
a proxy for demographic change, I use total population growth rates. Rural population growth rates
would be more ideal but they are mechanically linked to the share of the labor force engaged in
agriculture. And, total population growth rates and rural population growth rates are highly
correlated.


        We construct employment shares in agriculture using data from the DHS as follows. Using
the micro data for individuals, we construct means by country, year, urban, rural and gender for
employment in agriculture. We use the DHS because as mentioned previously, the DHS provide the
largest coverage of countries in SSA for the most recent time period. Recall, the WDI only report
employment shares by sector for 7 countries in SSA post-1999 and some of the data that does exist
is inaccurate.


        In Table 10, we report the results of regressing the change in the share of employment in
agriculture on each of the following variables measured at the beginning of the period: the share of
the labor force in agriculture, the share of the rural labor force enrolled in secondary school, the
                                                                                          Page 30 of 51
quality of governance, population growth, a dummy equal to one if the country was in conflict, and a
dummy equal to one if the country was in compliance with either CAADP target. For commodity
prices, we use the contemporaneous changes since commodity prices vary considerably from year to
year and because there is no concern about endogeneity with commodity prices. An interaction
between commodity prices and the quality of governance is also included. The idea is that revenues
from commodity prices are more likely to be spent on things that would raise productivity in
agriculture such as education and rural infrastructure when the quality of governance is high.
Finally, we include a dummies for gender and youth.


        All specifications reported in Table 10 include year dummies to capture global trends such as
the recent financial crisis. In columns (1) through (5) of Table 10, we include country fixed effects to
capture country specific factors that could impact the labor share in agriculture such as climate and
soil quality. Because of the biases that arise in fixed effects regressions with a lagged dependent
variable, we also report in columns (6) through (10) the results without country fixed effects; the
results are broadly similar. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation and
are clustered at the country-year level.


        The first important result which is consistent across specifications is that countries with a
higher share of the labor force in agriculture have experienced more rapid declines in the share of
the labor force engaged in agriculture. For example, the results in column (3) indicate that a one
percentage point increase in the initial employment share in agriculture is associated with a .9
percentage point decline in the share of the male labor force engaged in agriculture in the
subsequent period. This evidence is consistent with a large initial gap in productivity, and
productivity growth within agriculture that helps to finance households’ investment in both rural
nonfarm work and migration to urban employment, as well as the rise of employment opportunities
in the destination sector. In addition, since the share of the labor force in agriculture and the
incidence of poverty are highly correlated, this is evidence that poorer countries are experiencing a
more rapid decline in the share of the labor force in agriculture.


        The estimates in row three indicate that rural schooling is correlated with small declines in
the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture in the subsequent period. These effects are
strongest for rural women. A one percentage point increase in the share of the rural female

                                                                                           Page 31 of 51
population enrolled in secondary school is associated with a .08 percentage point decline in the share
of the rural female population engaged in agriculture.


        Increases in the commodity price index are positively correlated with male engagement in
agriculture and negatively correlated with female engagement in agriculture although only the results
for females remain significant once country fixed effects are eliminated. Improvements in the quality
of governance are also negatively correlated with female engagement in agriculture. However, it is
the combined effect of commodity price increases and improvements in the quality of governance
that are most strongly negatively correlated with the employment share in agriculture. This
correlation is strongest for females; females in countries where the rise in commodity prices
coincided with an increase in the quality of governance are significantly less likely to be engaged in
agriculture.


        The results in row 8 indicate that in countries with higher population growth rates the share
of the labor force engaged in agriculture is falling faster; this correlation is the strongest for rural
males. This result combined with the negative coefficient on youth is consistent with a story in
which the share of the population engaged in agriculture is falling at least in part because population
growth reduces the average farm size making farming an increasingly less attractive option for the
young. Conversely, reductions in rural population growth increase the availability of land and make
farming more profitable thus increasing the share of the workforce engaged in agriculture.


        The coefficient on the conflict dummy is negative and is driven by rural men. This is
inconsistent with the hypothesis that reductions in conflict might reduce the labor share in
agriculture. A story consistent with the negative coefficient is that men in countries in conflict spend
less time in agriculture and more time in combat.



        Finally, countries that achieve at least one of their CAADP targets experience more rapid
declines in the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture. This correlation is consistent with
theories that emphasize a negative relationship between agricultural productivity growth and the
share of the labor force engaged in agriculture.



                                                                                             Page 32 of 51
6. Conclusion

        Africa has been largely absent from empirical work on structural change. This paper aims to
fill that gap. We begin by documenting a number of stylized facts. First, recent patterns of
employment shares in Africa fit the stylized facts of other regions’ historical development. In other
words, controlling for income, the quantitative patterns of employment shares in Africa are roughly
what we would expect based on what has transpired elsewhere. Second, between 2000 and 2010,
structural change contributed around 1 percentage point to labor productivity growth in Africa.
Moreover, overall labor productivity growth in Africa was second only to Asia where structural
change continued to play an important positive role. There is however an important difference
between the two regions: the share of employment in manufacturing in Asia is roughly double the
share of employment in manufacturing in Africa.


        Like other developing regions, structural change in Sub-Saharan Africa has been
characterized by a significant decline in the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture. This is a
positive development because agriculture is the least productive sector in the economies of Sub-
Saharan Africa. However, unlike other developing regions, structural change in SSA has not yet been
accompanied by a significant expansion in the share of the labor force employed in manufacturing.
Instead, the reduction in the employment share in agriculture has been matched by a sizeable
increase in the share of the labor force engaged in services. These stylized facts are robust to
alternative data sources. In particular, we use data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
to check our estimates of changes in employment shares and find similar patterns.


        These results are encouraging and point to reasons for the real consumption growth in Sub-
Saharan Africa documented by Young (2012). However, they also underscore the fragility of Sub-
Saharan Africa’s recent growth. This is because the services sector in Sub-Saharan Africa is unlikely
to be an engine of sustained productivity growth over the long run. Nevertheless, several recent
trends in the global economy provide the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa with unprecedented
opportunities for the kinds of activities that could sustain productivity growth in the long run.
Increasing agricultural productivity in Africa and rising global food and commodity prices coupled
with stable macro and political trends have made foreign and local entrepreneurs more willing to



                                                                                           Page 33 of 51
invest in Africa,12. Rising wages in China make Africa a more attractive destination for labor
intensive manufacturing. The global search for natural resources leaves African governments with
unprecedented bargaining power and financial resources. And the spread of democracy in Africa
makes it more likely that these resources will be used to invest in human capital and infrastructure.




12   Steven Radelet (2010), Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way. Baltimore: Brookings Institution Press.

                                                                                                           Page 34 of 51
Works Cited

Elizabeth Asiedu, “Foreign Direct Investment in Africa: The Role of Government Policy,
       Institutions and Political Instability,” World Economy, 29(1), 63-77, 2006.


Badiane, O. 2011. Agriculture and Structural Transformation in Africa. Stanford Symposium Series on
       Global Food Policy and Food Security in the 21st Century. Center on Food Security and the
       Environment. Stanford, California: Stanford University.


Robert Bates and Steven A. Block, “Revisiting African Agriculture: Institutional Change and
       Productivity Growth,” The Journal of Politics, Vol. 75, No. 2, pp 372-284, April 2013.


Bruckner, Markus, Antonio Ciccone and Andrea Tesei, “Oil Price Shocks, Income and Democracy,”
       The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 94(2), pages 389-399, May.


Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Di_erences,” in Philippe Aghion and
       Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1A, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2005,
       chapter 9, pp. 679–742.


Chenery, H.B. 1960. Patterns of industrial growth. American Economic Review, Vol. 50, pp.624-654.


Chenery, H. and Taylor, L. .1968. Development patterns among countries and over time. Review of
       Economic and Statistics, August, pp. 966-1006.


Chenery, H.B. and Syrquin, M. 1975. Patterns of development. London: Oxford University Press.


Collier, Paul and Benedikt Goderis, “Structural policies for shock-prone developing countries,”
       Oxford Economic Papers, Oxford University Press, vol. 61(4), pages 703-726, October.


Dercon, Stefan and Doug Gollin, “Agriculture in African Development: A Review of Theories and
       Strategies,” Draft, March 2014.



                                                                                         Page 35 of 51
de Vries, G.J., M.P. Timmer and K. de Vries, “Structural Transformation in Africa: Static gains,
      dynamic losses,” GGDC Research Memorandum 136, 2013.


Diao, Xinshen, James Thurlow, Samuel Benin and Shenggen Fan (Editors), “Strategies and Priorities
      for African Agriculture: Economywide Perspectives from Country Studies,” International
      Food Policy Research Institute, 2012.


Duarte, Margarida and Restuccia, Diego. 2010. The role of the structural transformation in aggregate
      productivity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 125(1), pages 129-173,
      February.


Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, Hengyong Mo, “World Trade
       Flows: 1962-2000,” NBER Working Paper 11040, 2005.


Fuglie, Keith O., and Nicholas E. Rada. “Resources, Policies and Agriclutural Productivity in Sub-
       Saharan Africa,” ERR-145, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service,
       February 2013.


Gollin, Douglas, David Lagakos, Michael E. Waugh. 2012. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap,”
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013.


Gollin, Dougas, Stephen L. Parente, and Richard Rogerson, “The Role of Agriculture in
       Development,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2002, 92, 160–164.


Henderson, J. Vernon, Mark Roberts and Adam Storeygard, “Is urbanization in Sub-Saharan Africa
      Different?” Policy Research Working Paper Series 6481, The World Bank. 2013.


Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson and Akos Valentinyi, “Two Perspectives on Preferences
      and Structural Transformation,” American Economic Review, American Economic
      Association, vol. 103(7), pages 2752-89, December.


W. Arthur Lewis, (1955): The Theory of Economic Growth. London: Allen and Unwin.

                                                                                      Page 36 of 51
Maddison, Angus, Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2008 AD,
       Groningen: University of Groningen, 2010.


Kiminori Matsuyama, “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage and Economic Growth,”
       Journal of Economic Theory, Elsevier, vol. 58(2), pages 317-334, December.


McMillan, Margaret and Dani Rodrik, “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth,”
       in M. Bachetta and M. Jansen, eds., Making Globalization Socially Sustainable, International
       Labor Organization and World Trade Organization, Geneva, 2011.


McMillan, Margaret, “Africa’s quiet agricultural revolution,” This is Africa, a publication of The
       Financial Times, January 6, 2014.


Rachel L. Ngai and Chrisopher Pissarides, “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of Growth,”
       American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 97(1), pages 429-443,
       March.


Rodrik, Dani, “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
       (2013) 128(1): 165-204.


Page, John and Abebe Shimeles, “Aid, employment, and poverty reduction in Africa” WIDER
       Working Paper 2014/043 Helsinki: UNU-WIDER.


Pinkovskiy, M. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “African poverty is falling...much faster than you think!
       NBER Working Papers 15775, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


Steven Radelet, Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way. Washington, DC: Center
       for Global Development, 2010.


Restuccia, Diego, Yang, Dennis Tao, and Zhu, Xiaodong. 2008. Agriculture and aggregate
       productivity: A quantitative cross-country analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol.
       55(2), pages 234-250, March.

                                                                                          Page 37 of 51
Scott Strauss, “WARS DO END! CHANGING PATTERNS OF POLITICAL VIOLENCE IN
      SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA,” African Affairs, 111/443 179-201, March 2012.


Young, Alwyn, “The African Growth Miracle,” Journal of Political Economy, 120 (August 2012):
      696-739.




                                                                                     Page 38 of 51
Figure 1: Employment Shares by Main Economic Sector


                                                         Employment shares of 3 broad sectors
                                Comparing sample from Duarte and Restuccia (2010) and African countries (sample from Jan 2013)
                                  2006 - 2012

                                           Agriculture                                                                 Industry




                                                                                  0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                    sEhi_ind
        sEhi_ag




                       6         7         8          9        10                                   6         7         8          9        10
                           Log GDP per capita (1990 International $                                     Log GDP per capita (1990 International $

                               D&R sample             Africa sample                                         D&R sample            Africa sample


                                 Services (with fitted values)
     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
       sEhi_srv




                       6         7         8          9        10
                           Log GDP per capita (1990 International $

                               D&R sample             Africa sample

  Note that Africa data measure sectoral share of total employment whereas D&R data measure share of total hours.
  Hours shares from Duarte and Restuccia (2010) cover 29 countries from 1950-2006
  Their data were accessed 07/24/2012 from Duarte's website
  GDP from Maddison (2010)
Figure 2: Employment Shares by Main Economic Sector, Africa.


                     Employment shares in 3 broad sectors in 1990 and 2005
                                                           African countries (new sample from January 2013)




                                                                                     Employment share in Industry
                                                    Agriculture                                                                       Industry
     Employment share in AGR
       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                         0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                          ETHMLI AGO
                                               RWA
                                           UGA
                                          MWI
                                          TZA
                                           MWI    MOZ
                                            ETH
                                            TZARWA
                                            ZMBUGA CMR MOZ
                                                  KEN
                                                MLISEN
                                                 GHA
                                                 KEN
                                                  CMRGHA
                                              ZMBNGA       MAR
                                                     NGA                                                                                             MUS
                                                         EGY                                                                             MAR
                                                    SEN     EGYBWA                                                                           ZAF            MUS
                                                          DZA                                                                              DZA
                                                                                                                                           BWA
                                                                                                                                          DZA
                                                                                                                                            EGYZAF
                                                           DZA
                                                             ZAF   MUS                                                                   EGY
                                                                                                                                           MAR
                                                           BWA                                                                ZMB   SEN
                                                                                                                                     GHA
                                                                                                                                     NGA       BWA
                                                                            MUS                                                  GHA
                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                         MAR ZAF                                                           MWI
                                                                                                                            ZMB
                                                                                                                            ETH
                                                                                                                          MWI
                                                                                                                            TZA
                                                                                                                          TZA
                                                                                                                           UGA
                                                                                                                          ETH
                                                                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                                                                UGA
                                                                                                                               RWA
                                                                                                                               RWA
                                                                                                                             MLI   CMR
                                                                                                                                 KEN
                                                                                                                                  KEN
                                                                                                                                MLISEN MOZ
                                                                                                                                  MOZ
                                                                                                                                 AGO

                                    6          7          8          9          10                                  6          7          8          9          10
                                        Log GDP per capita (1990 International $                                        Log GDP per capita (1990 International $
     Employment share in Services




                                                     Services
          0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                               ZAF
                                                         MAR
                                                           BWABWA           MUS
                                                          DZA
                                                            DZA
                                                             ZAF
                                                  NGANGA EGYEGY    MUS
                                                 KENSEN    MAR
                                                MLI
                                                 GHA GHA
                                                   SEN
                                                UGA
                                                  CMR
                                              ZMBKEN
                                            ZMB
                                            TZA
                                            ETHRWA
                                           MWI
                                          TZA
                                           UGA
                                          MWI      CMR MOZ
                                                  MOZ
                                          ETHMLI AGO
                                               RWA

                                    6          7          8          9          10
                                        Log GDP per capita (1990 International $

  GDP from Maddison (2010)
Figure 3: Labor Productivity Gaps in Africa in 2005
                                                        2500

                                                                                                                                              2162.214
                                                            Mining (min)
   Sectoral Productivity as % of Average Productivity




                                                            Utilities (pu)
                                                        2000Finance (fire)
                                                            Transport (tsc)
                                                            Manufacturing (man)
                                                            Construction (con)
                                                            Other services (cspsgs)
                                                            Trade (wrt)
                                                        1500Agriculture (agr)
                                                                                                                                                 1269


                                                        1000                                                                                     902



                                                         500                                                                                     407

                                                                                           36                                              162213
                                                                                                                           89        105
                                                             100
                                                            0
                                                               0           10         20   30        40      50       60        70   80     90
                                                                                                Share of Total Employment (%)



Source: Own calculations using data from McMillan and Rodrik (2011)
Figure 4.a. Decomposition of Productivity Growth by Country                                       Figure 4.b. Decomposition of Productivity Growth by Country
           Group, 1990-1999 (unweighted)                                                                     Group, 1990-1999 (weighted)


                  LAC                                                                                        LAC                                                                 within
                                                                                 within
                                                                                 structural                                                                                      structural

               AFRICA                                                                                    AFRICA



                 ASIA
                                                                                                             ASIA



                    HI
                                                                                                               HI


  -1.00% -0.50%       0.00%      0.50%   1.00%   1.50%   2.00%   2.50%   3.00%   3.50%    4.00%
                                                                                                   -1.00%          0.00%     1.00%      2.00%       3.00%       4.00%      5.00%          6.00%


Figure 4.c. Decomposition of Productivity Growth by Country                                       Figure 4.d. Decomposition of Productivity Growth by Country
            Group. Post 2000 (unweighted)                                                                    Group. Post 2000 (weighted)

                                                                                                                                                                        within
                  LAC                                                            within                     LAC
                                                                                                                                                                        structural
                                                                                 structural


               AFRICA                                                                                   AFRICA




                 ASIA                                                                                       ASIA




                    HI                                                                                        HI



  -1.00%              0.00%              1.00%           2.00%           3.00%            4.00%    -1.00%      0.00%       1.00%     2.00%      3.00%   4.00%      5.00%     6.00%        7.00%




Source: McMillan et.al. (2013)
Figure 5.a: Latin American Countries                                                                                                                 Figure 5.b: Asian Countries
                                                                Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and                                                                                                               Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                               Change in Employment Shares in Latin America                                                                                                                    Change in Employment Shares in Asia




                                                                                                                                                       Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
  Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity




                                                    β = 4.7730; t-stat = 0.16                                                                                                                            β = 24.1876; t-stat = 1.23




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                             2



                                                                                       min
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        min




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               man
                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ter




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                             man
                 0




                                                                                                                                       ter




                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            agr

                                                       agr




                                                                                                                                                        -2
   -1




                                                             -.01                     0              .01                       .02             .03                                                        -.04                         -.02                   0                                  .02                            .04
                                                                                       Change in Employment Share                                                                                                                                 Change in Employment Share
                                                                                            (∆Emp. Share)                                                                                                                                              (∆Emp. Share)

                                                                                                       Fitted values                                                                                                                                              Fitted values

                                                    *Note: Size of circle represents employment share at beginning of period                                                                             *Note: Size of circle represents employment share at beginning of period
                                                    **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:                                                                             **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                            ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share                                                                                                                           ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share
                                                     Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)                                                                              Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009) and China's National Bureau of Statistics




Figure 5.c: High Income Countries                                                                                                                    Figure 5.d: African Countries
                                                                Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and                                                                                                         Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                Change in Employment Shares in High Income                                                                                                              Change in Employment Shares in Africa
  Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity




                                                                                                                                                       Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
                                                    β = -5.8398; t-stat = -2.04                                                                                                                          β = 24.7129; t-stat = 0.91                             min
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                     min




                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                               .5




                                                       man




                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ter
                 0




                                                                                                                                             ter




                                                                                                                                                           -1       0
                                                                                              agr
   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                            agr

                                                           -.02               -.01            0           .01                    .02          .03                                                         -.04                      -.02                  0                             .02                         .04
                                                                                      Change in Employment Share                                                                                                                              Change in Employment Share
                                                                                           (∆Emp. Share)                                                                                                                                           (∆Emp. Share)

                                                                                                      Fitted values                                                                                                                                         Fitted values
                                                    *Note: Size of circle represents employment share at beginning of period                                                                             *Note: Size of circle represents employment share at beginning of period
                                                    **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:                                                                             **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                            ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share                                                                                                                           ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share
                                                     Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)                                                                              Source: Authors' calculations.
Figure 6a. Mauritius                                                                                                                                                    Figure 6b. Nigeria

                                                             Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and                                                                                                                           Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                         Change in Employment Shares in Mauritius (2000-2007)                                                                                                                     Change in Employment Shares in Nigeria (1999-2009)
 Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity




                                                                                                                                                                         Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
                                                   β = 2.5940; t-stat = 2.37                                                                                                                                               β = 85.2651; t-stat = 0.52
                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                              min
                                                                                                                                                      ter                                                                                                                                 min




                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                      man
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ter                                                          man




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  agr
    -.4




                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                            agr

                                                         -.05                              0                     .05                                        .1                                                             -.01                     -.005                 0              .005                                     .01
                                                                                        Change in Employment Share                                                                                                                                            Change in Employment Share
                                                                                             (∆Emp. Share)                                                                                                                                                         (∆Emp. Share)

                                                                                                        Fitted values                                                                                                                                                         Fitted values
                                                   *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 2000                                                                                                               *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1999
                                                   **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:                                                                                                **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                           ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share                                                                                                                                              ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share
                                                    Source: Authors' calculations with data from Mauritius' CSO and UN National Accounts Statistics                                                                         Source: Authors' calculations with data from Adeyinka, Salau and Vollrath (2012)




Figure 6c. Uganda                                                                                                                                                       Figure 6d. Malawi

                                                                   Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and                                                                                                                        Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                Change in Employment Shares in Uganda (1999-2009)                                                                                                                    Change in Employment Shares in Malawi (1998-2005)
 Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity




                                                                                                                                                                         Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
                                                   β = 9.9173; t-stat = 7.92                                                                                                                                               β = 43.9572; t-stat = 0.49




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        min
                                         1




                                                                                                                           man                                    ter




                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ter
                                                                                                                     min                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      man
             -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                  0
    -1




                                                      agr                                                                                                                                                                                   agr
                                                                                                                                                                          -1




                                                          -.1                        -.05                 0                                 .05                  .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.02                        -.01                   0                                .01                            .02
                                                                                            Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                 (∆Emp. Share)                                                                                                                                                    Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (∆Emp. Share)
                                                                                                            Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fitted values
                                                   *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1999
                                                   **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:                                                                                                *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1998
                                                           ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share                                                                                                                                      **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                    Source: Authors' calculations with data from Uganda's Bureau of Statistics, IMF,                                                                                               ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share
                                                    and UN National Accounts Statistics                                                                                                                                     Source: Authors' calculations with data from Malawi's National Statistical Office, WDI 2010, and ILO's LABORSTA
Figure 7.a: Avg. change in probability of working in occupation,                                                                                                                                    Figure 7.b: Avg. change in probability of working in occupation,                                                                                                                           Figure 7.c: Avg. change in probability of working in occupation,
all population                                                                                                                                                                                      All rural population                                                                                                                                                                       All urban population
                                                .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .02
 Ten Year Change in Share in Each Category




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ten Year Change in Share in Each Category




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ten Year Change in Share in Each Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .02
                                                0
     Unweighted Cross Country Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Unweighted Cross Country Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Unweighted Cross Country Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.02
                                                -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.04
                                                -.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.06
                                                -.08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.08
                                                                                                Agriculture      Services         Professional      Unskilled        Skilled     Not Working                                                                                                    Agriculture     Services          Professional      Unskilled       Skilled      Not Working                                                        Agriculture      Services         Professional    Unskilled         Skilled     Not Working
                                                                                                                            All                  Female                   Male                                                                                                                                              All                    Female                Male                                                                                                   All                  Female                  Male




Figure 7.d: Avg. change in probability of participating in                                                                                                                                          Figure 7.e: Avg. change in probability of participating in                                                                                                                                 Figure 7.f: Avg. change in probability of participating in
occupation, All young individuals (age 16 to 24)                                                                                                                                                    occupation, All young rural individuals (age 16 to 24)                                                                                                                                     occupation, All young urban individuals (age 16 to 24)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .15
                                                                                         .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ten Year Change in Share in Each Category




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ten Year Change in Share in Each Category
                                             Ten Year Change in Share in Each Category




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Unweighted Cross Country Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Unweighted Cross Country Average
                                                 Unweighted Cross Country Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .05
                                                                                         .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.05
                                                                                         -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.1
                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                   Agriculture    Services        Professional   Unskilled      Skilled   Not Working   In School                                                                                           Agriculture   Services   Professional      Unskilled       Skilled   Not Working    In School                                                          Agriculture    Services   Professional     Unskilled       Skilled   Not Working   In School

                                                                                                                                   All                Female                   Male                                                                                                                                   All                   Female                   Male                                                                                                       All                  Female                  Male




Source: Author's calculation using DHS data.
Notes:
1. Average predicted 10-year changes are computed as a simple unweighted mean of country specific 10-year changes. Country specific 10-year changes correspond to the coefficient on the final year dummy of a country specific regression of
occupation on time dummies with the first year excluded; these changes were then annualized and multiplied times ten to get the predicted 10-year change.  
2. Countries in sample include: Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Figure 8: Predicted Ten Year Change in Share of Workers in Agriculture. Old rural Men.

                                .05
                                0                                          Old (age 25+),male,rural individuals. Agriculture
     Ten Year Change in Share
                                -.05
                                -.1
                                -.15



                                                 Cameroon




                                                                            Uganda




                                                                                                       Ghana

                                                                                                               Guinea




                                                                                                                                                                                       Chad




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rwanda

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gabon
                                       Nigeria




                                                                                                                                     Zambia

                                                                                                                                              Zimbabwe

                                                                                                                                                         Kenya




                                                                                                                                                                                              Tanzania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cote d'Ivoire

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Benin
                                                                                     Mali




                                                                                                                                                                 Malawi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Senegal
                                                                                                                        Madagascar
                                                            Burkina Faso




                                                                                            Ethiopia




                                                                                                                                                                          Mozambique

Source: Own calculations using data from DHS.
Notes:
1. Sub-sample of all old (age 25+), rural, male agricultural workers not currently attending school.
2. Exlcudes Lesotho and Niger.
3. Results based on results of country-specific regression of dummy indicating whether individual works in agriculture or not against a constant and year dummies for each available survey
year. To get ten year changes, the coefficient on dummy for latest available year was divided by total number of years between first and last years with survey data for each country and
multiplied times ten.
Figure 9: Armed Conflict in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1960-2008
                     20
                          Interstate War
                     18
                          Civil War
                     16   Internationalized Civil War
  No. of Conflicts

                     14

                     12

                     10

                     8

                     6

                     4

                     2

                     0


                                                        Year
Source: Straus (2012)
Figure 10: Average polity2 score for Sub-Saharan Africa
      5
      0
   -5




          1960                    1970                    1980                    1990                    2000                    2010
                                                                       Year
                          1960 sub-sample                 1965 sub-sample                  1975 sub-sample                 1990 sub-sample



Source: Author's calculations using data from the Polity IV Project and The World Bank's WDI dataset.
Notes:
1. Graph shows a weighted average of the polity2 score (weighted by population) in the Polity IV dataset. The polity2 score is the revised
combined polity score which, is the result of substracting the "autoc" score from the "democ" score. It scores how democratic or autocratic a
regime is and ranges from -10 (strongly autocratic) to +10 (strongly democratic).


2. Solid bright lines are population-weighted averages of the individual country scores for each cohort: the 1960 cohort (red), 1965 cohort
(yellow), 1975 cohort (green), and the 1990 cohort (blue).



3. Countries included are: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo Brazzaville, Congo Kinshasa, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Togo,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Burundi, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia, Gambia, Botswana, Lesotho, Equatorial Guinea, Mauritius,
Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Guinea-Bissau, Angola, Cape Verde, Comoros, Mozambique, Namibia, Eritrea, and South Sudan.
                                     Figure 11: Commodity Price Indices by Country




                                     400
Commodity Price Index (2005 = 100)




                                     300
                                     200
                                     100
                                              0




                                                  1960                         1970                         1980                        1990                         2000                         2010
                                                                                                                             year
                                                               BEN                 BFA                CIV                 CMR                ETH                GAB                GHA                GIN
                                                               KEN                 LSO                MDG                 MLI                MOZ                MWI                NAM                NER
                                                               NGA                 RWA                SEN                 TCD                TZA                UGA                ZAF                ZMB
                                                               ZWE



                                     Source: Authors' calculations following Henderson, Roberts and Storeygard (2013) using data from several sources. Commodity prices come from UNCTAD except for
                                     maize, natural gas, rubber, silver, tea, tobacco, logs, and sawnwood wich come from The World Bank's Pink Sheet dataset (Sept. 2013 update). Export shares were
                                     calculated from Freenstra (2005) data. Consumer price index for the US comes from US Bureau of Labor Statistics and GDP data in current dollars comes from the Penn
                                     World Tables version 7.
                                     Notes:
                                     Included commodities are: Aluminium, bananas, beef, cattle hides, coconut oil, cocoa beans, coffee, copper, copra, cotton, crude petroleum, cottonseed oil, groundnut oil, iron
                                     ore, jute, lead, linseed oil, manganese ore, pepper, palm oil, rice, sisal, sunflower, soybeans, sugar, soybean oil, tin, wheat, zinc, maize, natural gas, rubber, silver, tea,
                                     tobacco, logs, sawnwood.
Table 1: Comparing the Africa Samples to All of Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                M&R (2011)                  DHS'              M&R (2011)
                                                                                           All SSA
                                                                                                                 Sample                    sample              Plus 10
                                                                                              (1)                  (2)                       (3)                 (4)

GDP per capita, PPP (constant 2005 international $)                                          3,189                   3,617                  1,829*                2,817
                                                                                            5,048                    4,229                  2,609                 3,674

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)                                               74.34                  58.85**                 74.89                 66.99
                                                                                            26.18                    22.67                    17                  23.77

Years of Schooling                                                                           5.03                   6.59***                  4.88                  5.45
                                                                                             2.05                     1.64                     2                   2.32

Years of Primary Schooling                                                                   3.66                   4.85***                  3.72                   4.1
                                                                                             1.43                     0.92                   1.47                  1.52

Years of Secondary Schooling                                                                  1.3                     1.66                    1.1                  1.28
                                                                                              .82                     1.06                    .8                   1.03

Years of Tertiary Schooling                                                                   .07                      .07                    .07                   .06
                                                                                              .07                     .04                    .07                    .04

Raw materials exports as prop. of total exports; WDI period average                           .15                      .12                    .17                   .13
                                                                                              .11                     .05                    .12                    .06

Share of NRX in GDP (%) in 2000                                                              21.16                   20.17                  18.14                 17.81
                                                                                            19.44                    14.59                  12.51                 13.09

Undervaluation Index; average during period (PWT7)                                            -.08                    -.01                   -.05                   .02
                                                                                               .3                     .18                    .36                    .19

Employment in agriculture (% of total employment)                                            53.24                   43.33                 67.7***                 51.3
                                                                                            28.15                    31.68                  18.71                 30.63

Total population (in millions)                                                              716.62                  395.65                 542.11                 484.78
                                                                                                                                                                   68%
Number of countries                                                                           46                       11                     24                    16

Notes: All estimates are for 2005 with the exception of Share of NRX in GDP (2000). Standard deviations in italics. For colums (2) to (4), asterisks next to a variable
indicate that two-sided test of difference in means shows that difference is statistically significant from mean value for SSA countries not in the respective sample: ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. For a list of countries in each sample see Appendix.
Table 2. Summary Statistics

                                                                      Coef. of Variation of
                                           Economywide                                         Sector with Highest      Sector with Lowest      Compound Annual
             Country             Code                                   Log of Sectoral
                                         Labor Productivity*                                   Labor Productivity       Labor Productivity       Growth Rate of
                                                                         Productivity                                                                                Period
                                                                                                                                                  Economywide
                                                                                                                                                 Productivity **
                                                                                                          Labor                    Labor
                                                                                              Sector                   Sector
                                                                                                       Productivity*            Productivity*
High Income
        United States            USA              71,021                     0.026             man       114,566        ter        65,236             2.34%        (2000-2005)
        France                   FRA              56,526                     0.015             man       70,223         agr        47,528            0.97%         (2000-2005)
        Italy                     ITA             51,638                     0.051             min       140,037        agr        39,472            -0.61%        (2000-2005)
        Netherlands              NLD              51,588                     0.123             min       930,958        agr        47,084             1.05%        (2000-2005)
        Sweden                   SWE              50,765                     0.028             man       87,719         ter        42,579            2.67%         (2000-2005)
        Japan                    JPN              49,419                     0.069             man       72,900         agr        13,758             2.22%        (2000-2005)
        United Kingdom           UKM              47,472                     0.077             min       287,454        ter        43,730            1.42%         (2000-2005)
        Spain                    ESP              47,019                     0.016             min        55,314        agr        36,811            -0.25%        (2000-2005)
        Denmark                  DNK              45,447                     0.114             min       622,759        ter        44,582             1.04%        (2000-2005)
Asia
          Hong Kong              HKG              67,758                     0.068             ter        70,624        agr        14,861            3.47%         (2000-2005)
          Singapore              SGP              65,352                     0.063             man        81,563        agr        18,324            1.51%         (2000-2005)
          Taiwan                 TWN              48,069                     0.100             min       171,853        agr        12,440            2.26%         (2000-2005)
          Malaysia               MYS              33,852                     0.131             min       469,892        agr        18,425            3.64%         (2000-2005)
          South Korea            KOR              32,121                     0.082             min       118,103        agr        20,652            3.16%         (2000-2005)
          Thailand               THA              13,856                     0.143             min       110,836        agr         3,754            2.50%         (2000-2005)
          Indonesia              IDN              11,276                     0.129             min        85,836        agr         4,307            3.81%         (2000-2005)
          Philippines            PHL               9,892                     0.104             min        50,414        agr         5,498            2.53%         (2000-2005)
          China                  CHN               9,317                     0.135             min        55,879        agr         2,594            8.77%         (2000-2005)
          India                  IND               7,318                     0.108             min        23,825        agr         2,510            6.96%         (2000-2005)

Latin America
        Argentina                ARG              29,363                     0.096             min       239,645        ter        24,742            0.01%         (2000-2005)
        Chile                    CHL              28,257                     0.098             min       194,745        agr        19,008             1.29%        (2000-2005)
        Mexico                   MEX              24,252                     0.085             min        75,702        agr         9,002             2.38%        (2000-2005)
        Costa Rica               CRI              20,956                     0.054             man       35,230         min        10,575            1.55%         (2000-2005)
        Venezuela                VEN              20,854                     0.146             min       297,975        agr        10,130             1.33%        (2000-2005)
        Colombia                 COL              13,887                     0.081             min        57,984        agr         9,029             0.12%        (2000-2005)
        Peru                     PER              12,894                     0.128             min        84,817        agr         4,052             2.78%        (2000-2005)
        Brazil                   BRA              11,830                     0.114             min        78,214        agr         5,660             0.09%        (2000-2005)
        Bolivia                  BOL               7,002                     0.159             min       121,264        agr         4,162            -0.53%        (2000-2005)
Africa
          South Africa***        ZAF              39,908                     0.076             min        73,982        agr        11,442             2.47%        (2000-2005)
          Mauritius***           MUS              38,434                     0.027             min        46,248        agr        24,698             2.29%        (2000-2005)
          Algeria                DZA              21,128                     0.163             min       304,257        man        7,187              0.62%        (2001-2009)
          Egypt                  EGY              13,354                     0.211             min       770,347        agr        4,903              1.73%        (2000-2007)
          Morocco                MAR               8,065                     0.120             min        39,977        agr         2,615             4.18%        (2000-2007)
          Angola                 AGO               7,771                     0.284             min       568,823        agr          604              5.68%        (2005-2009)
          Nigeria***             NGA               4,340                     0.281             min       666,121        agr        1,858              3.77%        (2000-2005)
          Senegal                SEN               4,224                     0.144             min        27,948        agr         1,271             0.79%        (2000-2005)
          Cameroon               CMR               3,786                     0.212             min       157,258        agr        1,503             -2.61%        (2001-2007)
          Kenya***               KEN               3,550                     0.154             min        49,226        agr         2,391            -0.42%        (2000-2005)
          Ghana***               GHA               3,044                     0.053             min         3,393        man        1,422              3.63%        (2000-2005)
          Zambia***              ZMB               2,395                     0.174             min        15,120        agr          535              1.30%        (2000-2005)
          Uganda                 UGA               2,161                     0.124             ter         5,467        agr          738              1.78%        (1999-2009)
          Tanzania               TZA               2,101                     0.142             man        16,315        agr          923              3.17%        (2000-2007)
          Ethiopia***            ETH               1,993                     0.088             ter         6,352        agr        1,250              2.09%        (2000-2005)
          Rwanda                 RWA               1,490                     0.143             ter         6,086        agr          683              3.96%        (1996-2005)
          Malawi***              MWI               1,314                     0.240             min        70,846        agr          521             -1.73%        (2000-2005)
          Mozambique***          MOZ               1,285                     0.143             man         5,130        agr          436              4.91%        (2003-2009)
          Mali                   MLI               1,178                     0.141             min         9,526        agr          760              2.81%        (2001-2009)

Note: All numbers are for final year in period unless otherwise stated.
* 2000 PPP dollars. All numbers are for final year in period.
** During period. *** Part of original M&R (2011) sample.
Table 3. Sector Coverage


                                                                              Average Sectoral     Maximum Sectoral Labor     Minimum Sectoral Labor
                      Sector                          Abbreviation
                                                                             Labor Productivity*        Productivity               Productivity

                                                                                                                Labor                      Labor
                                                                                                   Country                   Country
                                                                                                             Productivity*              Productivity*


Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, and Fishing                 agr                    14,435           USA         65,306        MOZ            436

Mining and Quarrying                                        min                    156,577          NLD         930,958       RWA            994

Manufacturing                                               man                    33,051           USA         114,566       GHA           1,422

Tertiary                                                    ter                    23,662           HKG         70,624        MLI           1,687

Economy-wide                                                sum                    23,454           USA         71,021        MLI           1,178
Note: All numbers are for final year in period for all countires.
* 2000 PPP dollars. All numbers are for final year in period for all countries.
Table 4: Decomposition of productivity growth, 2000 -2005.

                             Labor Productivity              Of which:
                                       Growth     "Within"          "Structural"
Latin America                          1.00%       1.86%                 -0.86%
Africa                                 2.13%       1.21%                 0.92%
Asia                                   3.86%       3.45%                 0.41%
High Income                            1.21%       1.40%                 -0.19%
Notes: Regional unweighted averages.
Table 5 : Decomposition of productivity growth in Africa (post 2000)

                                   Labor Productivity                                    Of which:
                                        Growth                                "Within"               "Structural"
Algeria                                    0.62%                               0.43%                    0.19%
Angola                                     5.68%                               5.29%                    0.39%
Cameroon                                   -2.61%                              -3.08%                   0.46%
Egypt                                      1.73%                               3.20%                   -1.47%
Ethiopia                                   2.09%                               2.06%                    0.03%
Ghana                                      3.63%                               3.66%                   -0.03%
Kenya                                      0.57%                               0.29%                    0.27%
Malawi                                     -1.73%                              -1.80%                   0.08%
Mali                                       2.81%                               2.29%                    0.52%
Mauritius                                  2.29%                               1.82%                    0.46%
Morocco                                    4.18%                               3.16%                    1.02%
Mozambique                                 4.91%                               3.98%                    0.94%
Nigeria                                    3.77%                               0.96%                    2.81%
Rwanda                                     3.96%                               -0.16%                   4.12%
Senegal                                    0.79%                               -0.37%                   1.16%
South Africa                               2.47%                               2.10%                    0.38%
Tanzania                                   3.17%                               0.76%                    2.41%
Uganda                                     1.78%                               -0.88%                   2.65%
Zambia                                     1.30%                               1.23%                    0.57%


Africa Unweighted                          2.18%                               1.31%                    0.87%
Africa Weighted                            2.87%                               2.07%                    0.80%
Source: Author's calculations based on data described in the data appendix.
Table 6: DHS Survey Countries and Years in Sample, SSA

Country Name                                   DHS Survey Years
Benin                                  1996(f&m), 2001(f&m), 2006(f&m)
Burkina Faso                       1992(f&m), 1998(f&m), 2003(f&m), 2010(f)
Cameroon                           1991(f&m), 1998(f&m), 2004(f&m), 2011(f)
Chad                                          1996(f&m), 2004(f&m)
Cote d'Ivoire                      1994(f&m), 1998(f&m), 2005(f), 2011(f&m)
Ethiopia                               2000(f&m), 2005(f&m), 2011(f&m)
Gabon                                         2000(f&m), 2012(f&m)
Ghana                           1993(f&m), 1998(f&m), 2003(f&m), 2008(f&m)
Guinea                                        1999(f&m), 2005(f&m)
Kenya                           1993(f&m), 1998(f&m), 2003(f&m), 2009(f&m)
Lesotho                                       2004(f&m), 2009(f&m)
Madagascar                           1992(f), 1997(f), 2004(f&m), 2009(f&m)
Malawi                          1992(f&m), 2000(f&m), 2004(f&m), 2010(f&m)
Mali                                   1995(f&m), 2001(f&m), 2006(f&m)
Mozambique                         1997(f&m), 2003(f&m), 2009(f), 2011(f&m)
Namibia                                    1992(f), 2000(f&m), 2007(f)
Niger                                  1992(f&m), 1998(f&m), 2006(f&m)
Nigeria                            1990(f), 1999(f&m), 2003(f&m), 2008(f&m)
Rwanda                          1992(f&m), 2000(f&m), 2005(f&m), 2010(f&m)
Senegal                         1992(f&m), 1997(f&m), 2005(f&m), 2011(f&m)
Tanzania                1992(f&m), 1996(f&m), 1999(f&m), 2004(f&m), 2008(f), 2010(f&m)
Uganda                          1995(f&m), 2000(f&m), 2006(f&m), 2011(f&m)
Zambia                             1992(f), 1996(f&m), 2001(f&m), 2007(f&m)
Zimbabwe                        1994(f&m), 1999(f&m), 2006(f&m), 2011(f&m)

Note: "f" indicates survey collects data only on women; "f&m" indicates survey collected data on women
and men.
Table 7: Percentage of Workers (age 25+) in Agriculture, DHS Africa Sample.
                                                      Female                                               Male                           Combined
    Country name
                                      1990s        2000 - 2005 2006 - 2012                      1990s   2000 - 2005 2006 - 2012   1990s   2000 - 2005 2006 - 2012


Benin                                  29.6             34.7             38.4                   67.1       61.4        55.4       48.3       48.1        46.9
Burkina Faso                           32.4             76.6             60.4                   77.7       76.2                   55.0       76.4        30.2
Cameroon                               62.0             53.6             40.9                   54.2       47.5                   58.1       50.5        20.5
Chad                                   47.4             75.4                                    79.1       71.8                   63.3       73.6
Cote d'Ivoire                          49.8             44.4             35.9                   51.6                   51.7       50.7                   43.8
Ethiopia                                                57.9             46.9                              84.5        74.8                  71.2        60.9
Gabon                                                   23.5              9.7                              19.2         7.4                  21.4         8.5
Ghana                                  41.4             39.7             32.9                   55.4       52.2        44.4       48.4       46.0        38.7
Guinea                                 64.4             60.3                                    62.3       60.7                   63.4       60.5
Kenya                                  48.2             53.6             42.3                   44.3       44.1        36.1       46.2       48.8        39.2
Lesotho                                                 35.2             22.3                              30.1        43.0                  32.7        32.6
Madagascar                             63.6             69.5             71.6                              66.8        73.9                  68.2        72.8
Malawi                                 23.8             67.6             55.9                   60.0       57.0        46.8       41.9       62.3        51.4
Mali                                   40.1             45.1              0.0                   64.8       66.2        56.1       52.5       55.6        28.0
Mozambique                             78.0             80.9             66.8                   56.2       65.2        45.2       67.1       73.0        56.0
Namibia                                 1.9             11.1             16.9                              17.0                              14.1         8.4
Niger                                  34.8                              38.1                   76.1                   51.6       55.4                   44.8
Nigeria                                21.7             20.8             24.0                   43.2       39.2        39.9       32.5       30.0        32.0
Rwanda                                 94.5             89.6             84.4                   88.8       68.6        68.8       91.7       79.1        76.6
Senegal                                37.4             25.4             20.6                   43.1       29.7        25.7       40.3       27.6        23.2
Tanzania                               78.5             78.8             69.9                   72.1       70.5        61.3       75.3       74.7        65.6
Uganda                                 73.3             77.6             71.0                   71.6       66.9        63.2       72.5       72.3        67.1
Zambia                                 56.0             63.0             47.7                   49.1       58.1        50.4       52.5       60.5        49.1
Zimbabwe                               40.9                              32.6                   26.2                   32.9       33.5                   32.8


Average One                            51.9             56.4             46.2                   59.6       56.6        50.0       55.8       56.5        47.7
Average Two                            49.1             53.8             42.2                   60.2       54.9        49.3       54.6       54.6        49.3

Source: Own calculations using DHS data.
Notes:
1. Sample includes all African countries in DHS (excludes D. R. Congo).
2. Numbers shown are for sub-sample of people who reported to be currently working and not attending school.
3. Average One is the average for countries that have data for both genders for all three periods.
4. Average Two is the column average for all countries.
Table 8.A: Shares of Individuals by Sectors at Initial Year. Men.
                                                                                                                      Panel A: Rural
                                                                           Young                                                                                                                     Old
                       All                           Clerical, sales,                                                                                   All                           Clerical, sales,
                                    Professional                         Unskilled         Skilled                                                                   Professional                        Unskilled          Skilled
                   agricultural                       and services                                        Not working         In school             agricultural                       and services                                        Not working
                                      workers                             workers          workers                                                                     workers                            workers           workers
                     workers                            workers                                                                                       workers                            workers
                        (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)                     (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)                (12)             (13)

Benin                 79.19               0                4.03             4.7              12.08             7.45              7.95                  86.58              2.07              2.84              4                4.52             1.65
Burkina Faso          88.23              0.71              6.24            0.43                4.4             4.34               2.9                  89.05              1.61              5.39            0.39               3.56             0.66
Cameroon              75.17              0.93             19.84            1.74               2.32            20.04             24.57                  71.37               2.7             22.05            1.73               2.15             2.11
Chad                  95.91              0.22              2.65            0.07                 1              15.4             12.61                  92.76              1.33              2.51            0.33               2.33             1.02
Cote d'Ivoire         83.78              1.5               2.7              3.9               6.61            3.76              18.84                  76.73              5.11              7.26            3.63               7.26             0.56
Ethiopia              92.89              2.21              1.72            1.72               1.47             3.32             29.92                   91.2              1.59              3.94            1.17               2.1              2.37
Gabon                 59.09              6.06             13.64              0               21.21            29.79             45.81                  56.22             13.18              10.7              0                19.9            13.73
Ghana                 80.29              3.65              2.92            2.92              10.22            23.89             23.08                   77.9              7.31               5.7            3.21               5.88             2.43
Guinea                78.87               0                 4.7            3.29              13.15             12.7              15.6                  81.25              0.96              5.29            4.81               7.09             1.65
Kenya                 66.36              2.47             12.35            9.88               8.02             6.36             15.63                  57.81              8.83             11.87            10.32             10.88             0.98
Lesotho               74.54              2.21              3.69            7.38              11.44            51.26             36.17                  43.11               4.6             10.46             5.7              35.82            43.86
Madagascar            86.6               1.46              3.11            4.38               4.45             4.78              15.6                  86.47              4.16              3.13            0.86               5.38             0.33
Malawi                65.63              2.6              14.24            1.91              13.89            9.86              37.57                  63.63              5.67             11.28            1.29              15.65             5.7
Mali                  86.18               0                6.23            2.17               5.15            10.22              6.16                  79.63              0.52             11.45              0                7.81              1.9
Mozambique            67.24              6.03             17.67             6.9               2.15            33.52             24.25                  66.74             11.47              8.94            8.03               4.82            10.93
Namibia               60.71              4.76              7.14            15.48              11.9            55.08             42.13                  49.03             13.71              8.44            10.72              18.1            35.27
Niger                 91.45              0.11              6.03            0.11               2.19             2.25              1.99                   85.1              0.33              8.01            1.26               5.29             0.33
Nigeria               59.16              1.05             18.85            4.19              16.75            35.69             34.06                  56.07              6.57             22.65            0.37              14.34             5.36
Rwanda                89.45              0.87              3.46            2.77               3.46            11.62              9.89                  86.46              3.01              2.74            1.37               6.02             3.24
Senegal               68.82              1.46              9.98              0               19.75            10.09              0.92                  70.84              3.84             11.14              0               14.19             2.17
Tanzania              86.16              0.48               3.1            6.68               3.58             5.52             18.95                  87.15              3.86              2.27            3.61               3.11             0.34
Uganda                84.42              0.97              8.12              0                6.49             6.95             25.88                   80.2              5.41              7.75              0                 6.4             0.73
Zambia                82.93              1.02               9.9            3.75               1.71            22.49             20.88                  77.82              3.75              7.17             4.1               6.31             5.18
Zimbabwe              57.43              3.96              19.8            13.53              5.28            30.34             33.28                  49.76             14.43             13.13            13.29               9.4            12.61

                                                                                                                      Panel B: Urban
                                                                           Young                                                                                                                     Old
                       All                           Clerical, sales,                                                                                   All                           Clerical, sales,
                                    Professional                         Unskilled         Skilled                                                                   Professional                        Unskilled          Skilled
                   agricultural                       and services                                        Not working         In school             agricultural                       and services                                        Not working
                                      workers                             workers          workers                                                                     workers                            workers           workers
                     workers                            workers                                                                                       workers                            workers
                        (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)                     (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)                (12)             (13)

Benin                 39.06              1.56              6.25            28.13               25             26.44             21.93                  29.17             14.74             20.83            15.06             19.87            11.61
Burkina Faso          15.41              1.03             43.49            17.12             22.94              20              33.39                  14.32              17.9             36.37            12.24             19.17             6.78
Cameroon              10.11              0.45             75.96             8.09              5.39            51.47              41.1                  10.49              20.2             56.33             5.97              6.94             8.55
Chad                  33.96              0.7              29.27            18.5              17.33            49.53             33.28                  20.91             14.12             29.58              15              15.17             10.3
Cote d'Ivoire         10.5               2.28             25.57             8.22             53.42            22.34             33.33                  12.69             12.08              39.6             6.57             28.75             4.25
Ethiopia              8.85               8.85             44.25             11.5             26.55            10.32             51.33                  6.43              22.91             34.08             6.43             30.17             8.2
Gabon                 13.27              8.16             34.69             1.02             42.86            39.51             61.49                   8.93             30.46             29.51              0                31.1            13.64
Ghana                 19.15             10.64             17.02            14.89              38.3            47.19             29.69                  19.33             14.33             28.67              14              23.67             5.96
Guinea                6.93               0.99             25.74            14.85             49.51            38.04             40.14                  11.67              8.61             29.17              15              34.72            13.46
Kenya                   0               4.17              31.94            31.94               25              23.4               10                    3.17             10.66             39.48            14.12              29.4             3.88
Lesotho                15                 5                 35             11.67             31.67            47.37             55.47                  8.82              12.74             34.31             4.25             39.22            25.73
Madagascar            28.62              5.59             23.68             9.54             32.57            17.84             48.91                  18.52             17.22             25.52             4.61             34.13             2.84
Malawi                9.19               8.65             43.78             1.62             27.57             7.96             42.78                  7.14               12.5             36.31             3.72             33.48             1.9
Mali                  10.91              0.91             58.18            14.55             13.64            29.94             42.07                   16.4              1.96             66.85             1.43              9.98             6.97
Mozambique            8.42              12.63             36.84            23.16             18.95            33.57             39.44                  9.31              26.33             26.06             10.9             27.39            13.36
Namibia               4.49               8.33             31.41             14.1             41.67            43.48             33.89                  3.77               18.3             20.39            21.23             36.31            17.23
Niger                 26.6                0               34.29            16.99             18.91            23.34             23.92                  21.35              8.31             34.49             9.41              24.5             3.01
Nigeria               16.98              5.66              28.3              0               49.06            57.94             47.98                  11.94             10.37             49.12             0.98             27.59             8.09
Rwanda                11.11              4.23             20.64            23.28             40.74            19.57             26.98                  14.02             18.69              22.2             5.61             37.38             8.74
Senegal               7.94               5.08             22.22              0               64.76            31.67              5.48                   6.72             14.85              30.7               0              47.72            10.01
Tanzania              20.57              3.63             18.55            33.87             23.39            15.65             19.47                   26.7             12.41             16.84            27.89             16.16             2.81
Uganda                7.44               2.48             45.46              0               42.15            13.57             33.48                  12.4              14.32             38.02              0               34.44            1.36
Zambia                9.32               4.24             44.92             6.78              16.1             36.9             35.84                  8.21              17.01              30.2             6.45             32.55            9.79
Zimbabwe              0.87               9.56             26.96            38.26             24.35            33.53             27.92                  1.01              16.88             33.75            17.88             30.48            5.02


Notes:
1. Numbers in the table correspond to percentages of men in each sector for the corresponding sub-sample and country in the first-available survey year for each particular country.
2. Shares in columns (1) to (5) were calculated with respect to the total number of men in sub-sample who are currently not in school and working. Shares in colum (6) were calculated with respect to the total numberof men in sub-sample who are
currently not in school. Shares in column (7) were calculated with respect to the total number of men in sub-sample.
3. Shares in columns (8) to (12) were calculated with respect to the total number of men in sub-sample who are currently not in school and working. Shares in colum (13) were calculated with respect to the total numberof men in sub-sample who are
currently not in school.
Table 8.B: Shares of Individuals by Sectors at Initial Year. Women.
                                                                                                                     Panel A: Rural
                                                                          Young                                                                                                                    Old
                       All                          Clerical, sales,                                                                                   All                          Clerical, sales,
                                    Professional                        Unskilled          Skilled                                                                  Professional                       Unskilled           Skilled
                   agricultural                      and services                                         Not working        In school             agricultural                      and services                                         Not working
                                      workers                            workers           workers                                                                    workers                           workers            workers
                     workers                           workers                                                                                       workers                           workers
                        (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)                     (8)              (9)             (10)            (11)                (12)             (13)

Benin                 38.37              0.1             52.54             3.06              4.88             9.13              2.71                  41.63              0.22            53.65              3.25             1.11             3.85
Burkina Faso          43.09              0.1             46.09             4.66              6.05            15.11              0.61                  41.69              0.13            42.81              7.13             8.24            11.47
Cameroon              77.2               0.11            21.37              0.83             0.44             34.2             22.56                  74.84              0.6             23.67              0.41             0.49            13.47
Chad                  52.8                0              46.15              0.11             0.94            39.44             12.06                  54.55              0.05            43.82              0.03             1.55            36.12
Cote d'Ivoire         64.88              0.1             29.25              0.3              3.48            28.06             4.71                   71.07             0.46             27.05             0.18              0.92            14.6
Ethiopia              66.36              0.64            18.68              2.2             12.12            34.41             10.46                  73.66              0.62            13.34              1.52            10.86            33.21
Gabon                 63.39               0              34.43              2.19              0              58.97             33.73                  69.54               2.5            26.29              1.25             0.42            36.93
Ghana                 59.96              0.8             23.11              0.2             15.94            33.95             11.63                  66.65             2.27             19.01             0.52             11.49            9.69
Guinea                76.9                0              17.35              2.16             3.39            17.67              1.17                  83.26              0.15            13.44              1.67             1.33            10.22
Kenya                 51.29              2.82            29.58              3.87             6.81              0                6.89                  53.32              8.13            31.31              2.83             3.76              0
Lesotho               46.89              3.85            15.57              2.93            14.84            64.96             28.53                  50.29              7.32            16.33              3.73             15.3            50.09
Madagascar            78.01              0.24             8.92              3.12             9.71            18.94              3.61                  76.17              1.62             8.19              1.92            12.09            14.67
Malawi                71.36              0.88            19.85              3.93             3.32            47.02             18.36                  67.07              2.03            19.49              5.79             5.36            40.14
Mali                  55.44              0.09            31.52                0             11.69            43.87              1.8                   54.68              0.31            30.09               0              14.64            42.18
Mozambique            87.19              1.49             8.01               1.4             1.61            24.01              7.25                  84.39              2.41             8.75              2.37             1.93             13.2
Namibia               8.61              10.63            25.57             34.18             4.05            76.05             39.93                   8.61             20.65            16.99             39.55             3.03            64.63
Niger                 51.15              0.04             28.7              0.39            19.58            57.41              2.61                   41.3              0.32            36.22              0.07            22.07            46.21
Nigeria               26.54              2.55            56.26              0.43            14.23            67.02             24.88                  30.02               3.6            57.47              0.11             8.81             41.7
Rwanda                95.69              0.79             1.71                0              0.94             1.63              4.27                  96.47              1.48             1.32               0               0.58             0.67
Senegal               67.39              0.27            25.63                0              6.71            53.25              0.5                   61.53              0.72            33.31               0               4.43            34.63
Tanzania              88.2               0.42             0.57              9.74             1.07            40.28              8.73                  87.83              1.22             0.53              9.77             0.65            33.94
Uganda                82.56              0.98            10.14                0              5.34            33.33              6.13                  81.75              2.24             9.56               0               6.34            29.64
Zambia                59.41              1.18            26.27              0.78            12.03            53.71              8.4                   59.74              2.3             21.96             1.05             14.69            43.2
Zimbabwe              51.81              3.63            30.77              1.6             12.19             50.5             16.85                  58.86              6.36             18.4              1.96            14.41            39.65

                                                                                                                     Panel B: Urban
                                                                          Young                                                                                                                    Old
                       All                          Clerical, sales,                                                                                   All                          Clerical, sales,
                                    Professional                        Unskilled          Skilled                                                                  Professional                       Unskilled           Skilled
                   agricultural                      and services                                         Not working        In school             agricultural                      and services                                         Not working
                                      workers                            workers           workers                                                                    workers                           workers            workers
                     workers                           workers                                                                                       workers                           workers
                        (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)                     (8)              (9)             (10)            (11)                (12)             (13)

Benin                 10.96             1.37             63.47             2.06             18.26            25.51             12.37                   10.3             1.82             77.15             1.39               8.8             7.72
Burkina Faso          4.21              1.76               81              6.65              6.38            23.23             15.49                   4.9              9.92             71.02              5.2             8.95             9.43
Cameroon              16.75             0.68             78.09              3.7             0.29             60.62             32.77                  18.39             7.31             70.82             2.45              0.46            29.06
Chad                  9.24                0              88.2              0.74              1.81            57.23             26.67                  13.77              1.98            80.47             0.66              3.13            36.96
Cote d'Ivoire         3.97               0.5             78.91             0.99              7.57            43.36             14.17                  6.96              3.27             84.41             0.28              3.97            26.19
Ethiopia              2.42              3.03             78.67             5.14             10.74             41.5             39.54                  2.46              7.63             62.55             7.31             20.05             35.5
Gabon                 7.93              3.96             81.06             6.17              0.88            71.73             53.64                  14.35             15.02            65.96             3.06              1.61            39.96
Ghana                 6.01              4.14             54.51             0.75             32.33            48.35             16.67                   9.1              7.45             61.11             1.65             20.45             17.3
Guinea                5.29                0              62.98             0.72             29.57            41.57             17.78                  7.53              2.97             81.76              0.1             6.64             19.73
Kenya                 2.21              3.87             48.07             2.76              11.6              0                4.74                   3.64             15.06            59.22             2.86              8.83              0
Lesotho                5.91             1.58             29.92             3.15             35.83            46.07             35.39                   4.99             12.53            36.38              2.8             35.77             27.9
Madagascar            21.21             0.71             31.64             23.7             22.75            34.42             27.21                  16.72              9.97            38.43             13.22            21.66            23.13
Malawi                16.34             7.53              55.7              6.67             5.59            64.29             28.03                  13.12             13.78            55.03              9.32             6.11            43.21
Mali                   3.21             0.71             65.06              0.36            12.83            50.04             16.57                   3.75              1.79            77.15              0.17            12.45             41.5
Mozambique            26.42             5.81             41.12              9.87            11.73            36.36             25.01                   30.7             11.21            35.45              7.86            11.18            15.96
Namibia                3.55             8.65             48.78             22.62             3.99            61.49             32.51                   3.51              20.2             34.5              24.3             4.36            35.93
Niger                  2.11             2.54             60.47              4.86            26.11            68.69             19.31                   2.08               5              73.96              4.16            13.86            45.22
Nigeria                4.09             5.91             69.09              0.46            20.45            65.94             31.13                  6.39              8.63             72.84             0.09             12.05            28.49
Rwanda                34.13             5.59             24.48             0.28              5.03            15.28              14.4                  40.14             14.15            35.89             0.08              4.72             8.94
Senegal                2.57             1.43             76.46               0              19.54            66.09              7.76                   3.82              5.29            78.37                0             12.52            43.56
Tanzania              41.83             3.58              7.16             42.95             4.47            62.69             12.87                  48.22              7.13             5.14             35.22              4.3              40
Uganda                20.29             5.25             51.55               0              13.13            50.35             13.52                  19.63             14.18            55.07                0              9.81            25.87
Zambia                 4.82             4.35             70.71              3.41            13.06             61.9             20.52                   4.85             11.82            67.29               2.5            11.29            34.61
Zimbabwe               3.52             1.76             71.83              3.17            19.72            52.59             17.38                   6.47             11.71            52.39              2.62            26.81            32.26


Notes:
1. Numbers in the table correspond to percentages of women in each sector for the corresponding sub-sample and country in the first-available survey year for each particular country.
2. Shares in columns (1) to (5) were calculated with respect to the total number of women in sub-sample who are currently not in school and working. Shares in colum (6) were calculated with respect to the total numberof women in sub-sample who are
currently not in school. Shares in column (7) were calculated with respect to the total number of women in sub-sample.
3. Shares in columns (8) to (12) were calculated with respect to the total number of women in sub-sample who are currently not in school and working. Shares in colum (13) were calculated with respect to the total numberof women in sub-sample who
are currently not in school.
Table 9: Summary Statistics for Selected Variables

Variables                                                                                                   Mean    Standard Dev.   No. of obs.
Works in agriculure (self-employed or employed)                                                             0.38        0.49        1,094,581
Professional                                                                                                0.03        0.18        1,094,581
Works either in clerical, sales, services                                                                   0.19        0.39        1,094,581
Skilled manual                                                                                              0.06        0.25        1,094,581
Unskilled manual                                                                                            0.03        0.17        1,094,581
Not working                                                                                                 0.29        0.45        1,094,581
Youth                                                                                                       0.38        0.48        1,094,581
Female (1 if female)                                                                                        0.74        0.44        1,094,581
Urban (1 if living in urban area)                                                                           0.30        0.46        1,094,581
Individual has no education level completed                                                                 0.38        0.48        1,094,581
Incomplete primary                                                                                          0.26        0.44        1,094,581
Complete primary                                                                                            0.12        0.32        1,094,581
Incomplete secondary                                                                                        0.18        0.38        1,094,581
Complete secondary                                                                                          0.04        0.20        1,094,581
Higher                                                                                                      0.03        0.17        1,094,581
Log of Total population                                                                                     16.63       0.97        1,094,581
Country experienced any kind of conflict                                                                    0.39        0.49        1,094,581
Revised Combined Polity Score from Polity IV                                                                1.56        4.52        1,094,581
Log of Agricultural Commodity price index                                                                   5.11        1.47        1,094,581
Interaction between Log of Non-agric. Comm. Price index and re-scaled polity score                          2.87        1.27        1,094,581

Source: Own calculations using data from several rounds of DHS surveys and the Polity IV Project dataset.
Table 10: Correlates of Changes in Agricultural Employment Shares 1990s and 2000s

                                                                                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)
                                                                                                                  Full Sample     Urban        Rural      Rural Men    Rural Women   Full Sample     Urban        Rural      Rural Men    Rural Women
Agricultural Employment Share Previous Period                                                                     -0.1112***    -0.512***    -0.546***    -0.915***     -0.787***    -0.104***     -0.321***    -0.326***    -0.361***     -0.228***
                                                                                                                  (0.02205)      (0.0689)     (0.0673)     (0.0578)      (0.0762)     (0.0222)      (0.0550)     (0.0689)     (0.1003)      (0.0578)
Female (= 1 for Female Population)                                                                                -0.0748***     0.0028      -0.0398***                              -0.0291***     0.0084       -0.0054
                                                                                                                   (0.0150)      (0.1150)     (0.0150)                                (0.0100)      (0.0060)     (0.0180)
Youth (= 1 for Population Ages 15-24)                                                                             -0.0248***    -0.0241***   -0.0858***   -0.165***     -0.088***    -0.0211***    -0.0167***   -0.0648***   -0.0811***     -0.0322
                                                                                                                   (0.0105)      (0.0064)     (0.0105)     (0.0251)      (0.0251)     (0.0103)      (0.0065)     (0.0103)     (0.0203)      -0.0227
Beginning of Period Share Rural Population in Secondary School                                                    -0.032***       -0.043      -0.047**      -0.045      -0.116***    -0.017***       -0.011      -0.251*       -0.054      -0.0861***
                                                                                                                    (0.011)      (0.327)      (0.018)      (0.035)       (0.043)       (0.008)      (0.327)      (0.128)      (0.055)       (0.034)
Change in Agricultural Commodity Price Index                                                                        0.0237       -0.0019      0.0522      0.1654***     -0.131***      0.0017       0.0144       0.0041       0.0592       -0.091***
                                                                                                                   (0.0441)      (0.0447)     (0.0490)     (0.0697)      (0.0521)     (0.0675)      (0.0121)     (0.0071)     (0.0793)      (0.0321)
Beginning of Period Revised Combined Polity Score from Polity IV                                                    0.0075       0.0101       0.0061       0.0161        0.00265      -0.0025       -0.0003     -0.0127***     -0.006      -0.0181***
                                                                                                                   (0.0030)      (0.0120)     (0.0048)     (0.0146)      (0.0159)     (0.0064)      (0.0010)     (0.0030)     (0.0068)      (0.004)
Interaction between Change in Price Index and Beginning of Period Polity Score                                     -0.0135       -0.0068     -0.0226***   -0.042***     -0.123***      -0.014       0.0022      -0.0268***    -0.0116      -0.0282***
                                                                                                                   (0.0063)      (0.0443)     (0.0060)     (0.0134)      (0.0375)     (0.0515)      (0.0036)     (0.0107)     (0.0141)      (0.0119)
Current Period Population Growth                                                                                  -0.716***      -0.0448     -0.828***      -0.096        -0.467      -0.187**      -0.0561     -0.0831***   -0.058***       -0.327
                                                                                                                    (0.211)      (0.1150)     (0.306)      (0.387)       (0.378)       (0.098)      (0.081)      (0.038)      (0.017)       (0.318)
Country in Conflict at Beginning of Period                                                                          0.0379       0.0318       0.0712      -0.1399***     0.0457       -0.00317      0.0235       -0.0195     -0.0657***    0.0657***
                                                                                                                   (0.0234)      (0.0275)     (0.0606)     (0.0337)      (0.0375)     (0.0041)      (0.0174)     (0.0155)     (0.109)       (0.195)
CAADP=1 if Country Reached Either CAADP Target at Beginning of Period                                             -0.0399**      -0.0121     -0.0516**     -0.0278       -0.0321      -0.0112*     -0.0399**     -0.0321*    -0.0516**      -0.0341
                                                                                                                   (0.0195)      (0.0192)     (0.0217)     (0.0251)      (0.0262)     (0.0052)      (0.0195)     (0.0192)     (0.0217)      -0.0122
Constant                                                                                                            0.111         0.068        0.431        0.564         0.497        0.021         0.039      0.149***       0.191         0.407
                                                                                                                    (0.038)      (0.018)      (0.060)      (0.089)       (0.059)       (0.046)      (0.024)      (0.065)      (0.117)       (0.059)

Observations                                                                                                         368           183          185          83            102          368           183          185          83            102
R-squared                                                                                                           0.149         0.414        0.455        0.672         0.609        0.239         0.386        0.435        0.546         0.852
Number of countries                                                                                                   24           24           24           22            24            24           24           24           22            24
Country fixed effects                                                                                                YES          YES          YES          YES           YES           NO            NO           NO           NO            NO
Year fixed effects                                                                                                   YES          YES          YES          YES           YES           YES          YES          YES          YES           YES


Source: Own calculations using data from several rounds of DHS surveys, WDI dataset, Polity IV Project dataset.
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2. Young: age 15-24; old: age 25+
3. Change in Agricultural Employment Share.
Appendix 1

         Due to limited data availability for most African economies, we used a broad set of sources.
This appendix describes in detail the data and data sources used in our analysis. In the first section
of this appendix we document the main methodology and sources used in our estimates of labor
productivity for our analysis on structural transformation. Gathering and organizing this data was
the most consuming part of the data work given the lack of sources on labor productivity for
African countries and the limited primary data sources on sectoral employment and sectoral value
added. We then describe the other variables used in our analysis as well as their sources.

        To construct our estimates of sectoral employment and value added, we draw from, and
broadly follow, the data and methodology used in Timmer and de Vries (2009) and McMillan and
Rodrik (2011). However, there are some differences between our approach and that of the studies
mentioned above. First, we focus on 4 instead of 9 broad economic sectors. Similarly, our Africa
sub-sample includes more countries and draws from a broader set of data sources. Finally, our
Africa sub-sample covers a longer period of time (roughly from 1995 to 2010).

         Our estimates of sectoral employment and value added for non-African economies are
drawn directly from Timmer and de Vries (2009) following McMillan and Rodrik (2011). However,
our estimates for these variables in our Africa sub-sample vary slightly from those presented in
McMillan and Rodrik (2011). These authors mostly use primary data sources for a smaller set of
African countries in their analysis. Moreover, given the more narrow set of African countries they
focus on and the larger availability of data for those countries relative to other African countries,
they are able to closely follow Timmer and de Vries’ (2009) methodology. In contrast, in order to
get a broader picture of structural transformation in Africa in more recent years, and due to the lack
of sufficient primary data for a number of African economies, we had to resort to a broader set of
data sources and a higher level of aggregation for our sectoral breakdown. As a result, while we draw
from Timmer and de Vries (2009) and McMillan and Rodrik (2011), our sectoral employment and
value added estimates for our Africa sub-sample differ slightly from those in the above mentioned
studies. However, our methodology remains broadly consistent with those in Timmer and de Vries
(2009) and McMillan and Rodrik (2011).

        As mentioned above, given the limited availability of sectoral employment and value added
data for a large number of African countries, and in order to broaden our coverage of African
economies, we had to aggregate sectors into 4 broad sectors rather than 9 sectors (as in McMillan
and Rodrik, 2011). Our sectoral classification follows the ISIC rev. 2 main categories but, differs in
the level of aggregation as shown in Table A1.




                                                                                           Page 1 of 14
    Table A1. Sector Coverage




               Sector       Abbreviation                                  Categories Included in Sector

                                                  Category Name                  ISIC rev. 2              ISIC rev. 3 Equivalent


                                           Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry
    Agriculture                 agr                                            Major division 1                   A+B
                                           and Fishing

    Mining                      min        Mining and Quarrying                Major division 2                     C

    Manufacturing               man        Manufacturing                       Major division 3                     D


                                           Wholesale and Retail Trade,
    Tertiary                    ter                                            Major division 6                   G+H
                                           Hotels and Restaurants

                                           Transport, Storage and
                                                                               Major division 7                     I
                                           Communications

                                           Finance, Insurance, Real
                                                                               Major division 8                   J+K
                                           Estate and Business Services

                                           Community, Social, Personal
                                                                               Major division 9             O+P+Q+L+M+N
                                           and Government Services




         Two things are worth noting. First, our classification is at a more aggregate level than that of
the ISIC. Second, we were not able to gather data for the public utilities and construction sectors for
a number of African economies and thus, we excluded these sectors. We were careful to make sure
that, for countries where this data was available, our estimates excluded these sectors to maintain
consistency across countries. Hence, we were forced to use a sectoral disaggregation that would be
compatible with all of the countries in our sample (i.e. 4 sectors). While we acknowledge that having
data for the utilities and construction sectors and that at a broader disaggregation for services is
desirable, the lack of data for Africa makes this virtually impossible. Furthermore, we still manage to
include in our sample the most dynamic sectors of the economy and those sectors which employ the
vast majority of people, particularly in Africa.

Data sources for sectoral employment and value added

        As mentioned above, our sectoral employment and value added estimates come from a
variety of sources. For non-African economies, we used data from Timmer and de Vries (2009) and
McMillan and Rodrik (2011). We refer the reader to the above mentioned papers for details on the
methodology and sources they use. On the other hand, we gathered sectoral employment and value
added data for a number of African economies not included in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).1 Below


1
    We also updated data for 3 African countries in McMillan and Rodrik (2011): Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia.

                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
we give a detailed description of the sources and methodology for constructing the Africa sub-
sample on sectoral employment and value added used in this paper.

Algeria

Years: 2001 and 2009

Employment: Employment by sector for 2001, 2003, and 2004 comes from ILO’s LABORSTA.
We also used employment by sector for 2010 and 2011 from Algeria’s Office National des
Statistiques (ONS). Given that employment data for 2010 and 2011 for manufacturing and utilities
from the ONS was aggregated together, we used average shares of employment in each of these
sectors for 2001, 2003, and 2004 to get estimates of manufacturing employment excluding
employment in utilities for 2010 and 2011. Since we do not have data on employment by sector for
2009, we interpolated sectoral employment between 2004 and 2010. While this is not ideal we think
that any potential bias in our estimates of sectoral employment for 2009 is small enough that its
effect would be minimal; particularly in the long-term trends of these estimates.

Value Added: We used data for value added by sector from “Les Comptes Economiques de 2000 a
2011” from the Office National des Statistiques (ONS) as well as from the UN’s National Accounts
Main Aggregates online database.2 Since we only had data for PPP conversion factor from the Penn
World Tables version 7.0 (PWT7) for up to 2009, we used value added and employment in 2009. We
rebased all sectoral series to 2000 constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values
to PPP dollars using conversion factors from the PWT7.

Angola

Years: Given the long civil conflict in Angola, there are few sources of data for Angola and there is
data for only a few years in the recent past. Hence, our data for Angola includes data for 2005 and
2009.

Employment: Employment estimates for Angola come from CEIC-UCAN’s “Relatorio Economico
Anual” for 2007, 2008, and 2009. To get employment estimates at our 4 aggregate sectors of
interest, we aggregated employment in oil and refining, diamonds and other extractive industries to
get an estimate of employment in Mining and Quarrying.

Value Added: We used data for value added by sector from CEIC-UCAN’s “Relatorio Economico
Anual” for 2007, 2008, and 2009 as well as from the UN’s National Accounts Main Aggregates
Database. Since the UN’s data aggregates value added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and
utilities, we used data on sectoral shares from CEIC-UCAN to separate value added in mining and
quarrying. We rebased all sectoral series to 2000 constant prices using implicit price deflators and
converted values to PPP dollars using conversion factors from the PWT7.



2   http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/introduction.asp

                                                                                         Page 3 of 14
Cameroon

Years: 2001 and 2007

Employment: Our sectoral employment data for Cameroon comes from the IMF’s Regional
Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa (2012).3

Value added: To get our sectoral value added estimates we used data form UN’s National Accounts
Main Aggregates Database. Value added in agriculture and manufacturing are already presented as
separate series, and we used those for our estimates of value added in agriculture and manufacturing,
respectively. On the other hand, we constructed our value added series for the tertiary sector by
aggregating value added in all services sectors.4 Constructing the value added series for mining and
quarrying was a bit more cumbersome. The UN’s data does not disaggregate value added in mining
and quarrying; it is presented within an aggregate series which includes value added in
manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities.5 To get estimates of value added in mining and
quarrying we did the following. First, we subtracted value added in manufacturing from total value
added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities to get an estimate of total value added in
the latter sectors. Then, we calculated the share of total value added in mining and quarrying, and
utilities that the mining and quarrying sector represents using data from the UN’s “National
Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and Detailed Tables, 2007.” Finally, using these shares, we
estimated value added levels for mining and quarrying from total value added in mining and
quarrying, and utilities. Since we only had data for these shares up to 2006, we used the 2006 shares
to get the estimate of value added in mining and quarrying for 2007. We rebased all sectoral series to
2000 constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using
conversion factors from the PWT7.

Egypt

Years: 2000 and 2007

Employment: Our sectoral employment data for Egypt come from the ILO’s LABORSTA database
which includes data from several labor force surveys. LABORSTA has employment data
disaggregated by main ISIC sector, and we aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

Value Added: To get our sectoral value added estimates we used data form UN’s National Accounts
Main Aggregates Database. Value added in agriculture and manufacturing are already presented as
separate series, and we used those for our estimates of value added in agriculture and manufacturing,
respectively. On the other hand, we constructed our value added series for the tertiary sector by



3
  We thank Rodrigo García-Verdú, Alun Thomas and John Wakeman-Linn for sharing their data. Their data comes from
calculations from several IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa, mainly the reports for October
2011 and October 2012.
4 Following the classification shown in Table A1 above.
5 However, as mentioned previously, it does offer a separate value added series for manufacturing.


                                                                                                 Page 4 of 14
aggregating value added in all services sectors.6 Constructing the value added series for mining and
quarrying was a bit more cumbersome. The UN’s data does not disaggregate value added in mining
and quarrying; it is presented within an aggregate series which includes value added in
manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities.7 To get estimates of value added in mining and
quarrying we did the following. First, we subtracted value added in manufacturing from total value
added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities to get an estimate of total value added in
the latter sectors. Then, we calculated the share of total value added in mining and quarrying, and
utilities that the mining and quarrying sector represents using data from several “Annual Reports”
by the Central Bank of Egypt. Finally, using these shares, we estimated value added levels for mining
and quarrying from total value added in mining and quarrying, and utilities. We rebased all sectoral
series to 2000 constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars
using conversion factors from the PWT7.

Ethiopia

Years: 1999 and 2004.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011). We
aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

Value Added: Our sectoral value added data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011). We
aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

Ghana

Years: 2000 and 2010.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data for 2000 comes from Jedwab and Osei (2012), 8 and
our data on employment in 2010 comes from Ghana’s Population and Household Census 2010.9 10
Jedwab and Osei (2012) calculate sectoral employment using various sources, mainly: Population
and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000 and Ghana Living Standard Survey (GLSS) 1991/92
and 2005/06. We use their employment estimates for 2000. We aggregated employment to our 4
sectors of interest.

Value Added: Our sectoral value added data comes from Jedwab and Osei (2012). They use data
from several sources: Maddison (2008) and World Bank (2010) for per capita GDP data and various
other sources (see Jedwab and Osei, 2012 for details) to get estimates of sectoral GDP shares. Using
these numbers, they then estimate sectoral GDP (in constant 2000 dollars, PPP) for 9 sectors (as

6 Following the classification shown in Table A1 above.
7 However, as mentioned previously, it does offer a separate value added series for manufacturing.
8 Jedwab, Remi, and Osei, Robert D. 2012. “Structural Change in Ghana 1960-2010,” September 2012. Mimeo. We

thank the authors for making their data available.
9 While Jedwab and Osei’s (2012) value added includes data for 2010, their sectoral employment series only covers up to

2009.
10 Ghana Statistical Service “2010 Population & Housing Census Summary Report of Final Results” (May 2012).


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 14
defined in Timmer and de Vries, 2009; and McMillan and Rodrik, 2011). Their data is for value
added in 2000 PPP dollars already. We aggregated value added to our 4 sectors of interest.


Kenya
Years: 1998 and 2009.

Employment: Our sectoral employment estimates come from several sources. Using data on sectoral
shares of employment from the Demographic and Health Surveys, we calculated employment shares
for agriculture, manufacturing, and services. To get an estimate of the share of employment in
mining in 1998 we use data from McMillan and Rodrik (2011) for that year. To get an estimate of
the share of employment in mining in 2009 we use the average share of employment from McMillan
and Rodrik (2011).11 Using these numbers, we calculated sectoral shares for our 4 sectors of interest
and, using these, we calculated sectoral employment using data on total employment for persons
aged 15+ from ILO’s KILMnet dataset.12

Value Added: To get our sectoral value added estimates we used data form UN’s National Accounts
Main Aggregates Database and national accounts data from Kenya’s National Bureau of Statistics
(KNBS).13 Value added in agriculture and manufacturing in the UN’s National Accounts Main
Aggregates Database are already presented as separate series, and we used those for our estimates of
value added in agriculture and manufacturing, respectively. On the other hand, we constructed our
value added series for the tertiary sector by aggregating value added in all services sectors.14
Constructing the value added series for mining and quarrying was a bit more cumbersome. The
UN’s data does not disaggregate value added in mining and quarrying; it is presented within an
aggregate series which includes value added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities.15
To get estimates of value added in mining and quarrying we did the following. First, we subtracted
value added in manufacturing from total value added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and
utilities to get an estimate of total value added in the latter sectors. Then, we calculated the share of
total value added in mining and quarrying, and utilities that the mining and quarrying sector
represents using data from the KNBS’ national accounts statistics. Finally, using these shares, we
estimated value added levels for mining and quarrying from total value added in mining and
quarrying, and utilities. We rebased all sectoral series to 2000 constant prices using implicit price
deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using conversion factors from the PWT7.

Mali

Years: 2001 and 2009.


11 We do this since their data does not cover 2009 and since the share of employment in mining is relatively stable, being
approximately 0.4% of total employment for the 1990 to 2005 period.
12 http://kilm.ilo.org/kilmnet/
13 Kenya Bureau of Statistics “Gross Domestic Product. First Quarter 2010.”
14 Following the classification shown in Table A1 above.
15 However, as mentioned previously, it does offer a separate value added series for manufacturing.


                                                                                                          Page 6 of 14
Employment: Our sectoral employment comes from the IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook for
Sub-Saharan Africa (2012).

Value Added: To get our sectoral value added estimates we used data from the UN’s National
Accounts Main Aggregates Database, the UN’s “National Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and
Detailed Tables, 2007” and national accounts data from Mali’s Institut National de la Statistique
(INSTAT).16 Value added in agriculture and manufacturing in the UN’s National Accounts Main
Aggregates Database are already presented as separate series, and we used those for our estimates of
value added in agriculture and manufacturing, respectively. On the other hand, we constructed our
value added series for the tertiary sector by aggregating value added in all services sectors.17
Constructing the value added series for mining and quarrying was a bit more cumbersome. The
UN’s data does not disaggregate value added in mining and quarrying; it is presented within an
aggregate series which includes value added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities.18
To get estimates of value added in mining and quarrying we did the following. First, we subtracted
value added in manufacturing from total value added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and
utilities to get an estimate of total value added in the latter sectors. Then, we calculated the share of
total value added in mining and quarrying, and utilities that the mining and quarrying sector
represents using data from the UN’s “National Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and Detailed
Tables, 2007” and national accounts data from Mali’s national accounts statistics from INSTAT.
Finally, using these shares, we estimated value added levels for mining and quarrying from total
value added in mining and quarrying, and utilities. We rebased all sectoral series to 2000 constant
prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using conversion factors
from the PWT7.

Malawi

Years: 1998 and 2005.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011). We
aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

Value Added: Our sectoral value added data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011). We
aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.



Mauritius

Years: 2000 and 2007.



16 INSTAT “Comptes Economiques Serie 2003-2010.”
(http://instat.gov.ml/documentation/comptes_economiques_serie_2003_2010.pdf)
17 Following the classification shown in Table A1 above.
18 However, as mentioned previously, it does offer a separate value added series for manufacturing.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011). Using their
same sources, we extended the dataset to 2007.19 We aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of
interest.

Value Added: Our sectoral value added data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011). Using their
same sources, we extended the dataset to 2007.20 We aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of
interest.

Morocco

Years: 2000 and 2007.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from Morocco’s Haut-Commissariat au Plan’s
(HCP) Enquête Nationale sur l’Emploi. These results are published by the HCP in its annual
“Activité, Emploi et Chômage. Resultats Detailles” and are available for: 1999 to 2011. Table 2.4 of
the report offers employment by activity. We aggregated employment into our 4 sectors as follows.
First, we aggregated employment in extractive industries, food, beverages and tobacco industries,
textile industry, and other manufacturing industries into the manufacturing sector (“man”). Similarly,
we classified employment in extractive industries as employment in the mining and quarrying sector
(“min”). Likewise, we classified employment in agriculture, forestry, and fishing as employment in
agriculture (“agr”). Finally, we aggregated employment in all other sectors – excluding electricity,
water, and gas and construction and public works – to get an estimate of employment in the services
or tertiary sector (“ter”). While the trend in employment in agriculture for people aged 15 and over
from 2003-2011 is consistent, prior to 2003 employment in agriculture for people aged 15 and over
is significantly lower (almost 10% lower). However, if we include persons under 15 years old in
agricultural employment prior to 2003, the big drop in agricultural employment is greatly reduced.
Hence, for years prior to 2003 we use total employment in agriculture (including those under 15
years of age). For the rest of the sectors, we use employment for persons aged 15 and over.

Value Added: Our value added data comes from the HCP’s national accounts data. 21 We aggregated
sectoral value added to our 4 sectors of interest. Similarly, we rebased all sectoral series to 2000
constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using conversion
factors from the PWT7.

Mozambique

Years: 2003 and 2009.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from the IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook
for Sub-Saharan Africa (2012).



19 See McMillan and Rodrik (2011) for details.
20 Idem.
21 Haut-Commissariat au Plan “Comptes Nationaux 1980-2008.” April 2010.


                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
Value Added: Our value added data comes from Instituto Nacional de Estatística’s (INE) national
accounts report22 aggregated to our 4 sectors of interest. We rebased all sectoral series to 2000
constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using conversion
factors from the PWT7.

Nigeria

Years: 1999 and 2009.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from Adeyinka, Salau and Vollrath (2012).23
Their estimates are based on several rounds of Nigeria’s National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) General
Household Surveys (GHS): 1996 to 1999, and 2005 to 2009. To estimate employment, they use
answers from the GHS based on main job in the last week. The authors point to issues with industry
classifications in the 2008 GHS which do not correspond to ISIC definitions. They also point to an
anomalous increase in manufacturing employment in 2010 when compared to this variable’s long-
term trend. For these reasons, and following Adeyinka, Salau and Vollrath (2012) we use estimates
for 2009. We aggregated sectoral employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

Value Added: We used estimates of sectoral value added from Adeyinka, Salau and Vollrath (2012)
aggregated to our 4 sectors of interest. These authors find anomalies in value added for crop
production (which accounts for a large share of total value added in agriculture). The original series
shows a big jump in 2002, which persists from 2002 onwards, and is inconsistent with the trends
observed for FAO’s crop production index and total production of cereals. They correct this issue
by eliminating the jump in 2002 while maintaining the observed growth in real crop value added
from 2002 on (see Adeyinka, Salau and Vollrath, 2012 for details). Similarly Adeyinka, Salau and
Vollrath (2012) find an unusual jump in 2001 in the trend for value added in electricity that does not
correspond with data on electricity production. They correct this series in a similar manner to the
methodology they used for correcting value added in crop production. We rebased all sectoral series
to 2000 constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using
conversion factors from the PWT7.

Rwanda

Years: 1996 and 2005.

Employment: Our sectoral employment comes from the IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook for
Sub-Saharan Africa (2012).

Value Added: To get our sectoral value added estimates we used data form UN’s National Accounts
Main Aggregates Database. Value added in agriculture and manufacturing are already presented as
separate series, and we used those for our estimates of value added in agriculture and manufacturing,
respectively. On the other hand, we constructed our value added series for the tertiary sector by

22   Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE) “Contas Nacionais Preliminares IV Trimestre 2011.”
23   We thank the authors for sharing their data with us.

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 14
aggregating value added in all services sectors.24 Constructing the value added series for mining and
quarrying was a bit more cumbersome. The UN’s data does not disaggregate value added in mining
and quarrying; it is presented within an aggregate series which includes value added in
manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities.25 To get estimates of value added in mining and
quarrying we did the following. First, we subtracted value added in manufacturing from total value
added in manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and utilities to get an estimate of total value added in
the latter sectors. Then, we calculated the share of total value added in mining and quarrying, and
utilities that the mining and quarrying sector represents using data from the UN’s “National
Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and Detailed Tables, 2007” (for 1996) and Rwanda’s National
Institute of Statistics (NIS) “GDP National Accounts 2011” (for 2005). Finally, using these shares,
we estimated value added levels for mining and quarrying from total value added in mining and
quarrying, and utilities. We rebased all sectoral series to 2000 constant prices using implicit price
deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using conversion factors from the PWT7.

Tanzania

Years: 2000 and 2007.

Employment: Our sectoral employment comes from the IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook for
Sub-Saharan Africa (2012).

Value Added: Our value added data for Tanzania comes from Tanzania’s National Bureau of
Statistics (NBS) national accounts data.26 The NBS offers estimates of sectoral value added for 15
sectors, following ISIC Rev. 3. We aggregated value added into our 4 sectors of interest as follows.
We aggregated value added in Agriculture, Hunting, and Forestry (ISIC Rev. 3 category A) and value
added in Fishing (category B) into a single category: agriculture (“agr”). For value added in the
tertiary sector (“ter”) we aggregated value added in categories G-O. For value added in mining and
quarrying (“min”) and manufacturing (“man”) we used data on value added for the corresponding
sectors in the NBS’ data (categories C and D, respectively). We rebased all sectoral series to 2000
constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP dollars using conversion
factors from the PWT7.

Uganda

Years: 1999 and 2009.

Employment: We calculate employment by sector from Uganda’s National Household Survey data
for the 1999/2000, and from Uganda’s National Panel Survey 2009/2010. We kept only those 15
years old and older who reporting being employed and who reported employment sector for their
main activity. We aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

24 Following the classification shown in Table A1 above.
25 However, as mentioned previously, it does offer a separate value added series for manufacturing.
26 “National Accounts of Tanzania Mainland 2000-2010” published by the National Bureau of Statistics; September

2011.

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
Value Added: Our value added data for Uganda comes from Uganda’s Bureau of Statistics (UBOS)
Statistical Abstracts for 2008 and 2010, as well as from the UN’s “National Accounts Statistics: Main
Aggregates and Detailed Tables, 2007.” We start by using sectoral value added from the Statistical
Abstracts (from 2003 to 2009). We use data from the UN’s “National Accounts Statistics: Main
Aggregates and Detailed Tables, 2007.” to calculate sectoral value added growth rates prior to 2003.
Using this data, we get estimates of sectoral value added based on the latest available sectoral
estimates published by the UBOS in their Statistical Abstracts going back to 1997. We rebased all
sectoral series to 2000 constant prices using implicit price deflators and converted values to PPP
dollars using conversion factors from the PWT7 and aggregated value added to our 4 sectors of
interest.

Zambia

Years: 2000 and 2006.

Employment: Our sectoral employment data comes from our own estimates of sectoral employment
from various rounds of Zambia’s Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (LCMS). In particular, we
calculated sectoral employment for three rounds of the survey: 1998 (round II), 2002-2003 (round
III), and 2006 (round V). For each round of the survey rounds we calculated sectoral employment at
the 9 sector level27 for individuals aged 15 and over.28 We also calculated sectoral employment from
the Zambia’s 2000 Population and Housing Census microdata. However, employment levels (total
and by sector) from the 2000 Population and Housing Census data seem to be too low29 compared
to the trends in sectoral and total employment from our LCMS estimates as well as those published
in reports for other LCMS survey rounds and other household surveys for Zambia. Given this
discrepancy in the 2000 census data, we interpolated sectoral employment between 1998 and 2002-
2003 using our LCMS estimates for those years to get estimates of sectoral employment for 2000.
Finally, we aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of interest.

Value Added: Our sectoral value added data comes from McMillan and Rodrik (2011).30 Using their
sources, we incorporated value added data for 2006 and aggregated employment to our 4 sectors of
interest.




27 As defined in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
28 We kept only those who reported sector of employment and held the same job for the past 12 months to capture
workers’ “main” or “usual” employment.
29 About 500,000 workers lower than the numbers reported in the 1998 and 2002-2003 LCMS surveys. Moreover, the

2000 census estimates (even those reported on the census report) of sectoral and total employment seem to be at odds
with trends and levels from a number of household surveys (which tend to be quite consistent between each other).
30 We refer the reader to the original paper for further details.


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
Appendix 2: Occupation information from Demographic and Health Surveys

The DHS data sets provide comprehensive information on employment and occupation for women
and men. The procedure used to determine whether individuals are working and if so, in what
occupation is described in this appendix.

Women and men aged 15 to 49 (sometimes 15-59) respond to the questions on employment and
occupation. Questions on occupation and employment are asked in the main questionnaire. The
respective variables are then included in the “woman’s” recode and in the “man’s” recode,
respectively. First, each woman or man is asked about her/his current working status. The
questions asked are as follows: 1) “aside from your own housework, have you done any work in the
last seven days? 2) “As you know, some women take up jobs for which they are paid in cash or in
kind. Others sell things, have a small business or work on the family farm or in the family business.
In the last seven days, have you done any of these things or any other work?” 3) Although you did
no work in the last seven days, do you have any job or business from which you were absent for
leave, illness, vacation, maternity leave, or any other reason?” 4) Have you worked at all within the
past 12 months. The combination of these four questions builds the foundation for the variable
“respondent is currently working” (v714) in the DHS data set. This means that respondents are
considered as “employed” or “working” if they reported that they were working within the last
seven days or if they worked at any time within the last 12 months.

The employment status of the respondent (v714) determines whether information is collected about
the respondent’s occupation. If the answer to question v714 is yes, the woman/man is then asked:
“What is your occupation, that is, what kind of work do you mainly do?” (v716). Answers to this
question are directly typed into the questionnaire resulting in a large number of reported
occupations. Differences occur mainly as a result of different wordings and different languages of
reported occupations. In our pooled data set around 3,000 different answers have been recorded. To
standardize occupation types across countries, surveys, and over time, V716 is recoded into a
second variable, v717, which groups the answers from variable v716 into 11 different occupation
categories. These categories are: “not working”, “professional/technical/managerial”, “clerical”,
“sales”, “agricultural - self employed”, “agricultural – employed”, “household & domestic”,
“services”, “skilled manual”, “unskilled manual”, and “army”.

The variable v717 - occupation of women and men - is the foundation for our analysis. Hence, we
restrict our sample to surveys where information on v717 is available. However, prior to analysis,
coding errors in the variable v717 have been corrected. In most cases this was not necessary but
there were some blatant errors that were obvious such as coding all agricultural workers as military
workers such that a country had no workers in agriculture. For example, v717=10 is categorized as
“army” or “armed forces” in most of the surveys where this category exists (Gabon 2012, Guinea
2005, Niger 2006, and Rwanda 2005), however in Mali 2006 v717=10 is categorized as “agriculture,
breeding, fishing, forest”. In cases like this, we recoded the variable to be consistent with the coding
for other countries by coding these workers as agricultural workers.


                                                                                          Page 12 of 14
Table A1 shows how we arrive at our final sample after having taken into account these issues. First,
we drop all single-survey countries allowing us to analyze changes in occupation by socioeconomic
subgroups over time. This leaves us with a sample 87 women’s recodes and 76 men’s recodes from
25 countries. Second, we dropped missing values and miscoded values from the sample. All “Don’t
know” answers or “missing” for variable v717 are considered as missing and are dropped from the
sample (v717=95, 96, 97, 98, or 99).

Finally, after dropping countries for which the variable v17 was missing and countries for which
only one survey round of data was available, we are left with a total of 25 countries and a sample size
of 819,419 women and 275,162 men. Table A2 shows the mean shares and frequencies of the
occupation types for women and men for the final sample. For our analysis we further aggregate the
information on occupation. Clerical, sales and services are grouped into on category. The same is
done for agricultural –self employed and agricultural – employee, which are groups to one category
“agriculture”. Note that the share of men and women not working appears high in Table A2 because
it includes individuals who are not working because they are in school.
                         Woman's recode                                                          Man's recode

Countries     Surveys       Obs.                                        Countries      Surveys     Obs.

                                            73'550 lost due to single                                            29'780 lost due to single
   36           100       932,008                                          36               85   309,293
                                                     survey                                                               survey


                                              39'039 missing data on                                              4'351 missing data on
   24            87       858,458                                          24               76   279,513
                                                occupation (v717)                                                   occupation (v717)



   24            87       819,419                                          24               76   275,162




                            Table A2: Number of Observations by V717 in Final Sample

                                                                        Men                                   Women
          Respondent's occupation (grouped)                   Freq.             Percent              Freq.            Percent

          Not working                                       281,044                  34.3           45,021             16.36
          Professional/technical/managerial                  21,373                  2.61           16,902              6.14
          Clerical                                           9,208                   1.12           5,086               1.85
          Sales                                             139,902                 17.07           21,800              7.92
          Agricultural - self employed                      239,943                 29.28           94,247             34.25
          Agricultural - employee                            33,035                  4.03           30,254             10.99
          Household and domestic                             9,237                   1.13           2,183               0.79
          Services                                           25,892                  3.16           12,774              4.64
          Skilled manual                                     37,706                  4.6            32,026             11.64
          Unskilled manual                                   21,927                  2.68           14,586              5.3
          Armed forces                                        152                    0.02            283                0.1

           Total                                          819,419                   100             275,162            100
        Source: Demographic and Health Surveys; calculations by the authors.




                                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
Appendix 3: Changes in Sectoral Employment Shares 2000-2010


Table A.3: Change in Sectoral Employment Shares 2000-2010

                           Agriculture                   Mining                 Manufacturing                   Tertiary



Algeria                       -10.81                       0.20                       1.29                        9.32
Angola                        -12.55                      -0.28                       0.15                       12.69
Cameroon                       -5.23                      -0.11                       5.49                       -0.15
Egypt                           4.74                      -0.17                       -0.81                      -3.75
Ethiopia                       -8.59                       0.34                       2.67                        5.58
Ghana                         -11.02                      -0.41                       -0.19                      11.62
Kenya                         -21.56                       0.00                       7.19                       14.37
Malawi                        -10.90                      -0.04                       1.44                        9.50
Mali                           -3.76                       0.01                       1.41                        2.34
Mauritius                      -3.91                      -0.28                       -8.62                      12.80
Morocco                        -7.06                      -0.13                       0.40                        6.79
Mozambique                     -0.92                      -0.69                       3.94                       -2.34
Nigeria                        -6.92                       0.15                       0.99                        5.78
Rwanda                        -10.55                       0.48                       2.48                        7.58
Senegal                        -6.54                       0.14                       2.97                        3.43
South Africa                   -7.84                      -2.47                       -0.12                      10.42
Tanzania                      -11.54                       0.20                       1.49                        9.85
Uganda                        -11.19                       0.12                       1.22                        9.86
Zambia                         -0.03                       0.12                       0.33                       -0.43

Average (all countries)
Simple Average          -7.69                             -0.15                        1.25                       6.59
Weighted Average        -6.30                             -0.07                        1.14                       5.27

Average (excluding N. Africa, Mauritius and S. Africa)
Simple Average         -8.61                  -0.16                                    2.10                       6.67
Weighted Average       -8.35                  -0.06                                    1.87                       6.54

Source: Own calculations using data described in the data appendix.
Notes:

 1. Table shows 10-year changes in sectoral employment shares (in percentage points). Due to data availability, initial and
final years are not the same for some countires so direct comparisons are not possible. In order to make results
comparable, changes were first annualized and then multiplied times 10 to get percentage point changes in shares in a 10
year period.
 2. Weighted averages use total employment in 2000 as weights. If employment in 2000 was not available, value was
estimated using a linear projection.

3. Changes in shares might not add up to zero due to rounding.


                                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
