                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FINANCIAL HEALTH ECONOMICS

                                           Ralph Koijen
                                          Tomas Philipson
                                           Harald Uhlig

                                        Working Paper 20075
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20075


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2014




We are grateful to the late Gary Becker, Amy Finkelstein, Francisco Gomes, John Heaton, Casey Mulligan,
Jean-Marc Robin (the editor), Jesse Shapiro, Amir Sufi, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Pietro Veronesi,
Rob Vishny, and Moto Yogo and seminar participants at Stanford, “Hydra conference” on Corsica
(2012), Bonn University, Columbia University, Humboldt University (Berlin), Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia, MIT, the Milken Institute, University of Chicago, Wharton, USC, Yale, TEDMED,
and the American Enterprise Institute for useful discussions and suggestions. Koijen acknowledges
financial support from the European Research Council (grant 338082). Philipson acknowledges financial
support from The George J. Stigler Center for The Study of The Economy and The State, University
of Chicago. Uhlig acknowledges financial support from the NSF (grant SES-1227280) and INET,
grant #INO1100049. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Ralph Koijen, Tomas Philipson, and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Health Economics
Ralph Koijen, Tomas Philipson, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 20075
April 2014, Revised June 2015
JEL No. G0,I0

                                              ABSTRACT

We provide a theoretical and empirical analysis of the link between financial and real health care markets.
This link is important as financial returns drive investment in medical research and development (R&D),
which in turn, affects real spending growth. We document a “medical innovation premium” of 4-6%
annually for equity returns of firms in the health care sector. We interpret this premium as compensating
investors for government-induced profit risk, and we provide supportive evidence for this hypothesis
through company filings and abnormal return patterns surrounding threats of government intervention.
We quantify the implications of the premium for the growth in real health care spending by calibrating
our model to match historical trends, predicting the share of GDP devoted to health care to be 32%
in the long run. Policies that had removed government risk would have led to more than a doubling
of medical R&D and would have increased the current share of health care spending by more than
3% of GDP.


Ralph Koijen                                         Harald Uhlig
London Business School                               Dept. of Economics
Regent's Park                                        University of Chicago
London NW1 4SA                                       1126 E 59th Street
United Kingdom                                       Chicago, IL 60637
rkoijen@london.edu                                   and NBER
                                                     huhlig@uchicago.edu
Tomas Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
                                    1.   Introduction

Improvements in health have been a major component of the overall gain in economic welfare
and the reduction in world inequality during the last century (Murphy and Topel (2006) and

Becker, Philipson, and Soares (2005)). Indeed, an emerging literature finds that the value of

improved health is on par with many other forms of economic growth during the last century,
as represented by material per-capita income reflected in conventional GDP measurements.

As such, the increase in the quantity and quality of life might be the most economically

valuable change of that century. At the same time, the current size of the health care sector,

now close to a fifth of the U.S. economy, and its continued growth have given rise to concerned
public debates.

   Medical innovation and its demand are central to these improvements in health and the

expansion of the health care sector. Through medical progress, including improvements in
knowledge, procedures, drugs, biologics, devices, and the services associated with them, there
is an increased ability to prevent and treat old and new diseases. Many analysts emphasize

that this surge in medical innovation is key to understanding the rapid expansion of the
health care sector (Newhouse (1992), Cutler (1995), and Fuchs (1996)).

   Therefore, to understand the growth of this sector, and the medical R&D that induces
it, it is therefore important to understand the financial returns of those investing in medical

innovation. This paper provides the first quantitative analysis of the joint determination of
the financial returns of firms that invest in medical R&D and the resulting growth of the

health care sector.

   We first provide empirical evidence that the returns on firms engaged in medical R&D are

substantially higher, around 4-6% per annum, than those predicted by standard empirical

asset pricing models, such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe (1964)) and the Fama
and French (1992) model. This large “medical innovation premium” suggests that investors

in the health care industry need to be compensated for non-standard risks.



                                               1
      We provide a potential interpretation of the medical innovation premium as resulting

from government risk for which investors demand higher returns on health care firms beyond
standard risk-adjusted returns. In particular, we consider government-induced profit risk

to be a plausible explanation for the medical innovation premium for three reasons. First,

government greatly affects both the onset of profits through approval regulations and the
variable profits conditional on such approval though reimbursement policies. For example,

demand subsidy programs such as Medicare and Medicaid currently make up about half

of medical spending in the United States and, thus, are clearly an important component

affecting the profits of innovators. Second, we seek an aggregate risk component to which
the health sector is particularly exposed. Government-induced profit risk has that property.

Third, we discuss that several other plausible risk factors, such as for instance longevity risk,

often imply a negative medical innovation premium in standard consumption-based asset
pricing models, which is the opposite sign of the premium we document.
      We provide supportive evidence for the hypothesis that government risk contributes to

the medical innovation premium in three ways. First, we provide a text-based analysis of
financial statements (10-K filings) that companies file with the Securities and Exchange

Commission (SEC). The 10-K filings contain a section that asks the company about the
risk factors it faces. We show that firms in the health care sector discuss government-

related risk significantly more frequently than firms in other sectors. Second, we find that
investors experience large negative returns when there are severe threats of government

intervention.1 Third, examining the proposed Clinton health care reforms of the 1990s,
we find that health care firms experienced abnormally low returns. Moreover, firms with

more negative (abnormal) returns during this period, which are therefore firms that are

more sensitive to government intervention risk, are generally more exposed to the health

care factor that earns the medical innovation premium. This finding is consistent with our

interpretation of the medical innovation premium as compensation for government-induced
  1
    See Ellison and Mullin (2001) and Golec, Hegde, and Vernon (2010) and the Clinton health care reform
as a key example.


                                                   2
profit risk.

       Our theoretical analysis then investigates the link between financial markets, the incen-
tives for medical innovation it induces, and real health care markets in terms of its growth

resulting from this innovation. We analyze the quantitative growth of the health care sector

when investors face government-induced profit risk. The model developed in this paper is
a two-sector version of a rare-disaster model. 2 The economy has a large sector outside of
health care that is free from disaster risk (in fact, for simplicity, free of any risk) and a smaller

health-care sector facing a non-trivial probability of disaster. That disaster is government
intervention that wipes out, or substantially reduces, shareholder value in the sector. This

is a disaster from the perspective of the investors only, as opposed to society as a whole.

With an artfully chosen stochastic discount factor for the investors, the model delivers the
observed medical innovation premium. The medical innovation premium predicted by the
model has two parts: an actuarially fair disaster premium and the risk premium arising from

the entrepreneurial consumption reduction in the wake of the disaster. We argue that a
standard CAPM regression, or a Fama-French regression, finds a substantial excess return

(alpha) for the disaster-prone sector mainly because of the latter, that is, mainly because of
the adverse correlation with the stochastic discount factor.

       We find that the medical innovation premium has large effects on health care spending

and medical R&D by calibrating our model to observed time trends from 1960 to 2010. In

particular, we find that the size of the health care sector would have increased by 3% of GDP
if government intervention risk had been removed and we show that the larger part of it is

due to the entrepreneurial risk premium as opposed to the actuarially fair disaster premium.
Furthermore, our calibration implies that R&D would more than double in the absence of

the medical innovation premium, where once again the risk premium explains the bulk of

the difference. This reduction in medical R&D investments in the presence of the medical
   2
     The rare-disaster approach has been used in a number of recent papers to explain equity premia; see,
for instance, Barro and Ursua (2008), Barro and Jin (2011) or Gabaix (2012) We apply this idea specifically
to the health care sector.



                                                    3
innovation premium provides a potential explanation for the “missing R&D” implied by the

analysis by Murphy and Topel (2006), which suggests that the enormous value of gains in
health justify much larger investments in medical R&D than are actually observed.

   By 2050, our model suggests that 27% of GDP is spent on health care, conditional on

no government intervention. The long-run steady state share is slightly below 32% of GDP.
The CBO projects that total spending on health care would rise from 16% of GDP in 2007

to 37% in 2050 and 49% in 2082. Hence, our model produces estimates for the health care

share that are somewhat lower than the CBO projections.


            2.   Related Literature and Institutional Background

                                   2.1.   Related Literature

Our paper relates to several strands of previous research by merging insight from three
separate fields: health economics, macro-economics, and finance. Therefore, we briefly review

how our work relates to some key papers in all three fields. Our paper differs from previous
works by examining the joint determination of financial asset returns for those investing in

medical innovation and the resulting growth in the real health care sector.
   Our paper adds the analysis of R&D incentives to the macro-economic literature, which
has analyzed the relationship between health and growth, see for instance Barro (1996)

and Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer, and Miller (2004). A large empirical literature in health
economics estimates the impact of economic growth on health care spending, see Gerdtham

and Jonsson (2000) for a review.

   A seminal paper analyzing the interrelationship between macroeconomic growth and the

share of income spent on health is Hall and Jones (2007). These authors point out that

a rise in the share is predicted by many reasonable preference specifications, as additional
health spending increases longevity while the marginal utility for extra consumption declines

with growth. Hall and Jones (2007) provide a detailed quantitative analysis of the effect and



                                               4
social desirability of health spending. 3
       We view our paper as complementary to theirs. In particular, our focus is on the inno-
vation in the health sector and the entrepreneurial risks associated with that investment,

while these authors assume technological progress in the health sector to be deterministic
and exogenous. While the long-run demand for new innovations in health might well be

due to the forces Hall and Jones (2007) discuss, the key entrepreneurial risks arise from the

possibility of governmental intervention rather than, say, risks in the effectiveness of health

spending in increasing longevity, as we discuss in section 7. Compared to their model, our
model puts the incentives for R&D at center stage, which requires us to extend the model

along this dimension, while simplifying the longevity analysis performed by Hall and Jones

(2007).
       In finance, our paper relates to recent literature that shows that government risk affects
asset prices.4 The main contribution of our paper is to document the medical innovation
premium in the health care sector and to map out the implications for investment in medical

R&D and thus future health care expenditures. As a potential explanation of this risk
premium, we point to the risk of government intervention.

       Most closely related to our paper are Ellison and Mullin (2001) and Golec, Hegde, and
Vernon (2010) who study the impact of the Clinton health care reform proposals in 1992
and 1993 on stock prices. Both papers find that health care stocks are negatively impacted

by the Clinton reform plans. Furthermore, Golec, Hegde, and Vernon (2010) also show that

the effect is more pronounced for R&D intensive firms and that (unexpected) R&D declines
   3
     The empirical evidence showing that health care is a luxury good is mixed, see Acemoglu, Finkelstein,
and Notowidigdo (2009) and the references therein. Also, in the cross-section, health care is a necessity in
the upper part of the income distribution, suggesting that technology may ultimately be the barrier to rich
people from spending larger shares of their incomes on health care.
   4
     For instance, Belo, Gala, and Li (2013) link the cross-section of expected stock returns to firms’ exposures
to the government sector. Brogaard and Detzel (2013) use the political uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom,
and Davis (2013) to show that spikes in political uncertainty go together with declines in the stock market,
which is largely the result of increases in risk premia. Kelly, Pastor, and Veronesi (2014) show how political
uncertainty is priced in the option market using national elections and global summits, building on the
theories developed in Pastor and Veronesi (2011) and Pastor and Veronesi (2012). These papers do not focus
on the health care sector.



                                                       5
more for those firms who are more exposed to government intervention risk. 5 This evidence

is consistent with the main implications of our model.


                                   2.2.   Institutional Background

Technological change that raises health care spending mainly comes from three categories:

medical devices, biologics, and drugs, and the services associated with them. In the United

States, the variable profits on these new technologies are determined both by private and
public reimbursement policies. According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services

(CMS), in 2012 about 44% of U.S. spending was publicly financed, mainly through the

Medicare and Medicaid programs. However, returns in other parts of the world are more

contingent on public reimbursement policies. For example, in European countries, roughly
85% of health care is publicly financed (OECD, 2013).
    New health care products are often discovered by academic research; however, the high

cost of development of medical products relies on outside investors, whose main focus is on
(risk-adjusted) earnings. Hence, even though the research (“R”) in medical R&D may not
be motivated entirely by future returns, the development (“D”) certainly is. Indeed, drugs

and biologics are among the most R&D intensive industries in the United States.
    To raise capital for the large development costs, manufacturers often use public capital

markets. It is important to note that much of the production of goods and services in health
care are not financed through public equity markets. Providers of hospital services, making

up about a 35% of health care spending, are about 70% not-for-profit and thus rely on debt or
donations instead of public equity. Physician services, making up an additional 22% of health

care spending (CMS 2012), are often organized in small privately-financed clinics. Given the

lack of public equity financing in these major health care sectors, it is understandable that

the for-profit firms engaged in medical innovation make up a large majority of the firms

listed on public equity exchanges.
   5
     Julio and Yook (2012) show more generally how corporate investment is affected negatively by political
uncertainty.


                                                    6
       Government policies in the United States disproportionally affect the returns on medical

R&D investments as world sales for medical products is highly concentrated in the United
States. Egan and Philipson (2013) use data from the World Bank and WHO to estimate

that U.S. health care spending was about 48% of world spending in 2012 even though U.S.

GDP was only about 24% of world GDP in the same year. For biopharmaceutical spending,
the U.S. share of world spending is lower at about 39%, as many emerging markets spend

a larger share of their overall health care on biopharmaceuticals. Given the larger markups

on U.S. spending, a larger share of profits than sales is generated in U.S. markets. Because

of the concentration of world profits in the United States, changes in reimbursement policies
that threaten U.S. markups are of primary importance to those investing in medical R&D.

This motivates our focus on the risk of U.S. government reimbursement policies on asset

prices.


              3.   Empirical Evidence: The Medical Innovation Premium

                            3.1.    Risk Premia in Health Care Markets

To estimate the medical innovation premium, we use data on industry returns, the Fama
and French factors, and market capitalization from Kenneth French’s website. The first
classification we use splits the universe of stocks in five industries: “Consumer goods,”

“Manufacturing,” “Technology,” “Health care,” and a residual category “Other.”
       The health care industry includes medical equipment, 6 pharmaceutical products, 7 and
health services.8 We also study the Kenneth French’s classification into 48 industries, which

splits the health care industry into the three aforementioned categories. We follow the

industry classification as on Kenneth French’s website for both the entire health care industry
   6
     The corresponding SIC codes are 3693: X-ray, electromedical app., 3840-3849: Surgery and medical
instruments, 3850-3851: Ophthalmic goods.
   7
     The corresponding SIC codes are: 2830: Drugs, 2831: Biological products, 2833: Medical chemicals,
2834: Pharmaceutical preparations, 2835: Invitro, in vivo diagnostics, and 2836: Biological products, except
diagnostics.
   8
     The corresponding SIC codes are 8000-8099: Services - health.



                                                     7
and for the three sub-industries.

       We first study the returns of firms in the health care industry. In computing the returns
to health care companies, we correct for standard risk factors to account for other sources

of systematic risk outside of the model. Therefore, we are interested in the intercepts, or

“alphas,” of the following standard time-series regression:


(1)                                       rt − r f t = α + β 0 F t + εt ,


where Ft is a set of risk factors. We are interested in the returns of health care firms relative
to firms that are not in the health care industry. To compute the relative returns, we regress
the returns on a constant, the alpha, and a set of benchmark factors, Ft . The alpha measures

the differential average return of health care firms that cannot be explained by standard asset
pricing models.

       Asset pricing models are distinguished by the pricing factors Ft they account for. As a first
model, we use the excess return on the CRSP value-weighted return index, which is comprised
of all stocks traded at AMEX, NYSE, and Nasdaq. This is a common implementation of

the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), see Sharpe (1964). The second benchmark asset
pricing model we consider is the 3-factor Fama and French (1992) model, which is labeled
“Fama-French.” In addition to the market factor, this model also accounts for firm size (the

“SMB” factor) and the value factor (the “HML” factor). Empirically, smaller firms and firms
with high book-to-market ratios, that is, value firms, tend to have higher average returns

that are not explained by differences in CAPM betas. These additional two factors account
for these regularities in asset markets. 9
       We present our main results for annual returns, using the Fama and French model,

and for the sample from 1961 to 2012, which is the period for which we observe health
   9
     There is a large literature that provides explanations for the size and value effects, see for instance Berk,
Green, and Naik (1999), Zhang (2005), Yogo (2006), Lettau and Wachter (2007), and Koijen, Lustig, and
Van Nieuwerburgh (2012). In this paper, we are particularly interested in the risk premium in the health
care industry above and beyond the standard risk factors and do not provide an explanation for the market,
size, and value risk premia or exposures.


                                                        8
care spending. As the risk-free rate, rf,t in equation (1), we use 1-month T-bill rate from

Ibbotson and Associates, Inc., rolled over for 12 months as constructed by Kenneth French
and available from his website. As the return per industry, rt in equation (1), we use the
value-weighted return of all stocks in a given industry.
    The results are reported in Panel A of Table 1. The first line corresponds to the alpha

and the second line reports the t-statistic using OLS standard errors. We find that the

health care industry earns an economically and statistically significant alpha of 5.0% (with

a t-statistic of 2.4) relative to the Fama and French model.
    We also report the alphas of the other industries and find that they do not have large

alphas relative to the standard models. We conclude that there is a risk premium for holding

health care stocks that cannot be explained by standard asset pricing factors.
    If we remove health services and focus on medical equipment and pharmaceutical prod-
ucts, the alphas are even higher at 6.4% and 5.4% per annum, respectively. This is because

the alphas on medical services are close to zero, which lowers the overall alpha of the health
care sector.10 Both alphas are statistically significant at conventional significance levels.
    Although both sub-sectors, that is, medical equipment and drugs, earn significant alphas,

these alphas are not necessarily driven by exposures to the same risk factor. To test this
more directly, we augment the Fama and French model with the health care factor, which
we define as the industry return on the entire health care sector in excess of the risk-free

rate.

    We report the alphas of the sub-sectors relative to the augmented Fama and French

model in Panel B of Table 1. We find that the alphas are economically and statistically close
to zero once the health care factor is included in the model, which is consistent with the

interpretation that the same risk factor drives the alphas in both sub-sectors.
    Our results are consistent with the findings in Fama and French (1997), who study the

performance of the Fama and French (1992) model for a large cross-section of 48 industries.
 10
    The returns on services start only in the late sixties, and we therefore exclude them from the table.
However, their returns are well explained by standard asset pricing models and the alphas are close to zero.


                                                     9
Their Appendix B shows that the model is rejected in particular due to two industries: real

estate and health care. Despite the growing literature on returns in real estate markets, little
is known about health care markets in this context.

       For robustness, we estimate the model also at a monthly frequency and for two additional

sample periods for annual returns, namely from 1927 to 2012 and from 1946 to 2012. The
first sample period is the longest sample available. The second sample focuses on the post-

war period. Furthermore, we compute the alphas not only relative to the Fama and French

model, but also relative to the CAPM. The results for monthly returns and other sample

periods are reported in the Online Appendix, but the results are broadly consistent with the
findings reported in Table 1. If we use monthly data, or longer sample periods, the statistical

significance of the alphas increases.


                        3.2.    Government Risk and the Health Care Sector

In this section, we provide new evidence on the importance of government risk for firms in
the health care industry.


3.2.1.     Risk Factors Identified from 10-K filings

Our first piece of new evidence comes from a text-based analysis of 10-K reports that each

firm files annually with the Securities and Exchange Committee (SEC). 11 We use the 10-K
filings for 2012. As a robustness check, we also use the 10-K filings for 2006, which is before

Obamacare was discussed and before the financial crisis to ensure that our results are not

driven by the recent health care reforms or regulation that followed the financial crisis.

       In each 10-K filing, there is a section 1.A labeled “Risk Factors.” The guidelines for this
section are described in Regulation S-K, Item 503(c), requesting companies to list the “most
  11
    10-K filings have been explored recently in the finance literature to define industries (Hoberg and Phillips
(2011)), to measure competition (Feng Li and Minnis (2013)), to predict the volatility of stock returns
(Kogan, Levin, Routledge, Sagi, and Smith (2009)), and to predict future stock returns (Loughran and
McDonald (2011)).




                                                      10
significant factors” which affect the future profitability of the company. 12
       To illustrate the data we use in this section, we include the “Risk Factors” section of the
10-K filings of Pfizer and Apple, which are among the largest health and non-health care

firms by the end of our sample, in the Online Appendix.
       As is clear from the filings, various forms of government regulation are a major concern

to Pfizer, while for Apple traditional risk factors such as economic conditions and compe-

tition are more relevant. Consistent with our model, Pfizer also explicitly mentions price

controls and government intervention as one of the key risk factors that may affect the firm’s
operations.

       Generalizing beyond the illustration of Apple and Pfizer, we hand-collect the sections

on risk factors for the largest 50 health care companies and the largest 50 non-health care
companies. For each firms, we count the number of times words related to the government
or government risk appear in the filings.

       The dictionary that we use is summarized in Table 2. The dictionary attempts to capture
the prevalence of government-related risks in the 10-K filings. In the main dictionary, we

avoid words that are government-related yet particular to the health care sector such as for
instance “FDA,” as this would bias our risk measurement towards the health care sector.

       The results are summarized in Panel A of Table 3. For firms in the health care sector,

we find that words in this dictionary appear roughly twice as much in 2012, on average 130

times, compared to, on average, 77 times for firms outside the health care sector.
       However, the typical 10-K filing for health care firms is longer. As an alternative measure,

we can look at the average fraction of words that appear in our dictionary. For firms within
the health care sector, this fraction is 1.55% while it is only 1.24% for firms in the non-health
  12
     The precise definition is: Where appropriate, provide under the caption “Risk Factors” a discussion of
the most significant factors that make the offering speculative or risky. This discussion must be concise and
organized logically. Do not present risks that could apply to any issuer or any offering. Explain how the
risk affects the issuer or the securities being offered. [...] The risk factors may include, among other things,
the following: (i) Your lack of an operating history; (ii) Your lack of profitable operations in recent periods;
(iii) Your financial position; (iv) Your business or proposed business; or (v) The lack of a market for your
common equity securities or securities convertible into or exercisable for common equity securities.



                                                      11
care sector, implying that words from our dictionary appear 25% more frequently for firms

in the health care sector.
      One concern one may have is that the higher fraction of government-related words in 2012

is driven by the discussions around Obamacare. We therefore repeat the entire exercise, but

now for 2006, thus before President Obama was elected. Figure 2 shows the fractions for
health care and non-health care firms in both periods. We find that the fractions in both

cases increase following the financial crisis, as one may expect. However, the fraction for

non-health care firms increases substantially more (from 0.93% to 1.24%) than for health

care firms (from 1.46% to 1.55%). These results suggest that our findings are not just driven
by risks related to Obamacare or changes in regulation that followed the financial crisis.

      As discussed, we omit government-related words from our main dictionary that are par-

ticular to the health care sector. We also explore how our results are affected if we include the
health care-specific terms “medicare,” “medicare reform,” “medicaid,” “medicaid reform,”
“ppaca,” “cms,” “healthcare reform,” “nhs,” and “fda” in our dictionary. The results for this

expanded dictionary are reported in Panel B of Table 3. The differences in the average word
count and the average fraction increase substantially, making the differences economically

and statistically more significant.
      Taken together, the text-based analysis of 10-K filings provides suggests that government

risk is a relatively more important concern for firms in the health care sector.


3.2.2.    Drawdowns of the Health Care Sector

Second, we study when financial investments in health care sector experienced large negative

returns as a way to identify the risks to which the sector is exposed. In Figure 1, we plot

the drawdowns for the health care sector alongside the drawdowns of the aggregate stock

market. Drawdowns are defined as:

                                       t
                                       X                      s
                                                              X
(2)                             Dt =         ru − max               ru ,
                                                s∈{1,...,t}
                                       u=1                    u=1



                                                 12
where rt denotes the log return on either the aggregate stock market or the health care

sector. Hence, drawdowns measure the cumulative downturn relative to the highest level the
indexed reached up to a certain point in time. Drawdowns are a common way to measure

the risk of investment strategies (see for instance Grossman and Zhou (1993), Landoni and

Sastry (2013), and Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2013)).
   Figure 1 points to three large downturns for the health care sector during the last two

decades: in the early nineties, during the 2000-2002 technology crash, and during the 2007-

2008 financial crisis. During the latter two periods, the drawdowns of the market are some-

what larger than those of the health care sector.
   The drawdown in 1992 and 1993 is of most interest to us, which coincides with the

discussions around Clinton’s health care reform. During this period, the aggregate stock

market increased, while the health care sector shows a large decline.
   Interestingly, we do not find a similar drawdown during the recent Obama reforms as
during the proposed Clinton reforms. Hult and Philipson (2012) provides an explanation

for these two opposing effects. They stress that government expansions often lower both
demand prices (premiums or copays) to raise access, but at the same time lower supply

prices (reimbursements) through increased government monopsony power.
   At the one extreme, when the poorest people are being added, the quantity effect will

dominate the markup effect as the poorest were outside the program. For example, Medicaid
expansions have this positive effect on earnings and innovation. At the other extreme, when

very rich individuals are added, their utilization will not be affected much by the lower

demand price in the public program but their markup will be lowered if they are subsumed

under a government buyer. For example, the single-payer European payment systems may

lower profits in this manner.
   The non-monotonic impact of government expansions across the income distribution im-

plies that Clinton’s reforms may affect returns in opposing ways than Obama’s reforms as
represented by the different drawdown patterns. In particular, for the ACA under Obama,


                                             13
the Medicaid expansions and the means-tested subsidies for exchange covered insurance raise

the demand of the poor beyond market levels. Indeed, the CBO estimates that the ACA
raises quantity, with most recent estimates suggesting that the act raised insurance coverage

by over 4 percentage points. 13
       More importantly, many investor reports from the financial services sector upgraded
valuations of medical R&D firms citing the increase in demand induced by ACA. 14 This may

be one explanation of why the pharmaceutical industry spent an estimated $150 million in

lobbying efforts in support of the ACA. 15
       In contrast, the Clinton health care plan, known officially as the Health Security Act,

was a 1993 healthcare reform package that centered on regulations to provide universal and

more homogeneous health care for all Americans and also had as a major component overall
price controls.
       The proposed Clinton reforms are therefore closer in spirit to our discussed overall markup

threats and may be interpreted as more universally affecting the entire income distribution,
not only the poor parts of the population as in the means-tested reforms of ACA. The

extreme version of Clinton reforms would have been universal public coverage such as in
many European countries, which would lead to the negative earnings effect discussed above.

       Investment reports expressed concern over the potential negative effects the Clinton plan

would have on health care stocks, 16 and we document that health care stocks responded
negatively to this potential threat of price controls on medical R&D firms. As opposed

to the industry support for the ACA, when Clinton came to office, the trade organization

Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) was created as a response and lobbied exten-
  13
     CBO (2014), “Updated Estimates of the Effects of the Insurance Coverage Provisions of the Affordable
Care Act.”
  14
     See for instance JPMorgan, “Global Biotech Outlook,“ Jan 6, 2014, BlackRock, “BGF World Health Sci-
ence Fund,” 2012-Q1 Commentary, BlackRock, “Equity Dividend Fund,” 2014-Q1 Commentary, BlackRock,
“North American Income Trust PLC,” Half Year Financial report, April 30, 2014, and Morgan Stanley, “On
the Markets,” October 2013.
  15
     See for instance: http://www.nationalcenter.org/PR-JohnsonandJohnson 042811.html.
  16
     Pink Sheet, “Third Quarter FDC Index is Mixed for Drugs as Fears of Clinton Spark September Swoon,”
October 5, 1992.



                                                   14
sively against the Clinton health care plan. 17


3.2.3. The cross-section of health care betas and event returns around Clinton’s health care
           reforms

Ellison and Mullin (2001) and Golec, Hegde, and Vernon (2010) also show that health care

stocks decline around the Clinton reform in the early nineties. These events provide a direct

test of our theory as the key component of the reform was to impose price controls on new
drugs. Our objective in this section is to show that firms that have higher health care

betas measured over periods much longer than the Clinton reforms, experience also more

negative returns during these events. This result is relevant as different exposures to the

health care factor measure different exposures to the risk factor that results in the medical
innovation premium. As differences in exposures to the health care factor relate to differences
in abnormal returns coming from threats of government intervention, government risk may

be a reasonable candidate determinant of the medical innovation premium. 18
       In our model, the exposure to the health care factor, which generates the medical inno-
vation premium, and the exposure to government intervention risk are one-for-one related as

government intervention risk is the only source of the risk premium. In reality, firms differ
in their exposure to the health care factor and in their exposure to government intervention

risk. We abstract from this heterogeneity for simplicity and tractability in the model, but
the heterogeneity in the data allows us to test the link between the exposure to the health

care factor and the exposure to government intervention risk.

       Ellison and Mullin (2001) and Golec, Hegde, and Vernon (2010) identify the key event

dates during the Clinton reform proposals, which we reproduce in Table 4. We first compute

the health care beta, βiHC , by regressing monthly excess returns of a given firm i on the
  17
    BIO, “Milestones 2003: A History of BIO,” http://www3.bio.org/speeches/pubs/milestone03/.
  18
    Ideally, we would like to use alphas of individual firms directly, but those turn out to be to noisy. As
betas are estimated more precily than alphas, we use betas with respect to the health care factor instead.




                                                    15
market return and the health care factor:


(3)                       rit − rf t = αi + βiM rtM KT,e + βiHC rtHC,e + εit ,


where rtM KT,e denotes the excess return on the aggregate stock market and rtHC,e the excess
return on the health care factor. We require firms to have no missing monthly returns in
1991, 1992 or 1993, which is the period we use for the event study. Also, consistent with the

empirical asset pricing literature, we remove stocks with prices below $5 and above $1,000.

      The regression in (3) provides us the exposure to the health care factor for each firm,

βiHC . The typical sample to estimate the beta is much longer than the period over which
Clinton care was discussed. As follows from Table 5, the average number of years used to

estimate the beta is around 20 years.
      Next, we estimate the cumulative abnormal returns. We use an event window that spans

from 5 days before, until 5 days after, each event listed in Table 4. We use 250 daily
returns prior to the event window to estimate the betas relative to the CAPM model. If

a firm has missing daily returns, it is omitted from the sample. We then compute the
cumulative abnormal return by aggregating the residual from this regression (Campbell, Lo,

and MacKinlay, 1997). We then sum over all event dates to get the total impact of the
Clinton reform proposal on each health care stock.
      We then relate the overall risk exposure of health care firms, estimated over a much

longer sample on average, to the cumulative abnormal return during the events in 1992 and

1993 through a cross-sectional regression across firms:

                                                     βiHC
(4)                             CARi = δ0 + δ1               + ui ,
                                                   σ (βiHC )

            
where σ βiHC is the standard deviation of health care betas across firms. The coefficient δ1

measures how the cumulative abnormal return, CARi , changes if the beta with respect to
the health care factor, βiHC , changes by one standard deviation.


                                                  16
      The main results are presented in Table 5. Firms with higher health care betas are more

sensitive to news about future government intervention. A 1-standard deviation increase
in the health case beta corresponds to a 12.2% lower cumulative abnormal return. Using

heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, the effect is significant with a t-statistic of -3.6.

As a point of reference, the average cumulative abnormal return across all firms is -23.6%.
The R-squared of the regression equals 13.9%, which illustrates that abnormal returns are

noisy, which is to be expected.

      Taken together, firms with higher health care betas also showed larger movements during

threats of government intervention. We interpret this as suggestive evidence that these firms
are more sensitive to news about future government intervention.


      4.   A Dynamic Model of Medical Innovation and Spending

                                   4.1. Outline of the Model

To understand the implications of our empirical findings for the health sector as well as its

macroeconomic consequences, we now proceed to build a dynamic aggregate model, which
centrally features the interaction between financial and real markets. We first lay out the
key mechanisms and results.

      The health industry risk premium α measured above arises here from the covariance

between the stochastic discount factor of investors and the returns to health industry in-

vestments, both of which are driven by government risk. Assume that the government
intervention may happen with some probability ω. As we show later, the health industry

risk premium can then be calculated as


(5)                                 α = − ln(1 − ω) − ln(X),


see (35) and (38). The term − ln(1−ω) reflects the actuarially fair disaster premium, whereas

− ln(X) is the risk premium against this disaster and depends on preference parameters. In


                                                17
section 6, we argue that it is the quantitatively larger component. R&D in the health sector

needs to earn the additional premium α, no matter how it arises. That is, the dynamics of
the model will depend on the preferences of the entrepreneur only via the return on health

industry investments, or the sum of the aggregate market return and this premium, see

equations (29), (37), and (38), and we can exploit that the premium α has been measured
with some care above.

   Given the government intervention risks facing medical entrepreneurs and their pref-

erences for evaluating them, we need to specify the demand for their products. For this

purpose, we consider a three-sector model in which labor is allocated across the production
of consumption, medical goods and services, and medical R&D. The profitability of R&D in-

vestments depends on the supply side serving this demand. To that end, the model assumes

monopolistic competition between health care suppliers, with non-entrepreneur households
as the final purchasers and consumers of these goods and services.
   We assume that non-entrepreneurial households are endowed with some base level of

health, which they can increase by purchasing medical goods and services in the market
place. To also account for the rise in R&D spending quantitatively requires some flexibility

in the specification for the innovation technology (11).
   Furthermore, it is quantitatively important to account for further government interven-

tions, such as subsidies to health spending and medical R&D and we therefore included these
features as well. Some additional choices such as an aggregate resource constraint on labor

as the input to production and R&D are required to close the model.

   After calibrating key parameters in section 6, we study the dynamics of the model as

well as examine the counterfactuals, when we set α to just the actuarially fair risk premium

or remove government risk altogether.




                                              18
                                       4.2.       The Environment

4.2.1.    Preferences and Endowments

Time is infinite, t = 0, 1, . . .. The population consists of households i ∈ [0, 1] and en-

trepreneurs i ∈ (1, 1 + κ] for some κ > 0, where we shall think of κ being small. We focus on
symmetric allocations and equilibria, with a representative household and a representative

entrepreneur.

      Households have Cobb-Douglas preferences over health and consumption:
                                                                           1−η 
                                       
                                                  ∞
                                                  X              cξt ht1−ξ       
(6)                                U =E                βt                       ,
                                                  t=0
                                                                    1−η


where ct is the consumption at date t, ht is the health, ξ ∈ (0, 1) determines the trade-off be-

tween health and consumption 19 , 0 < 1/η < 1 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
and β ∈ (0, 1) the time discount factor.

      Households are endowed with one unit of time each period, which they supply inelastically
as labor. The productivity of labor for producing consumption goods is growing exogenously

with γ > 1. Households are further endowed with a base level of health, given by hγ t for some
parameter h > 0, and thus assumed to be growing at the same rate as labor productivity.
      The preferences of the entrepreneurs imply a stochastic discount factor Mt+1 , see equation
(31), which shall be used to price profits in the health industry. For entrepreneurs, we

abstract from modelling health care consumption as well as labor supply explicitly. We think
of these as rich households, for which labor income and their aggregate labor supply does

not matter much, and who purchase the best medical care available, but which nonetheless

constitutes only a small fraction of their income. We therefore concentrate entirely on their

consumption (or what they “eat”) et and, below, their asset holdings.                  We assume that
  19
     Cobb-Douglas preferences imply that the marginal utility of consumption increases in health, which is
consistent with the empirical results in Viscusi and Evans (1990), Finkelstein, Luttmer, and Notowidigdo
(2008), and Koijen, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Yogo (2011).



                                                         19
their preferences are piecewise linear and given by


(7)                               Vt = u(et ) + β̃Et [Vt+1 ]
                                        
                                        
                                         %(et − e ) for
                                                   t                         e t ≤ et
                         where u(et ) =
                                        
                                         et − et        for                 e t ≥ et


for et ≥ 0 and parameters β̃, et , % ≥ 1. This kinked-linear specification can be viewed as
a simple version of prospect theory, as in Kahneman and Tversky (1979). We allow the

reference point et to vary with time, but shall assume that the entrepreneur treats the value
of et as exogenously given. There are many other preference specifications that have similar

implications as we discuss in an online appendix to this paper.


4.2.2.    Technologies and Feasibility

The production of aggregate consumption ct is given by


(8)                                         ct + κet = γ t Lct ,


where Lct are the total units of labor devoted to producing consumption goods. We use the

consumption good at time t as numeraire.
      Health is produced according to the production function


(9)                      ht =        hγ t          +                 mt                   ,
                                     |{z}                           |{z}
                                Exogenous health       Health due to medical treatments



where hγ t is the base health level the household is endowed with and mt is medical care, an

input to increase the health level beyond the base health level. One may wish to impose some
            ˉ t as the maximal level of health that can be reached with state-of-the-art
upper bound hγ

medical care, in order to motivate our assumption above of abstracting from medical care
for entrepreneurial households.


                                                        20
     It is well known that most health expenditures occur late in life. Furthermore, with

economic and medical progress, people now live considerably longer. We view our preference
specification (6) and health production equation (9) as a simple version of this phenomenon.
                                          ˉ for some h,
For example, for 0 < η < 1 and while ht ≤ h          ˉ one might wish to understand
 (1−η)(1−ξ)
ht            as proportional to a probability of staying alive in (6), and as the preferences
there arising from aggregating across a population with age heterogeneity, modelled appro-

priately: higher ht then corresponds to an older population, on average. Likewise, (9) can
be understood as stating that reaching a more advanced age requires medical treatments be-
yond a base level of health. Since we are assuming that the base level of health to rise with

general technological progress, we focus entirely on the role of medical progress in changing

the share of health spending and aging. As an alternative specification, one could more
explicitly introduce life-extending benefits of health care or medical care, which are central
in Hall and Jones (2007), which may require an extension of our preference specification.

     Longevity risk is, however, an unlikely source for the observed risk premium, see section
7. To focus on our main theme, we have therefore chosen to keep to the simpler specification

above. One advantage of the formulation here is that 1 − ξ as a key health spending share
parameter can be read off directly from the preference specification (6).

     Medical treatment or medical care is produced from a continuum of firms, indexed by

j ∈ [0, 1],

                                            Z       1            φ
                                                          1/φ
(10)                                 mt =                mjt dj        ,
                                                 0



where φ > 1. As is standard in models of monopolistic competition, φ determines the degree
of competition in the industry, and hence the market power of producers in the competitive

equilibrium below.




                                                     21
   The production of mjt units of type-j medical care is given by


                                       mjt = qjt γ t Lmjt ,


where Lmjt is the total units of labor used for producing type-j medical care, γ t is the general
productivity increase, and qjt is the productivity or quality level for producing type-j medical
                                                             −1
care relative to producing the consumption good. Therefore, qjt is also the marginal cost

for producing mjt in terms of the consumption good at time t. The evolution of the quality

is given by


                                                  ν
                                                              1/ν
(11)                                qj,t+1 =     qjt + dνjt          ,


where ν ≤ 1 is a parameter, and djt is the amount of R&D invested in the type-j-knowledge
qjt , created with labor per

                                          djt = γ t Ldjt ,

where Ldjt is the total labor used for undertaking type-j R&D, and γ t is the general level

of productivity. This specification abstracts from the risks inherent in undertaking medical

R&D or potentially sizeable fixed costs. We return to these issues in section 6.4, after
analyzing the baseline version described here. We drop the j-subscript to denote aggregates.
We shall focus on symmetric equilibria and thus qt ≡ qjt , et cetera. We shall return to a
discussions of asymmetric equilibria in section 6.4.

   Aggregate feasibility requires


(12)                                 Lct + Lmt + Ldt = 1.




                                                22
              4.3.   Households, Entrepreneurs, Government and Equilibrium

4.3.1.   Households and Entrepreneurs

Households receive labor income θ per unit of output produced with household labor, with

the remainder 1 − θ paid to entrepreneurs. This can be thought of as a simple stand-in for,
say, a Cobb-Douglas production function, with a labor share of θ and with entrepreneurs

owning the capital stock, or as a tax on labor income charged by the government to repay

government bonds, which are held by entrepreneurs, or as a payment for some fixed factor

of production.
   Importantly, we assume, that households neither trade assets on financial markets nor

hold shares in health industry firms, and that the share θ thus remains constant throughout.
There is a large literature documenting that the vast majority of households do not hold

stocks or only hold them in very small quantities, and that the distribution of wealth and
stock holdings is far from even. Nonetheless, all households are consumers of goods and

medical treatments. It is this tension that we seek to capture with this simple assumption.
   In the quantitative section, we shall allow θ to be somewhat larger than the labor share,

to reflect the fact that some stocks are held in small-scale retirement portfolios and alike.
The central feature of our modeling assumption is that these households will not hold any

part (or any substantial part) of the government intervention risk, as part of their portfolio,

and thus do not provide insurance against this risk. We view this as reasonable, given what
is known about the distribution of wealth and stock holdings.

   Households receive medical care purchase subsidies from the government and pay taxes.

They therefore maximize the utility U given by (6) by choosing ct and mt , subject to (9),
(10) and the sequence of budget constraints

                                            Z       1
(13)                         ct + (1 − σ)               pjt mjt dj + τt = θγ t ,
                                                0



taking prices pjt for medical care of type j at date t, the medical care purchase subsidy σ as

                                                        23
well as the lump sum tax τt as given. The maximization problem of the households implies

an aggregate demand function Dj,t+1 (pj,t+1 ) for medical care of type j. In the symmetric
equilibrium, mjt ≡ mt .

   Each period, entrepreneurs can undertake medical R&D to receive a patent that lasts
one period, and thus earn profits from monopolistic competition in period t + 1 due to

the patents created in t. More precisely, after medical care mjt , j ∈ [0, 1] is produced

and profits πjt , j ∈ [0, 1] are generated, ownership of the medical care types j ∈ [0, 1] are
reshuffled among the entrepreneurs, with each entrepreneur receiving 1 /κ types different
from the ones ever owned before. For each type j now owned, the entrepreneur receives the

previous knowledge level or quality level qjt for free (as the previous patent has expired).

The entrepreneur undertakes R&D djt and receives a monopoly for production and sales for
type j next period. The government subsidizes R&D at rate χ and may impose restrictions
on pricing next period.

   We can think of the entrepreneurial activity as creating a medical care firm at date t for
type j, which undertakes R&D djt at date t, sells mj,t+1 at price pj,t+1 at date t + 1, pays
profits πj,t+1 to its owning entrepreneur and then dies, where profits πj,t+1 = Πt+1 (qj,t+1 )
depend on aggregate conditions such as government pricing restrictions, as well as the firm-

specific quality level qj,t+1 . Given qjt , the entrepreneur will thus maximize the firm value vjt
given by

                           vjt = max Et [Mt+1 Πt (qj,t+1 )] − (1 − χ)dt ,
                                  djt


subject to (11), where Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor of the owning entrepreneur

between period t and t + 1.

   Entrepreneurs also receive income 1 −θ per unit of output produced with household labor.

We do not allow further trading of these assets between households and entrepreneurs, that

is, we assume that θ is constant. Given the riskless productivity growth of labor, the income
of these additional assets is safe, and the entrepreneurs, as a group, bear the entire risk of

changes in the profitability of medical care.

                                                24
   While a nonzero share of output in the non-medical sectors may flow to entrepreneurial

households invested in asset markets, it is not implausible that the marginal shareholders
is rather thinly diversified: while diversification could spread risks, it may diminish the

influence over the firms held. Therefore, 1 − θ can also be read as parameterizing the degree

of diversification for entrepreneurs and shareholders of medical care companies, with θ = 1
as the extreme of no diversification (and no insurance against aggregate risks to the health

sector) at all.

   Imposing symmetry and postponing the discussion of idiosyncratic risk and asymmetry

to section 6.4, we have dt = djt , qt = qjt and πt = πjt . Entrepreneurs now maximize (7)
subject to the sequence of budget constraints:

                                           1     1                
(14)                     et + τ̃t + (1 − χ) dt =   πt + (1 − θ)γ t .
                                           κ     κ

Note the division of R&D expenses and profits by κ, in order to properly distribute the
continuum j ∈ [0, 1] of firms and the share 1 − θ over the small continuum j ∈ [1, κ] of
entrepreneurial households.


4.3.2.   Government and Government Risk

The government intervenes in three ways that all affect the health care sector. First, it
proportionally subsidizes R&D undertaken by the firm, so that firms only need to privately

pay for a fraction 1 − χ of the costs of R&D, for some 0 < χ < 1. We keep this level of

subsidy fixed throughout. Second, it proportionally subsidizes the purchases of medical care
by households, so that households only pay for a fraction 1 − σ of the market price of medical

care, for some 0 < σ < 1. We keep this level of subsidy fixed throughout.

   Third, the government may restrict the prices firms can charge for medical care. We

assume that this restriction may randomly change over time: indeed, the main risk factor

we consider is this government price intervention risk.


                                             25
   Consider a non-intervention period, where firms are free to set prices. Profit maximization

with monopolistic competition leads to the usual markup pricing over marginal costs,


(15)                              pt = φ/qt and pjt = φ/qjt .


The resulting aggregate profits are

                                                                  1
(16)                          πt = πt (qt ) = (φ − 1)mt (φ/qt )      ,
                                                                  qt

where mt = mt (pt ) depends on pt , among other date-t-variables.

   When intervening, the government limits the markup, so that after-intervention aggregate
profits π̂t in the health industry are now a fraction ζ of the profits that would have obtained
in unconstrained competition, given qt ,


(17)                                   π̂t (qt ) = ζπt (qt ),


where 0 ≤ ζ < 1 is a parameter of the model. As a benchmark, suppose that all profits

are eliminated, ζ = 0. That corresponds to allowing no markups and forcing firms to sell at
marginal costs.
   Intervention is a stochastic process. For the quantitative calculations below, we need to

examine the probability of transiting to intervention in t + 1, if the government has never
intervened until date t. It is analytically convenient to fix this transition probability as a

constant parameter of the model, which we denote with ω.

   Only the first two types of intervention create a flow of payments from the government,

so that the government budget constraint is given by


(18)                               σpt mt + χdt = τt + κτ̃t ,




                                                26
where τt are the lump sum taxes collected from households at time t and τ̃t are the lump

sum taxes collected from entrepreneurs at time t. We assume that the taxes pay for the
subsidies received in each of the two segments of the population,


                                                  σpt mt = τt ,

                                                      χdt = κτ̃t .


4.3.3.   Equilibrium

We focus on symmetric equilibria, with representative households, entrepreneurs and firms.
Given the exogenous process zt , an equilibrium is an adapted stochastic sequence


              Ψ = (ct , mt , ht , τt , et , τ̃t , Lct , Lmt , Ldt , qt , dt , pt , πt , vt , Dt (∙))∞
                                                                                                    t=0 ,




with qt measurable at t − 1, such that households maximize their utility, given prices, govern-

ment interventions, and firm choices, entrepreneurs maximize utility, resulting in consump-

tion et , firms maximize profits and value per setting their own price, given prices set by
other firms, wages, the stochastic discount factor and government intervention, and markets
clear.


                            5.     Model Solution and Implications

We provide the model implications for the share of health care spending in section 5.1,
R&D spending in section 5.2, and the medical innovation premium in section 5.3. We shall

compare these to observed magnitudes in the data, after calibrating the model in section 6.




                                                            27
                                    5.1. Health Care Demand

Total demand for health care is obtained from the intra-temporal optimization problem of

the households,

                                                             1−η
                                                  cξt ht1−ξ
(19)                                  max                            ,
                                         mt          1−η

subject to (9) as well as the household budget constraint (13). This is solved by:

                                                                      
                                         1−ξ            θγ t − τt
(20)                         mt =                                            − ξhγ t ,
                                         1−σ                pt

Let λt = pt mt /γ t be the share of labor generated output spent by households on medical

care. Note that τt = σpt mt = σλt γ t . With this, rewrite (20) as

                                                   
                                          1−ξ
                               λt =                     (θ − σλt ) − ξhpt
                                          1−σ

and solve for λt . We find that the share evolves as

                                    pt mt    1−ξ      1−σ
(21)                         λt =      t
                                          =        θ−        ξhpt .
                                     γ      1 − σξ    1 − σξ

The model has two important implications. First, if firms do not undertake any R&D, that is,

dt = 0, then qt and hence pt do not fluctuate over time, holding markups constant. Therefore,
the health spending share increases only due to medical R&D, which lowers prices. Second,
and absent government intervention, the long-run share equals

                                                         1−ξ
(22)                                          λ∞ =             θ
                                                        1 − σξ

and therefore increases with the importance of health in the utility function (1 − ξ), the size

of the subsidy in the output market (σ) and the size θ of the labor generated output paid


                                                        28
to households.

   While γ t is the labor produced output, total output is given by


                                      yt = (1 + κ)γ t + πt ,


and includes the profits of health-care companies, see (16) and (17). If there is no intervention
in period t, these profits are


(23)                         πt = (1 − φ−1 )mt pt = (1 − φ−1 )λt γ t ,


To compare model output to the data, it is reasonable to think of yt as income from a
growing stock of capital and labor that can be spent on consumption and health care, that

is, as gross domestic product net of gross investment (but inclusive of health R&D, which
we shall think of as negligibly small, for this calculation). Since gross investment is about 16

percent of total output in the data, measured output will be about 1.19 times output yt in
the model. Health spending as a share ψt = pt mt /(1.19yt ) of measured output is therefore

                                                      λt
(24)                              ψt = 0.84                     ,
                                               1 + (1 − φ−1 )λt

absent government intervention, assuming that labor-produced output by entrepreneurs is
negligible, κ ≈ 0. The long-run value absent government intervention is then

                                                                   −1
                                              1 − σξ
(25)                         ψ∞ = 0.84                + 1 − φ−1           .
                                             (1 − ξ)θ

Note that θ enters this equation, because we have assumed that the health care demand
by the “rich” entrepreneurs is negligible compared to the entire economy, even though their

consumption share is not.

   In the benchmark scenario of a permanent intervention by the government, where markups



                                                 29
are eliminated entirely, private incentives to undertake R&D collapse. Assuming that the

government does not directly finance R&D or organizes this industry in some other way, the
quality of medical care remains constant from the intervention point onward. The price pt
for medical care drops from φ/qt to 1/qt due to the elimination of the markup. Equation (21)
then implies an increase of the gross income share λt spent on medical care in the period of

the intervention, due to this price drop and its effect on valuing the health endowment h.

From there onwards, the gross labor-produced output share λt remains constant, and will be
bounded above by (1 − ξ)θ/(1 − σξ). Moreover, it will equal 1.19 times the overall share of
measured output, since profits in the health industry are now zero. If the government finds

a way to continue R&D indefinitely, the quality qt may continue to grow to infinity, and the

long-run share λt once again converges to (1 − ξ)θ/(1 − σξ). Similar remarks hold, if not all
of the markup is eliminated, or if the interventions are only temporary.
   Note that patents last one period by assumption and thus, the R&D incentives at date t

are governed entirely by the probability and degree of government intervention in t + 1, and
do not depend on any future periods. Other government intervention scenarios, other than

the benchmark permanent intervention, can easily be understood. For example, in case of
a temporary, but assured intervention with a complete elimination of markups, the private

incentives for R&D collapse during the assured-intervention episode, but resume as soon

as there is some positive probability that the government may not intervene next period.

Likewise, if the intervention does not eliminate markups entirely, R&D incentives are reduced
rather than eliminated altogether, with corresponding lower growth of quality. The exact

magnitudes depend on the probabilities as well as the degree of markup control, and follow
from the calculations for optimal medical R&D, which we shall present now.


                                5.2.   Optimal Medical R&D

                                                                               ν
                                                                                           1/ν
Consider a single firm j, choosing some R&D level djt , resulting in qj,t+1 = qjt + dνjt          .

Given our symmetry assumption, we can drop the index j on qjt , and write qj,t+1 =


                                             30
  ν
              1/ν
 qjt + dνjt          : however, we need to keep j in djt and qj,t+1 to study the individual incen-

tives for R&D. Suppose the R&D choices of all other firms result in the aggregate state of

medical knowledge qt+1 . The markup equation (15) and the usual monopolistic competition
calculations for firm-individual demand imply

                                                                    1/(φ−1)
                                                            qj,t+1
                                          πj,t+1 =                              πt+1 ,
                                                             qt+1

regardless of whether the government has intervened or not: the power 1/(φ − 1) shows up
due to the elasticity of demand, and not due to the markup per se. The value maximization

problem of the firm can therefore be written as
                                          "            1/(φ−1)                 #
                                               qj,t+1
                               max Et                                Mt+1 πt+1 − (1 − χ)djt ,
                               dt ≥0            qt+1
                                                               1/ν
                               s.t. qj,t+1 = qtν + dνjt               ,


taking as given the aggregate variables qt , qt+1 , Mt+1 and πt+1 , and qt+1 known at date t. In
case of an interior solution, the first-order condition is

                                                  1/ν−1 ν−1         1 −1
                                       qtν + dνjt       djt    qj,t+1 φ−1
(26)                   1−χ =                                                Et [Mt+1 πt+1 ] .
                                           qt+1 (φ − 1)         qt+1

Imposing symmetry yields

                                                   dν−1
                                                    t      1
(27)                                   1−χ=       ν     ν
                                                               Et [Mt+1 πt+1 ] ,
                                                 qt + dt φ − 1

which can be solved for dt , if qt and Et [Mt+1 πt+1 ] are known. Note though, that both

Mt+1 and πt+1 generally depend on qt+1 and therefore on dt , as well as on the government

intervention decision in t + 1.
    Suppose there has been no government intervention until date t. The specification (7)

and suitable parameter restrictions on et and et+1 eliminate the dependence of Mt+1 on qt+1


                                                               31
and ensures that it takes the two values β̃, if there is no intervention in t + 1, and %β̃, if there

is government intervention in t + 1. We examine this in greater detail in section 5.3 below.
   With (17) and the conditional intervention probability ω, equation (27) can then be

rewritten as

                                   dν−1      1                              
                                     t
(28)                     1−χ=                    π t+1   (1 − ω) β̃ + ω% β̃ζ   ,
                                 qtν + dνt φ − 1

where πt+1 is now the no-intervention level of profits, given qt+1 = (qtν + dνt )1/ν . Thus,

substitute πt+1 out with (23) and in turn replace λt+1 per equation (21) to obtain

                                                                  !
                dν−1          1−ξ θ           1         1−σ                              
(29)      1−χ= ν t ν                  −                        ξh     (1 − ω) β̃ + ω% β̃ζ   .
              qt + dt        1 − σξ φ   (qtν + dνt )1/ν 1 − σξ

While this may seem like a somewhat daunting equation, the key is now that it is a non-

linear equation in dt , given parameters and given qt . It can be analyzed and solved using
conventional methods. With that, one can now solve for the entire model dynamics forward,
given initial conditions.


                  5.3.   Risk Preferences and the Stochastic Discount Factor

The budget constraint of the entrepreneurs as well as the government budget constraint

implies


(30)                                κet = (1 − θ)γ t + πt − dt


so that consumption of the entrepreneurial households is the entrepreneurial share of labor-

produced output plus current period profits of medical care firms minus the expenses for

creating the next generation of such firms. With the preferences given in (7), the stochastic




                                                 32
discount factor Mt+1 is

                                   
                                   
                                    β̃     if    et > et , et+1 > et+1 ,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    %β̃    if    et > et , et+1 < et+1 ,
(31)                      Mt+1   =
                                   
                                    β̃/%   if    et < et , et+1 > et+1 ,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    β̃     if    et < et , et+1 < et+1 .



   We shall assume (or calibrate) et so that the entrepreneurial consumption et is always

above this threshold in a non-intervention period, and below it in a period of government

intervention. We call this the calibration assumption.

   To explain the observed premium in the data, we only need this calibration assumption
to hold during the observed time span. For the long-run quantitative explorations below, we
shall impose it forever, however. In our calculations below, et grows in the non-intervention
scenario, so that we simply need et < e0 to assure the first half of this statement. This would
follow from assuming a constant reference value et ≡ e.
   To assure the second half of the calibration statement for a constant reference value e
and for the observed data, one needs that a government intervention within the next decade

depresses entrepreneurial consumption below the entrepreneurial consumption level e0 of
our observed data. In the extreme case of a complete elimination of markups and a zero

entrepreneurial share of labor-produced output, entrepreneurial consumption falls to zero:
we then just need e0 > e > 0. By continuity, this is then still true for a low, but nonzero
markup level as well as a low, but nonzero entrepreneurial share of labor income.

   However, if the entrepreneurial share of labor produced output is large compared to the

profit income from medical care firms or if the reduction in markup is rather modest or if
one seeks to impose the calibration assumption for all periods t, and thus also for the fu-

ture without allowing for complete elimination of markups or with a nonzero entrepreneurial

share of labor produced output, one needs to allow the reference value et to vary with time


                                                 33
and to tune it such that it lies just in between the value of entrepreneurial consumption that

obtains with and without government intervention. Put differently, more modest govern-
ment interventions or more diversification, expressed as a smaller value for θ, do not per se

invalidate our calibration assumption: they just make it harder to achieve and thus lessen its

plausibility. It should also be noted that nothing in the calibration assumption depends on
the government intervention being permanent or temporary. Once the calibration assump-

tion is granted, the rest of the analysis follows. If the calibration assumption is not satisfied,

then one requires another mechanism to generate the medical innovation premium and to

study its macro-economic implications. If the medical innovation premium arises to some
part as a risk premium, then assumptions are needed to generate sufficient volatility in the

stochastic discount factor, as here.

   With the calibration assumption, the stochastic discount factor Mt+1 in a non-government
intervention period can be rewritten as


(32)                                   Mt+1 = R−1 Xt+1 ,


where

                                                            1
(33)                          R = 1/Et [Mt+1 ] =
                                                    β̃ (1 − ω + ω%)

is the rate of discounting that is not particular to the health care risk. In a model with

standard productivity shocks et cetera, R ought to reflect the risk pricing of such shocks. It
is rather straightforward to extend our preference specification and model to account for other

risk factors such as aggregate stock market risk or even the Fama-French factors. However,

to focus on the economic mechanism at work, we restrict attention to the government risk
factor only.




                                               34
   The second component of the stochastic discount factor, Xt+1 , satisfies


(34)                                     1 = Et [Xt+1 ]


and is the component arising out of the health care sector aggregate return risk, which we
have modelled as the risk of government intervention. It satisfies
                   
                   
                    X = %/(1 − ω + ω%) ,          if no interv. in t, interv. in t + 1,
(35)      Xt+1   =
                   
                    X = 1/(1 − ω + ω%) ,          if no interv. in t and t + 1,


for the main cases of interest. Per (34), note that


(36)                                 1 = (1 − ω)X + ωX


and that X > X. Therefore, when the government intervenes, the marginal utility of
wealth of the agent pricing the assets is high. This covariance of marginal utility and profits

generates a positive risk premium for health care firms that is not accounted for with the
traditional risk factors used in standard asset pricing models.
   Consider a health industry asset that pays a return Q at date t+1 on a unit of investment

at date t, if there has been no government intervention, and pays ζQ, if the government

intervened, see (17). Since 1 = Et [Mt+1 Q], the return needs to satisfy

                                     R                  1
(37)                     Q=                 ˉ =                   .
                              (1 − ω)X + ωζ X   (1 − ω)β̃ + ω%β̃ζ

This logic applies in particular to equation (29), where we can replace the factor (1 − ω)β̃ +

ω%β̃ζ at the end with Q−1 . Thus, given a value for Q, ω as well as ζ disappears from
this equation. As a result, knowledge of Q is sufficient for calculating the dynamics of the

model, and will be independent of the probability of the government intervention during

the no-intervention epoch and independent of the degree of profit reduction ζ, given Q. In


                                              35
our quantitative section, we can therefore exploit our measurement of Q from our empirical

section above to obtain the entire dynamics.
   An entirely safe asset would have the return R. To disentangle risk aversion from disaster

risk for the return Q, suppose, that the government intervention for this particular asset

was uncorrelated with the intervention giving rise to the stochastic discount factor of the
entrepreneur. To keep the algebra simple, let us further assume total elimination of profits

in case of government intervention, ζ = 0. In that case, this disaster-risk-only return Q̃ must

solve
                                                   R
                                         Q̃ =           .
                                                (1 − ω)

Further, we can decompose the medical innovation premium α, written as the log excess

return on investing in a health industry asset, into two pieces,


(38)                      α = ln(Q) − ln(R) = − ln(1 − ω) − ln(X)


where the first piece is the log excess return that is entirely due to the disaster risk inherent
in health industry assets, while the second piece is due to the entrepreneurial risk aversion
against such a disaster. If ζ > 0, a similar decomposition easily obtains, but the resulting

formulas are more convoluted.
   While we have derived this stochastic discount factor from the preference specification

(7), the latter is not essential: only the properties of the stochastic discount factor above

matter for the solution of the model. We could have thus alternatively started with assuming
these properties of Mt+1 and then reverse-engineer entrepreneurial preferences, which give
rise to this stochastic discount factor. For the kinked-linear preference specification in (7),

it is easy to solve for β̃ and %, given ω, X, X and R, satisfying (36), from equations (33)

and (35), but the reverse-engineering approach can be applied to a wider variety of utility

specifications, which would thus serve just as well. We explore this route in a online appendix
to this paper.


                                                36
   The simple form of the stochastic discount factor and the binary nature of the government

intervention risk allow for a particularly simple way of solving the model, while respecting
key nonlinearities elsewhere in the model during the convergence phase to the steady state.



                  6.   Calibration and Quantitative Implications

In section 6.1, we discuss how we calibrate the model’s parameters, and provide intuition for
how parameters are identified. We then use the model in section 6.2 for two counterfactuals.

First, we consider the case in which the government risk is removed all together ( ω = 0).

Second, we consider the case in which the government risk is still present ( ω > 0), but the

stochastic discount factor is uncorrelated with government risk. We conclude this section by
studying the long-run implications of the model in section 6.3.


                        6.1.     Moments, Parameters, and Sensitivity

We need to calibrate the parameters


(39)                           {γ, h, ν, q0 , X, X, φ, ξ, ζ, χ, σ, θ}.


The parameters β and η have no implications for medical innovation or spending decisions
and therefore do not need to be calibrated. We calibrate the model to five periods of 10

years starting in 1960. Thus, t = 0 corresponds to 1960 and t = 5 corresponds to 2010. For

the calibration we shall additionally impose that zt = 0, t = 0, . . . , 5, which corresponds to

no government intervention.

   Real output growth during this period is about three percent per annum, with or without
the profits in the health industry. Therefore, we set γ = 1.35 per decade so that labor-

produced output grows at three percent per annum.

   Concerning the markup, Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991) estimate that prices of

drugs fall by 80% if a patent of a drug expires and generic drugs become available. This

                                                   37
suggests φ = 5. However, other expenses, such as marketing costs, decline as well after

patent expiration, which suggests a lower number. As a starting point, we therefore set
φ = 3.

   We then turn to the subsidy on medical care and medical R&D. According the the CMS,

about 50% of aggregate health care spending occurs via Medicare and Medicaid. We therefore

set σ = 50%. Further, we set the R&D subsidy to χ = 0.5, consistent with estimates of

Jones (2011).

   In calibrating government intervention risk, we initially consider the case in which gov-

ernment intervention reduces health care prices to marginal costs. This implies ζ = 0. We
set the probability of government intervention to ω = 10%, which implies that the probabil-

ity that the government did not intervene in a 50-year period equals 59%. We also explore
the implications for our main results of changing ω from ω = 10% to ω = 20%, implying a

a probability of no intervention over 50 years of less than 33%. We therefore view ω = 20%
as an upper bound for a reasonable intervention probability. One could, of course, increase

ω far enough so that the observed α is entirely due to the actuarially fair disaster premium,
with X = 1 in equation (38). To achieve a 5% alpha per year beyond the “usual” 4% annual
rate of return then requires ω = 1 − (1.04/1.09)10 = 37.5%. The probability of no interven-
tion for a 50-year period then equals 9.6%. Put differently, it is very improbable that no

intervention has taken place so far: an explanation, which we do not find plausible.
   Next, we calibrate the stochastic discount factor. R is the relevant discount rate in the

absence of government intervention risk. For the arguments given in McGrattan and Prescott

(2003), we set this discount rate to 4% per annum, capturing the rate of return on a balanced
stock-bond portfolio. This implies a value of R = 1.48. This discount factor should not be

interpreted as the safe return, but rather reflects other macroeconomic risks, not explicitly

modelled here, which affect investment choices, including the investments in medical R&D.

We assume that investments in the health care industry carry an additional premium of 5%
per annum, or Q = 1.0910 = 2.37 per decade. With ω, equation (37) now delivers values for

                                             38
β̃ as well as X, while (33) delivers the value for %.

   In our model, only health industry assets are risky, whereas all others are safe. If one
were to run a CAPM regression in our model, then these assets would have a premium

compared to the market return, which happens to be the safe return. While our model is

highly stylized, it does allow us to interpret the CAPM premia of the empirical section as a
version of the preference-driven model-based premia here.

   Second, equity generally is a claim on the leveraged assets of a company, while we in-

vestigate the premia on the unlevered investment in health care companies in the model.

However, pharmaceutical firms in particular tend to have very low debt levels, since most of
their investment is in intangibles. We therefore directly match the return on assets to the

return on equity.

   The parameter θ plays a dual role in the model. It measures the degree of diversification

for the entrepreneurs. First, a low value for θ means that entrepreneurs own a large share of
the economy aside from health industry equity, thus buffeting the impact of a potential gov-

ernment intervention. While this is important when inspecting functional form assumptions
for the entrepreneurs, this aspect is now mute, given the quantitative assumptions about the

risk premium against government intervention. Second, since entrepreneurs consume no (or
only a negligible) part of their income on medical services, a low value for θ lowers the overall
demand for medical services, given aggregate output. It is this force that is of quantitative

importance here, as can also be seen from (25) and the discussion there. We therefore set

θ = 0.8 and thus somewhat higher than the labor share in order to take into account the

demand for medical services by rich stock holders.
   We select the remaining four parameters, h , ν, q0 , and ξ to match the R&D share in
1990 and 2010, as well as the health share in 1960 and 2010. We use data on health care

spending from the CMS and data on R&D spending is from Jones (2011). For the R&D

share in 2010, we extrapolated from 2006, using the average R&D growth rate from 1987 to
2006 and the average GDP growth rate from 1987 to 2006.


                                               39
   In Table 6 we summarize the model parameters. We illustrate the fit of the model

relative to the data in Figure 3: they are the same for ω = 10% or ω = 20%, given the
remark following equation (37).


               6.2.   Risk Premia, Medical Innovation, and Medical Spending

To understand the impact of government intervention risk and risk premia on health care

spending and investment in medical R&D, we proceed in two steps. First, we remove all
government risk. Removing government risk altogether has two effects. On the one hand,

there is no risk premium effect anymore. On the other hand, the expected profits of firms

engaged in medical R&D increase. To separate both effects, we also consider the cases where

the government risk is still present, but there is no risk premium effect: it is here that we need
to distinguish between ω = 10% and ω = 20%. By comparing these three counterfactuals,
we can assess the cash flow and discount rate effects separately.


6.2.1.   First Counterfactual: No Government Risk

The first counterfactual we consider is when all government risk is removed, that is, ω = 0.

Since there is no risk, the stochastic discount factor takes the same value in both states, that
is, Mt+1 = R−1 . The results are presented in figure 4. The solid line presents the benchmark
case. The dashed line, which is furthest from the benchmark case, corresponds to the case

in which we remove government risk altogether.        The figure applies to the no-government

intervention epoch.

   In the absence of government risk, the discount rate which firms apply to medical R&D

investments is lower and the expected profits are higher. As such, medical R&D rises more
rapidly. By 2010, the R&D share more than doubles the R&D share in the presence of risk

premia and government risk.

   As a result of medical R&D, the price of medical care falls and the health care share
rises more rapidly as well. The impact is quantitatively large as the share of GDP spent on

                                               40
medical care rises from nearly 18% to 21% in 2010 in this counterfactual scenario.

   It is important to keep in mind that these reflect the accumulated impact over a span

of fifty years of removing the government intervention risk. Contrast this to removing the
government intervention risk for single year only. As a back-of-the-envelope calculation, the

effect should only be 1/50 as large: the share of GDP spent on medical care would rise

by about 0.06% of GDP in 2010 or about 9 billion US dollars. The same calculation for

R&D shows that R&D would rise by about 2.6 billion US dollars in 2010, when removing
the intervention risk for one year or when calculating the one-year effect of removing gov-

ernment intervention risk. Interestingly, Golec, Hegde, and Vernon (2010) argue that the

Clinton Administration’s Health Security Act of 1993 might have reduced R&D spending

by about 1 billion US dollars, as a “conservative” estimate, “even though it never became
law”. Our R&D measure for the sector is more inclusive and about twice as large as theirs.

Furthermore, they essentially examined the impact of an increased probability of some gov-
ernment intervention, whereas our number pertains to the full effect of overall government

intervention. We therefore view our quantitative implications as broadly in line with their
findings.


6.2.2.   Second Counterfactual: No Government Risk Premium

As a second counterfactual, we consider the case in which the government risk is present
(ω = 10% or ω = 20%), but we set the price of government intervention risk to zero,

X = X = 1. This case corresponds to the two middle (dash-dotted and dotted) lines
in Figure 4. This case allows us to understand two effects that are in play in the first

counterfactual separately. More precisely, if all government risk is removed, then Et [πt+1 ]
increases and the price of this cash flow, Et [Mt+1 πt+1 ], increases as well. We are particularly
interested in the effect of risk premia on medical innovation and spending, and therefore

want to hold constant the impact on expected profits, Et [πt+1 ].

   Based on Figure 4, we see that removing the risk premium alone accounts for three quar-

                                               41
ters of the increase in the health care share and R&D share for ω = 10% and is responsible

for about half of it at ω = 20%. This compares well to the following back-of-the-envelope
calculation. A per-decade intervention risk of 20% yields an annual intervention risk of about

2%. With an annual risk premium of 5%, about 3% of that must then be due to the risk

premium against this intervention. We have argued above that ω = 20% is an upper bound
for a reasonable intervention probability. We conclude that the risk premium as compared

to the actuarially fair disaster premium is the more important component for explaining

the “missing R&D” compared to the no-intervention scenario, as well as the financial health

premium for investors in that sector. Table 7 provides a numerical summary of our results.


                                6.3.   Long-Run Implications

Absent government intervention, the long-run health care share implied by the model is ψ∞ ,
see equation (25), which equals 32% in the presence of subsidies. If subsidies in the output

market are removed, that is, σ = 0, the share decreases to 25%. Note that the shares differ
from 1 − ξ, since the profits of the health sector are counted as part of GDP and thus, in this

ratio. Figure 5 illustrates the evolution of the health care spending share and the R&D share
as implied by the model, provided no government intervention takes place and comparing

the benchmark with the three counterfactuals. Obviously, the convergence is rather slow and

the health care share is expected to increase to 30% by 2050. This prediction is similar to
the model of Hall and Jones (2007). While the limit for the health spending share without

government intervention is independent of ω, given Q, this is not true for the R&D share:

indeed, without government intervention risk, it converges to about 2.5% of GDP rather
than 1.6% of GDP.

   Once the government intervenes, R&D activity will come to a halt, if left to private
markets. The R&D share drops to zero, the gross income share λt spent on medical care
jumps, but then remains constant, as explained below equation (21).



                                              42
               6.4.    R&D with Fixed Costs, Idiosyncratic Risk, and Heterogeneity

In our model, the only source of aggregate risk is the government intervention risk. 20 Fur-

thermore, R&D success is a smooth, non-probabilistic function of R&D effort, and there
is no heterogeneity across firms in equilibrium. While these are useful assumptions in the

service of the simplicity of the model, it is useful to understand whether our results carry

over to a more general specification, and under what conditions, as one may regard a richer

set of possibilities here as important for understanding medical R&D and the competition
in the health industry. The purpose of this section is to clarify how the results reported thus

far can be generalized.

       Consider qualities qjt and prices pjt for all firms j ∈ [0, 1]. As usual in monopolistic
competition models, define

                      Z       1                   φ−1            Z       1                   1−φ            Z       1
                                    1/(φ−1)                                      1/(1−φ)
(40)           qt =                qjt        dj          , pt =                pjt        dj          , dt =               djt dj
                           0                                            0                                           0



where we allow for stochastic variations across j ∈ [0, 1], including idiosyncratic risk: in that

case, the integrals should be understood as Pettis integrals, see Uhlig (1996). The aggregate
equilibrium dynamics in the model remains the same, if the dynamics of the aggregators qt ,
pt and dt remain the same. This then is the property that needs verification, if additional

features are added. Given the markup pricing, the dynamics for pt is implied by the dynamics

for qt ; hence, it remains to verify the dynamics for qt and dt .
       Consider now some more general model specification, including idiosyncratic risk and

firm heterogeneity. Assume first that entrepreneurs cross-insure each other. I.e., while

each pursues the objective of profit maximization for the firm managed by that individual

entrepreneur, share holdings in the health industry are diversified across entrepreneurs, id-

iosyncratic risk is washed out in their portfolio and the stochastic discount factor depends
  20
    As noted in section 6.1, we calibrate the non-intervention return to be 4 percent rather than the safe
rate of 1 percent to account for the fact that there are other aggregate risks, which demand a risk premium
in equilibrium and therefore lower medical R&D.



                                                                   43
on aggregate risk only. Examine a generalized version of the firm maximization problem

stated just before (26), allowing for a firm-specific starting quality q̃jt as well as a potentially
random outcome for qj,t+1 ,

                                                   "               #!
                                                       Mt+1 πt+1                h              i
                                                                                     1/(φ−1)
(41)           v(djt , q̃jt )   =    max Et              1/(φ−1)
                                                                           Et       qj,t+1         − (1 − χ)djt
                                       djt          qt+1
                                s.t. qj,t+1   = f (djt , q̃jt , μj,t+1 )


for some random variable μj,t+1 , idiosyncratic and identically distributed across j and t, and
some suitable function f (∙, ∙, ∙). With this notation, we allow the starting point q̃j,t+1 in t + 1

to be different from qj,t+1 : for the aggregate dynamics, we then need to clarify the relationship
between the two. We assume date-t-conditional independence of the random idiosyncratic

outcome μj,t+1 from the aggregate variables Mt+1 , πt+1 , qt+1 . This independence between
idiosyncratic and aggregate risk allows us to separate the expectations of the firm-individual

piece and the aggregate piece above.
   Suppose now, that

                                       h         i               1/((φ−1)ν)
                                         1/(φ−1)       ν
(42)                                 Et qj,t+1     = q̃jt + dνjt


locally around the equilibrium choice djt = Dt (q̃jt ) of the model above, for any initial q̃jt .
Note that this property is satisfied in the absence of idiosyncratic risk, see equation (11),
and therefore consistent with the baseline version of the model. With (42), the first-order
condition for djt in (42) around that equilibrium choice remains unchanged. If it also char-

acterizes the global maximum, then the choice for djt remains unchanged, given q̃jt . This

includes several interesting special cases.
   One case, without idiosyncratic risk, is a non-binding fixed cost for R&D as an alternative

to (11) for the specification of f (∙, ∙, ∙). Say,


                                                                         ν
                                                                                          1/ν
                                q̃j,t+1 = qj,t+1 = 1djt >0.9Dt (q̃jt ) q̃jt + dνjt

                                                           44
where 1djt >0.9Dt (q̃jt ) indicates that the next-period quality qj,t+1 will be zero, unless R&D

efforts djt exceed the threshold of 90% of the equilibrium choice Dt (q̃jt ). Furthermore,
given the same starting point q̃j0 ≡ q0 at date 0 for all firms, a symmetric equilibrium

qjt ≡ qt , djt = dt will persist. Obviously, the equilibrium dynamics changes with a threshold
that binds in equilibrium or other initial conditions: our aim here is simply to show that

there are versions of our model which include fixed costs and which nonetheless give rise to

the same dynamics.

   For the easiest cases involving idiosyncratic risk, assume an R&D externality to hold
across all firms: while qj,t+1 = f (djt , q̃jt , μj,t+1 ) is the profit-relevant next-period quality for
the date-t investing firm and thus relevant for the firm problem (41) stated above, assume

that new firms j in date t + 1 all start from the same quality level q̃j,t+1 , which is possibly
different from qj,t+1 . More precisely, assume that all firms start from


(43)                                           q̃jt = qt ,


for every period t, where qt is given by the quality average in (40). Assume that (42) holds

and that the starting point q0 here is the same as in the baseline model. By induction, we
shall show that we obtain the same aggregate equilibrium as in the baseline model. Assume,
that qt here and given by (40) at some given date t coincides with qt of the baseline model.
With (43), the R&D efforts djt = dt are then the same across all firms and coincide with dt
                                                                   h         i
                                                                     1/(φ−1)
of the baseline model. Comparing (11) to (42), it follows that Et qj,t+1       coincides with
 1/(φ−1)
qt+1       of the baseline model. Equation (40) then shows that

                                            h          iφ−1
                                                1/(φ−1)
                                     qt+1 = Et qj,t+1


here must coincide with qt+1 of the baseline model as well, completing the induction argu-
ment.

   The easiest way to guarantee (42) is to perturb the R&D outcome (11) with an exogenous


                                                  45
and idiosyncratic factor μj,t+1 ≥ 0,


                                                                     ν
                                                                                 1/ν
(44)                    qj,t+1 = f (djt , q̃jt , μj,t+1 ) = μj,t+1 q̃jt + dνjt          ,


where

                                                  h         i
                                                    1/(φ−1)
(45)                                        1 = Et μj,t+1     .


As a particular example, one might wish to assume that μj,t+1 = αφ−1 with some probability
0 < α < 1 and μj,t+1 = 0 with probability 1 − α, idiosyncratic across j and t, capturing the

idea that medical R&D succeeds only occasionally. With the assumption (43) of the R&D
externality across all firms and thus q̃jt ≡ qt , djt ≡ dt , one obtains the previously calculated
equilibrium. It is straightforward to generalize this result to a richer set of specification,
where the probability distribution of R&D or the probability of R&D success actually de-

pends on R&D effort, without changing the resulting equilibrium. The key is to “split” the
extensive or probabilistic dimension from the intensive or quality-level dimension in such a

way that (45) continues to hold.
   Matters become more involved, once one allows heterogeneity across firms and persistence
in the R&D outcome, dispensing with the R&D-externality-across-all-firms assumption and

replacing it with the assumption that


                                 q̃j,t+1 = qj,t+1 = f (djt , qjt , μj,t+1 ).


The calculations and required functional choices for obtaining the same dynamics still remain

reasonably tractable, if one assumes that φ = 2. One can then rewrite (42) as

                                                     ν 1/ν
                                          qj,t+1        djt
(46)                             Et               = 1+           .
                                           qjt          qjt




                                                    46
As an example, assume the specification of a random multiplicative disturbance (44), im-

posing
                                          1 = E[μjt ],

which coincides with (45) due to φ = 2. One can now see that proportionality

                                           djt   dt
                                               =
                                           qjt   qt

satisfies (46) as well as (40) and thus provides the equilibrium with the same aggregate

dynamics as before. Note that there is considerable and persistent heterogeneity across

firms in this case.

   Building on these insights, and at the cost of further algebra and unwieldy functional
form specifications, it appears to be possible to combine the features of the cases above,

allow for φ 6= 2 and introduce correlated risks as well. This may be an interesting research
project to pursue in order to study the dynamics of the industrial organization of the health

industry or other industries, but is beyond the scope of this paper.
   With the kinked-linear utility specification for the entrepreneur, it furthermore is not hard

to calculate the dynamics of the model, if there is no portfolio diversification and insurance
across entrepreneurs. In that case, the risk premium arises due to both idiosyncratic risks

as well as aggregate risks, and one needs additional analysis to disentangle the two. We find
this to be a less attractive specification for the model, though, since it seems a priori more
plausible that investors hold a somewhat diversified portfolio and will be particularly enticed

to do so if risk premia are due entirely or to a large extent to idiosyncratic risk. We do not

find it plausible that such a risk premium could persist over the long span of time, as we

have observed in the health industry.




                                              47
                  7.     Mechanisms for Health Care Risk Premia

                       7.1.   Broad Intuition for Alternative Mechanisms

In this section, we discuss qualitatively and in an exploratory fashion various economic mech-
anisms that may give rise to the medical innovation premium. This boils down to under-

standing how certain shocks, in general equilibrium, co-move with the investors’ marginal

utility. This section uses a broad theory brush, focusing on the key economic arguments
and without providing a comprehensive list of assumptions and caveats. We first provide a

broader overview, and then examine some approaches in somewhat more careful detail.

   The key finding from the empirical results is the medical innovation premium, which

implies that ∂U/∂ct+1 is low when health industry profits πt+1 are high. Ceteris paribus,
marginal utility is low if consumption is high.

   To analyze other factors that may yield the medical innovation premium, consider a
representative household that demands medical care m, resulting in health h = m. Medical

care can be provided with productivity (or “quality”, “inverse of marginal costs”) q, and
sold at price p, while subsidized at rate σ. The subsidies are financed per lump-sum taxes

τ on the household. Assume a linear production function and denote the markup with φ.
Profits of the medical sector are π. Aggregate income is y, while aggregate consumption is
c. Preferences by the household are given by a utility function u(c, h).

   For a linear production function, the relationship between prices, marginal costs, mark-

ups and profits are:

                                        φ                h
(47)                               p=     and π = (φ − 1) .
                                        q                q

The household budget constraint is:


(48)                               y + π = c + (1 − σ)ph + τ.


                                               48
The government budget constraint is:


(49)                                      σph = τ.


Together, we obtain the following two key equations:


(50)                            c = y − h/q = y − π/(φ − 1),

(51)                            π = (φ − 1)h/q.


These equations imply that approaches that treat y, φ, q as parameters or constants are
challenging to pursue. Consider the following sources of uncertainty:

  1. Medical progress, including longevity: If q increases, so will h. See section 7.2 for
       further details.

  2. Preference shocks for h, with c and h separable or complements in the utility function
       u(∙, ∙).

  3. A shock to the subsidies σ.

The challenge is the following. Suppose that these shocks result in surprise increases in

profits π. They will then lead to lower consumption. Conversely, lower profits go together
with higher consumption. In the cases above, this should yield a negative, not a positive

alpha.

   Approaches which treat all of π, h, c, y, φ, q as endogenous have more potential to be

successful. Consider the following sources of uncertainty:

  1. Medical progress and productivity. Suppose a surprise increase in q leads to a more
       productive workforce, thereby increasing y. It is then possible, in principle, to have

       both π and c increase.



                                              49
   2. A preference shock for h, where c and h are (strong) substitutes in the utility function

         u(∙, ∙). Suppose that h is increased and thus profits π increase, while consumption c de-
         creases. In principle, it is nonetheless possible that the marginal utility of consumption

         decreases as well.

   3. Government regulatory risk regarding φ: if φ declines unexpectedly, then so will π and

         c, while h increases.

These approaches face challenges on their own. The first one may not be sufficient quan-

titatively: while medical progress has perhaps led to somewhat longer working life and to

fewer absentee hours due to sickness in the US after the Second World War, these effects
may be too small to sensibly generate the medical innovation premium that we estimate in

our empirical work. The second approach may not be plausible. Per own introspection, it

does seem to us that consumption, and marginal increases thereof, are more fun and not less
fun, if one is healthy. 21 We therefore chose the third approach as the key approach in this
paper. The arguments above are painted with a broad brush: it is entirely conceivable, even
plausible, that reasonable exceptions can be found that allow the pursuit of other alterna-

tives. For some of them, more detail is useful to reveal where the challenges lie exactly. We
shall do so in particular for longevity risk.


                              7.2.   Risk Premia Due to Longevity Effects

Longevity is the key to understanding the growth of health expenditures in the model of

Hall and Jones (2007). Our paper is not in contrast to theirs; rather, it is complementary.
While longevity may indeed be key (and indeed, our long-run improvements in health may

well be interpreted as increases in longevity), we argue here that they are unlikely to be the

risk factor giving rise to the medical innovation premium.

       Consider a three-period extension of the model above, t = 0, 1, 2, where the household
  21
    This is also with the empirical results in Viscusi and Evans (1990), Finkelstein, Luttmer, and Notowidigdo
(2008), and Koijen, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Yogo (2011).


                                                     50
surely survives until t = 1. The probability of survival from t = 1 to t = 2 depends on

health, f (h1 ), where f 0 (h1 ) > 0. The household’s problem can then be summarized by:


(52)                       max u (c0 ) + βE0 [u (c1 )] + β 2 E0 [f (h1 ) u (c2 )] ,
                            (h1 )



where the maximization is subject to the resource constraints, yt + πt = pt ht + ct , the prices
of medical care, pt = φt /qt , and firm profits, πt = ht (φt − 1) /qt .22 Unless noted otherwise,

we focus on shocks to qt that lower the marginal cost of producing medical care.

       Optimal period-1 health follows from max (h1 ) u (c1 ) + f (h1 ) b, where b = βE1 [u (c2 )] > 0
a constant. In this case, we have c1 = y1 − h1 q1−1 = y1 − (φ1 − 1)−1 π1 , which implies
that consumption and profits are negatively correlated. Since M1 = βu0 (c1 ) /u0 (c0 ) =
                      
βu0 y1 − (φ1 − 1)−1 π1 /u0 (c0 ), profits and the stochastic discount factor are positively cor-
related. This implies a negative risk premium for health care firms. This holds true regardless

of the survival function f (h1 ) and as long as u0 (c) < 0.


                                           8.    Conclusion

Despite the fact that improvements in health care and health have been major components
of the overall gain in economic welfare during the last century, the continued financial in-
centives for medical innovation and the resulting growth of the health care sector are not

well-understood. Although it is generally believed that medical innovation and its demand

are central components of the expansion of this sector, little is known about what risks affect

the returns of R&D investments and how those risks, in turn, affect future spending growth.
       We provided an empirical and theoretical analysis of the link between financial and real

health care markets. We first documented a “medical innovation premium” for the returns

of medical R&D firms in the United States during the period from 1960 to 2010 and provided
suggestive evidence of government intervention risk as a determinant of this premium. The
   Relative to our full model, we consider a simpler production for health with h= 0 and ν = 1, which
  22

implies that medical spending maps one-to-one to health, mt = ht .


                                                     51
excess returns relative to standard risk adjustments were estimated to be 4-6% per annum,

which is large and about the same size as other asset pricing puzzles, such as the equity risk
premium and the value premium during this period. Motivated by this finding, we provided

a theoretical analysis of the joint determination of financial and real health care markets.

We interpreted the medical innovation premium to result from government markup risks
that might require investors to demand higher returns on medical R&D investments beyond

standard risk-adjusted returns.

       We simulated the quantitative implications of the medical innovation premium on health

care spending and on expenditures on medical R&D. We found that there would have been
a sizeable expansion of the health care sector by 3% of GDP as well as more than a doubling

of R&D efforts, in the absence of government risk, holding back innovation. The difference

is due to an actuarially fair disaster premium as well as a risk premium against that disaster.
We found that the risk premium is the larger component.
       Our analysis raises many future questions that need to be addressed to more fully under-

stand the growth of health care sectors around the world. First, if government uncertainty
discourages health care R&D, then how are standard analyses of government interventions

taking into account of this effect? For example, most governments across the world attempt
to stimulate medical R&D through various push-and-pull mechanisms. But if the government

uncertainty attached to such mechanisms discourages R&D, how much does this uncertainty
reduce the intended effects of such R&D stimuli? Second, discounting future public health

care liabilities by U.S. Treasury rates, as is done for future Medicare liabilities by the CBO,

rather than how markets discount health care spending, seems inappropriate in light of the

medical innovation premium documented in this paper. 23 Third, many policy proposals to
slow spending growth in health care need to incorporate the government risk and its ef-

fect on medical R&D. For example, the 2010 report of the National Commission on Fiscal

Responsibility and Reform suggests imposing restrictions on publicly-financed health care
  23
     See Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2011) and Lucas (2010) for recent work on the valuation of government
liabilities.


                                                 52
spending tied to GDP growth. Our framework and analysis can be used to consider imposing

government restrictions on health care spending and to quantify their effects, including the
growth effects introduced by policy uncertainty of implementing the restrictions themselves.

   More generally, we believe future analyses need to better incorporate the interaction

between financial markets that affect R&D investments, government risk, and the resulting
growth of the health care sector. The growth of the health care sector depends on medical

R&D, which is affected by government risk, which in turn means that greater uncertainty

introduced by government intervention discourages medical R&D. This important feedback

mechanism implies that any future growth of government programs, such as for instance
Medicare, is tied to the risk of policies surrounding those programs. Overall, we believe

that further explicit analyses of the dynamic incentives for continued medical progress are

warranted given the dramatic effects such progress has on overall health care spending and
health.




                                             53
                                           References

Acemoglu, D., A. Finkelstein, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2009): “Income and Health Spend-
  ing:Evidence from Oil Price Shocks,” Working paper, MIT.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2013): “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,”
  Working paper, Stanford University.

Barro, R. J. (1996): “Health and Economic Growth,” Working paper, Harvard University.

Barro, R. J., and T. Jin (2011): “On the Size Distribution of Macroeconomic Disasters,”
  Econometrica, 79(5), 1567–1589.

Barro, R. J., and J. F. Ursua (2008): “Consumption Disasters in the Twentieth Century,”
  American Economic Review, 98(2), 58–63.

Becker, G., T. Philipson, and R. Soares (2005): “The Quantity and Quality of Life and the
  Evolution of World Inequality,” American Economic Review, 95, 277–291.

Belo, F., V. Gala, and J. Li (2013): “Government Spending, Political Cycles and the Cross
  Section of Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 305–324.

Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (1999): “Optimal Investment, Growth Options and
  Security Returns,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1153–1607.

Brogaard, J., and A. L. Detzel (2013): “The Asset Pricing Implications of Government
  Economic Policy Uncertainty,” Working paper, University of Washington.

Caves, R. E., M. D. Whinston, and M. A. Hurwitz (1991): “Patent Expiration, Entry, and
  Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry,” Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, pp. 1–66.

Cutler, D. M. (1995): “Technology, Health Costs, and the NIH,” Working paper, Harvard
  University.

Egan, M., and T. Philipson (2013): “International Health Economics,” NBER Working Paper
  19280.

Ellison, S. F., and W. P. Mullin (2001): “Gradual Incorporation of Information: Pharmaceu-
  tical Stocks and the Evolution of President Clinton’s Health Care Reform,” Journal of Law and
  Economics, 34, 89–129.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of
  Finance, 47, 427–465.

           (1997): “Industry Costs of Equity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 43, 153–193.


                                                54
Feng Li, R. L., and M. Minnis (2013): “A Measure of Competition Based on 10-K Filings,”
  Journal of Accounting Research, 51, 399–436.

Finkelstein, A., E. F. Luttmer, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2008): “What Good Is Wealth
  Without Health? The Effect of Health on the Marginal Utility of Consumption,” Working paper,
  MIT.

Fuchs, V. (1996): “Economics, Values, and Health Care Reform,” American Economic Review,
  86, 1–24.

Gabaix, X. (2012): “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
  Macro-Finance,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 645–700.

Geanakoplos, J., and S. P. Zeldes (2011): “The Market Value of Social Security,” Working
  paper, Yale University.

Gerdtham, U.-G., and B. Jonsson (2000): “International comparisons of health expenditure:
  Theory, data and econometric analysis,” Handbook of Health Economics, 1, 11–53.

Golec, J. H., S. Hegde, and J. Vernon (2010): “Pharmaceutical R&D Spending and Threats
  of Price Regulation,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 45, 239–264.

Grossman, S. J., and Z. Zhou (1993): “Optimal Investment Strategies for Controlling Draw-
  downs,” Mathematical Finance, 3, 241–276.

Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones (2007): “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 39–72.

Hoberg, G., and G. Phillips (2011): “Text-Based Network Industries and Endogenous Product
  Market Differentiation,” Working Paper, University of Maryland.

Hult, K. J., and T. J. Philipson (2012): “Public Liabilities and Health Care Policy,” Working
  Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research 18571.

Jones, C. I. (2011): “Life and Growth,” Working paper, Stanford University.

Julio, B., and Y. Yook (2012): “Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment Cycles,”
  Journal of Finance, 67, 45–83.

Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky (1979): “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decisions under
  Risk,” Econometrica, 47(2), 263–292.

Kelly, B. T., L. Pastor, and P. Veronesi (2014): “The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory
  and Evidence from the Option Market,” Working paper, University of Chicago.



                                                 55
Kogan, S., D. Levin, B. Routledge, J. Sagi, and N. Smith (2009): “Predicting Risk from
  Financial Reports with Regression,” Proceedings of the North American Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics Human Language Technologies Conference.

Koijen, R. S., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2012): “The Cross-Section and Time
  Series of Stock and Bond Returns,” Working Paper.

Koijen, R. S., T. J. Moskowitz, L. H. Pedersen, and E. B. Vrugt (2013): “Carry,”
  Working paper, London Business School.

Koijen, R. S., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and M. Yogo (2011): “Health and Mortality Delta: As-
  sessing the Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice,” Working paper, University of Chicago.

Landoni, M., and R. Sastry (2013): “Quantifying Tail Risk in Hedge Funds,” Working Paper,
  Columbia Business School.

Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2007): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A Duration-
  Based Explanation of the Value Premium,” Journal of Finance, 62, 55–92.

Loughran, T., and B. McDonald (2011): “When is a Liability not a Liability? Textual
  Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks,” Journal of Finance, 66, 35–65.

Lucas, D. e. (2010): “Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk,” Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.

McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott (2003): “Average Debt and Equity Returns: Puz-
  zling?,” American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 93(2), 392–397.

Murphy, K. M., and R. H. Topel (2006): “The Value of Health and Longevity,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 114, 871–904.

Newhouse, J. P. (1992): “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 6, 3–21.

Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2011): “Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia,” Working Paper.

         (2012): “Uncertainty About Government Policy and Stock Prices,” Journal of Finance,
  forthcoming.

Sala-i-Martin, X. X., G. Doppelhofer, and R. I. Miller (2004): “Determinants of Long-
  Term Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,” American
  Economic Review, 94, 813–835.

Sharpe, W. (1964): “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of
  Risk,” Journal of Finance, 19, 425–444.


                                               56
Uhlig, H. (1996): “A law of large numbers for large economies,” Economic Theory, 8, 41–50.

Viscusi, K. W., and W. N. Evans (1990): “Utility Functions that Depend on Health Status:
  Estimates and Economic Implications,” American Economic Review, 80, 353–374.

Yogo, M. (2006): “A Consumption-Based Explanation of the Cross Section of Expected Stock
  Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61(2), 539–580.

Zhang, L. (2005): “The Value Premium,” Journal of Finance, 60, 67–103.




                                              57
                       Panel A: Industry alphas relative to the CAPM and the Fama and French model


                       Consumer goods     Manufacturing    HiTec   Health    Other   Medical equipment    Drugs
 CAPM                        1.81             1.66         -0.83    3.31      0.22          3.71           3.70
 T-statistic                 1.40             1.54         -0.54    1.61      0.17          1.40           1.78
 Fama and French            -0.13             1.04          1.67    5.01     -2.66          6.44           5.37
 T-statistic                -0.09             0.84          0.86    2.44     -2.75          2.05           2.63

 No. of observations          52                52           52       52       52             52           52

                       Panel B: Industry alphas relative to models extended with the health care factor

                                                                                     Medical equipment    Drugs
 CAPM + HC factor                                                                          0.22            0.31
 T-statistic                                                                               0.14            0.71
 FF+ HC factor                                                                             0.81            0.37
 T-statistic                                                                               0.47            0.70

 No. of observations                                                                          52           52

                                     Table 1: Industry alphas

The table reports in Panel A the alphas relative to the CAPM and the 3-factor Fama and
French model for different industries. The sample is from 1961 - 2012 and returns are
annual. The first five industries add up to the market. The last two columns report the
alphas of two sub-sectors of the health care sector: medical equipment and drugs. In Panel
B, we add the health care sector (Column 4) to either the CAPM or the Fama and French
model and report the alphas of both sub-sectors of the health care sector.




                                                     58
                               Dictionary to identify government risk

          Congress                     Government regulation(s)     Political risk(s)
          Congressional                Government approval          Politics
          Debt ceiling                 Government debt(s)           Price constraint(s)
          Federal                      Government deficit(s)        Price control(s)
          Federal funds                Government intervention(s)   Price restriction(s)
          Fiscal imbalance(s)          Law(s)                       Regulation(s)
          Government(s)                Legal                        Regulatory
          Government-approved          Legislation                  Regulatory compliance
          Government-sponsored         Legislative                  Regulatory delay(s)
          Governmental                 Legislatory                  Reimbursement(s)
          Governmental program(s)      Patent law(s)                Subsidy
          Government program(s)        Political                    Subsidies
          Governmental regulation(s)   Political reform(s)

                             Table 2: Dictionary for 10-K filings

The table reports the dictionary that we use to identify how frequently firms highlight risk
factors that are associated with government risk.




                                                59
               Panel A: Main dictionary without health care-specific terms


   2006                               Average word count       Average fraction of words
          Health care sector                76.36                       1.46%
          Non-health care sector            35.46                       0.93%

   2012
          Health care sector                130.06                      1.55%
          Non-health care sector            77.12                       1.24%


                 Panel B: Dictionary including health care-specific terms

   2006                               Average word count       Average fraction of words
          Health care sector                100.08                      1.92%
          Non-health care sector            36.18                       0.94%

   2012
          Health care sector                165.56                      1.97%
          Non-health care sector            79.72                       1.29%


       Table 3: Average word count to measure government risk from 10-K filings

Panel A of the table reports the average number of words in a firm’s 10-K filing appears in
the dictionary in Table 2. The average is taken across the 50 largest firms in the health
care sector and the 50 largest firms in the non-health care sector. The first column reports
the average word count, while the second column measures the average fractions of words
(that is, word count scaled by the length of the document). Panel B reports the results if
we expand the dictionary to include government-related words that are specific to the
health-care sector. We report the results for 2006 and 2012.




                                             60
 Event date           Description of event

 January 19, 1992     Clinton issues health care reform proposals before New Hampshire primary
 February 18, 1992    Clinton unexpectedly finishes second in the New Hampshire primary
 March 10, 1992       Clinton does well in the Super Tuesday primaries
 April 7, 1992        Clinton wins New York primary and becomes the favorite to win the Democratic nomination
 June 4, 1992         Republicans in the House of Representatives offer their health care reform proposal
 September 24, 1992   Clinton speaks at Merck on health care reform
 November 3, 1992     Clinton wins presidential election
 January 25, 1993     Clinton names Hillary Clinton to head his Health Care Task Force
 February 12, 1993    Clinton says drug prices are too high
 September 11, 1993   New York Times describes probable regulations based upon a leaked copy of the plan
 September 22, 1993   Clinton officially announces his health care reform plan

              Table 4: Key event dates around Clinton’s health care reforms

The table summarizes the key event dates and a description of the event during Clinton’s
health care reforms. The table is reproduced from Golec, Hegde, and Vernon (2010).




                                              61
                       Intercept                               -6.5%
                       t-statistics                             -1.15
                       Slope coefficient                      -12.2%
                       t-statistic                              -3.63

                       R-squared                              13.9%

                       Number of firms                           119

                       Average number of years                  21.1
                       used to estimate health care betas

 Table 5: Cross-sectional regression of cumulative abnormal returns on health care betas

The table reports the results of a cross-sectional regression of the cumulative abnormal
return of a firm during the Clinton health care reform on the beta of a given firm on the
health care factor in (4). The beta is standardized by the cross-sectional standard
deviation of the beta. The sample end in December 2012.




                                            62
              Parameter   Description

              γ                                                         1.35
              φ           Markup                                           3
              ζ           Constrained markup                               1
              χ           R&D subsidy                                   50%
              σ           Medical care subsidy                          50%
              R           10-yr benchmark return                        1.48
              Q           10-yr return on health R&D, if no interv.     2.37
              θ           labor share                                    0.8
              q0          Initial level of medical knowledge             7.8
              ν           Curvature R&D production function             0.42
              h           Health endowment                               3.2
              ξ           Weight non-health consumption in U            0.54
              X           Price of government risk, if ω = 10%:         0.69
              X           Price of government risk, if ω = 20%:         0.78


                                Table 6: Model parameters

The table summarizes the calibrated model parameters for two levels of government
intervention risk (ω) and full elimination of profits upon intervention, ζ = 1. The
parameters below the line are solved for by matching four observations regarding the
health-spending-to-GDP share and the health-R&D-share-to-GDP share. Note that the
parameters are identical across ω, except for X: given the no-intervention returns R and Q
as well as zero profits upon intervention, the dynamics during the non-intervention episode
must be the same, see equation (37).




                                            63
                   Benchmark      No government risk    No government risk   No government
                   Benchmark      premium, ω = 20%      premium, ω = 10%               risk
  Health share
  1960                   5.1%                  5.1%                  5.1%             5.1%
  1970                   6.8%                  7.1%                  7.3%             7.5%
  1980                   8.9%                  9.7%                 10.2%            10.6%
  1990                  11.6%                 12.9%                 13.6%            14.2%
  2000                  14.7%                 16.3%                 17.1%            17.9%
  2010                  17.9%                 19.6%                 20.5%            21.2%

  R&D share
  1960                   0.1%                  0.1%                  0.1%             0.1%
  1970                   0.1%                  0.2%                  0.2%             0.3%
  1980                   0.2%                  0.3%                  0.4%             0.6%
  1990                   0.3%                  0.6%                  0.7%             0.9%
  2000                   0.5%                  0.8%                  1.0%             1.3%
  2010                   0.7%                  1.1%                  1.4%             1.6%


Table 7: Health and R&D share dynamics for both counterfactuals and different levels of
government risk.

The table illustrates the impact of government risk and the medical innovation premium on
health care and R&D spending. The first column provides the benchmark results, the
second column removes government risk altogether, while the third column considers the
counterfactual in which there is government risk, but this risk is not priced in equilibrium.




                                             64
          0


       -0.1


       -0.2


       -0.3


       -0.4               Discussion Clinton
                          health care reform


       -0.5


       -0.6               2000-2002
                          technology crash
                                                 2007-2008
                                                 financial crisis
       -0.7
                Drawdowns health care sector
                Drawdowns aggregate market
       -0.8
         1990          1995              2000          2005         2010    2015




Figure 1: Drawdown dynamics for the health care sector and the aggregate stock market.

The figure reports the drawdown dynamics of the health care sector and the overall stock
market from 1990 until 2013. Drawdowns are defined in (2).




                                                65
 0.016
                                     Non-health care firms
                                     Health-care firms
 0.014


 0.012


  0.01


 0.008


 0.006


 0.004


 0.002


     0
                 2006                                        2012




Figure 2: Fraction of government-related words in 10-K filings in 2006 and 2012.




                                       66
                                             Health spending share: data vs model
                     20
                               Model
                               Data
    Percent of GDP




                     15



                     10



                       5
                      1960   1965    1970    1975    1980     1985    1990    1995    2000   2005   2010

                                              R&D spending share: data vs model
                     0.8
                               Model
                               Data
Percent of GDP




                     0.6


                     0.4


                     0.2


                       0
                      1960   1965    1970    1975    1980     1985    1990    1995    2000   2005   2010

                             Figure 3: Health and R&D share in the model and in the data




                                                         67
                                                       Health spending share
                     25
                                 no gov. risk
                                 no gov. risk premium
    Percent of GDP



                     20
                                 no gov. risk prem.,ω=20
                                 benchmark
                     15


                     10


                       5
                      1960    1965    1970     1975    1980     1985   1990     1995    2000    2005   2010

                                                       R&D spending share
                      2
                                 no gov. risk
                                 no gov. risk premium
Percent of GDP




                     1.5
                                 no gov. risk prem.,ω=20
                                 benchmark
                      1


                     0.5


                       0
                      1960    1965    1970     1975    1980     1985   1990     1995    2000    2005   2010

                           Figure 4: Counterfactual dynamics of health care and R&D spending.




                                                           68
                                                   Health spending share: long-run
                     40
    Percent of GDP



                     30


                     20
                                                                                     no gov. risk
                                                                                     no gov. risk premium
                     10
                                                                                     no gov. risk prem.,ω=20
                                                                                     benchmark
                       0
                      1960      1980    2000    2020    2040     2060    2080    2100     2120     2140    2160

                                                    R&D spending share: long-run
                     2.5

                      2
Percent of GDP




                     1.5

                      1                                                              no gov. risk
                                                                                     no gov. risk premium
                     0.5                                                             no gov. risk prem.,ω=20
                                                                                     benchmark
                       0
                      1960      1980    2000    2020    2040     2060    2080    2100     2120     2140    2160

                           Figure 5: Model-implied long-run dynamics of the health and R&D share




                                                            69
       Online Appendix: Not For Publication
        A.   Reverse-engineering the preferences of the entrepreneur

Given the numerical solution to the model, it may be instructive to “reverse-engineer” the
preferences, i.e., to find a value function V ({ce,t }t ) in terms of the stochastic stream of
entrepreneurial consumptions so that the assumed stochastic discount factors result from
the appropriate first-order conditions. It should be clear that there is considerable freedom
in doing so.
    Consider again the decomposition of the stochastic discount factor (32) as Mt+1 =
  −1
R Xt+1 , where Xt+1 is the stochastic component reflecting government intervention risk,
with E[Xt+1 ] = 1, see (35). Suppose now, that the preferences of the entrepreneur are time
separable,                                          "                         #
                                                        ∞
                                                        X
                                V ({ce,t }t ) = E             β̃ t u(ce,t )
                                                        t=0

The consumption of the entrepreneur ce,t in the absence of government intervention are
proportional to profits minus outlays for R&D, as stated in equation (11) of the paper.
The consumption of the entrepreneur with government intervention could either be read as
zero, or, in a slight extension of the model, assumed to be some fraction 0 ≤ ξt < 1 of the
non-intervention consumption ce,t at the time of the intervention.
   The standard relationships between preferences and stochastic discount factors deliver

                                              u0 (ce,t+1 )
(53)                               R−1 X = β̃
                                               u0 (ce,t )
                                              u0 (ξt ce,t+1 )
(54)                               R−1 X = β̃
                                                 u0 (ce,t )

From the numerical calculation done for t = 1, . . . , 6, one finds that entrepreneurial con-
sumption is growing over time, though not exactly at a constant rate.
    The easiest solution to the equations (53) above is to assume that the utility function is
piecewise linear, with a concave kink at some positive level of consumption below ce,1 and
with imposing that ξt takes post-intervention consumption to a level below ce,1 : ξt = 0 will
be one possibility that does the trick. This is the assumption we have used in the main text,
see (7). With the piecewise linear utility function, one needs to solve for β per

(55)                                       R−1 X = β̃

and find the slope below the kink (at c = 0, say) relative to the slope above the kink (at ce,t ,

                                                70
say) per
                                             X   u0 (0)
                                               = 0
                                             X  u (ce,t )
Such preferences are a simple version of loss-aversion preferences that have been proposed
for a variety of phenomena, including asset pricing, see Kahneman and Tversky (1979).
    If β̃ does not satisfy (55), but instead is some other value between that value and, say,
β = 1, one can solve the integration problem as follows. For a given value of β̃ strictly in
this range and with some normalization for u0 (ce,1 ) > 0, calculate recursively

                                                        X 0
                                      u0 (ce,t+1 ) =       u (ce,t )
                                                       β̃R

Note that 0 < u0 (ce,t+1 ) < u0 (ce,t ). Find a continuous decreasing non-negative function u0 (ce )
connecting these points: this is feasible, since ce,t is an increasing sequence. Integrate to find
the utility function u(ce ).
   While there are many solutions, it may be instructive to see whether one can bound this
exercise, using the CRRA specification. While the CRRA specification will not work exactly,
one can calculate ηˉ as the minimal η so that
                                                    −η
                           −1               ce,t+1
(56)                     R X ≥ β̃                          , for all t = 1, . . . , 6
                                             ce,t

and η as the maximal η, so that
                                                    −η
                           −1               ce,t+1
(57)                     R X ≤ β̃                          , for all t = 1, . . . , 6
                                             ce,t

Imposing CRRA preferences with these η, one can furthermore ask, what consumption re-
duction fraction ξt will be necessary in order to reach the marginal utilities required for the
intervention case. The results are in table 8. It turns out that the η−bounds are fairly close
to each other, indicating that CRRA is a pretty good fit even for β̃-values different from
that in equation (55), for any of the values of β. Furthermore, the values for η are within
the entirely reasonable range of [0, 2].
   The consumption reduction fraction are arbitrary for η = 0, and otherwise range from
0.04 to 0.33. A slightly different utility specification uses a (close-to-) CRRA utility function
above these consumption levels, and linear below, splicing it together smoothly at that
point: then, one may use any post-intervention consumption level below that consumption
reduction level. In that case, one needs a different felicity function for every period.



                                                     71
                          β̃ (p.a.):       0.92 0.94 0.97 0.98 1.00
                              ηˉ:           0.0 0.6 1.1 1.5 1.8
                     cons.reduct.fract.:   arb. 0.04 0.16 0.26 0.33
                              η:            0.0 0.5 1.0 1.3 1.6
                     cons.reduct.fract.:   arb. 0.03 0.13 0.22 0.29

Table 8: Calculating η-bounds and the corresponding consumption reduction fraction, as a
function of β.

   It should finally be noted that one needs

                                                 u0 (c̃e,t+1 )
                                      R−1 = β̃
                                                  u0 (c̃e,t )

for the post-intervention consumption levels c̃e,t . This will automatically be satisfied for
c̃e,t ≡ 0 and the kinked utility specification detailed above. For the CRRA specification,
one will need a constant growth rate of c̃e,t . Since the required preferences are not exactly
CRRA, one needs slightly uneven growth for c̃e,t in order to compensate.


              B.    Robustness of the Medical Innovation Premium

In the main text, we document the medical innovation premium for annual returns for our
main sample from 1961 - 2012 using both the CAPM and the 3-factor Fama and French
model.
    For robustness, we estimate the model both at a monthly frequency and an annual
frequency. If we estimate the model at a monthly frequency, we multiply the alphas by 12
to annualize them. We also consider three different sample periods: 1927.1-2013.7, 1946.1-
2013.7, and 1961.1-2013.7. The first sample period is the longest sample available. The
second sample focuses on the post-war period. The third sample coincides with the period
for which we have data on aggregate health care spending. The returns on services start only
in the late sixties, and we therefore exclude them from the table. However, their returns are
well explained by standard models and the alphas are close to zero.
   The annual results are in Panel A and the monthly results in Panel B of Table 9. The first
number corresponds to the alpha; the second number is the t-statistic using OLS standard
errors. We find that the health care industry tends to produce economically and statistically
significant alphas betwen 3-5% per annum, depending on the benchmark model and the
sample period. If we remove health services and focus on pharmaceutical products and
medical equipment, the alphas are even higher at 4-7% per annum. This is because the
alphas on medical services are close to zero.

                                               72
   We also report the alphas on the other industries, which do not have large alphas relative
to the standard models. We typically find that the results are somewhat stronger using the
Fama-French model. We conclude that there is a risk premium for holding health care stocks
that cannot be explained by standard asset pricing factors.



                   Panel A: Annual returns

 1927-2012         Consumer goods    Manufacturing   HiTec   Health   Other   Medical equipment   Drugs
 CAPM                   1.25             1.12         0.68    3.98    -0.96          4.33          4.35
                        1.22             1.49         0.57    2.35    -1.01          2.11          2.48
 Fama and French        0.78             0.53         2.11    5.56    -2.60          5.80          5.96
                        0.74             0.74         1.73    3.37    -3.54          2.83          3.42

 1946-2012         Consumer goods    Manufacturing   HiTec   Health   Other   Medical equipment   Drugs
 CAPM                    1.19            1.66        -0.29    4.29    -0.86          4.07          4.68
                         1.07            1.81        -0.21    2.10    -0.77          1.70          2.25
 Fama and French        -0.06            0.92         1.91    5.72    -3.10          6.27          6.06
                        -0.05            0.96         1.25    2.77    -3.82          2.36          2.87

 1961-2012         Consumer goods    Manufacturing   HiTec   Health   Other   Medical equipment   Drugs
 CAPM                    1.81            1.66        -0.83    3.31     0.22          3.71          3.70
                         1.40            1.54        -0.54    1.61     0.17          1.40          1.78
 Fama and French        -0.13            1.04         1.67    5.01    -2.66          6.44          5.37
                        -0.09            0.84         0.86    2.44    -2.75          2.05          2.63

                   Panel B: Monthly returns

 1927.1-2013.7     Consumer goods    Manufacturing   HiTec   Health   Other   Medical equipment   Drugs
 CAPM                   1.46             0.74         0.46    3.07    -1.24          3.27          3.47
                        2.12             1.24         0.52    2.43    -1.50          2.03          2.54
 Fama and French        1.45             0.26         1.60    3.89    -2.72          3.53          4.34
                        2.12             0.48         2.06    3.16    -3.91          2.22          3.27

 1946.1-2013.7     Consumer goods    Manufacturing   HiTec   Health   Other   Medical equipment   Drugs
 CAPM                   1.25             1.34        -0.59    3.18    -0.92          2.85          3.67
                        1.61             1.91        -0.58    2.40    -1.12          1.71          2.54
 Fama and French        0.58             0.25         1.57    4.85    -3.02          3.81          5.50
                        0.75             0.39         1.75    3.78    -4.13          2.25          3.98

 1961.1-2013.7     Consumer goods    Manufacturing   HiTec   Health   Other   Medical equipment   Drugs
 CAPM                   1.76             1.33        -1.01    2.64    -0.10          2.82          3.11
                        1.92             1.55        -0.84    1.76    -0.10          1.65          1.89
 Fama and French        0.79             0.17         1.24    4.78    -2.46          4.10          5.54
                        0.85             0.21         1.14    3.29    -2.82          2.33          3.52



                                    Table 9: Industry alphas




                                               73
