                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  EVOLVING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE AND
          THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN AGRICULTURAL MARKETS:
            EVIDENCE FROM 1.7 MILLION FIELDS AROUND THE WORLD


                                         Arnaud Costinot
                                         Dave Donaldson
                                          Cory B. Smith
                                        Working Paper 20079
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20079


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2014




For helpful suggestions and comments we are grateful to Sam Kortum, Rob Townsend, Ivan Werning
and seminar audiences at the IIES Conference on "Climate and the Economy," Princeton University,
Bocconi, the University of Munich, UBC, and UC Berkeley. Moya Chin provided excellent research
assistance. Costinot and Donaldson thank the National Science Foundation (under Grant SES-1227635)
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Cory B. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets:
Evidence from 1.7 Million Fields around the World
Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Cory B. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 20079
April 2014
JEL No. F0,O0,Q0,R0

                                              ABSTRACT

A large agronomic literature models the implications of climate change for a variety of crops and locations
around the world. The goal of the present paper is to quantify the macro-level consequences of these
micro-level shocks. Using an extremely rich micro-level dataset that contains information about the
productivity---both before and after climate change---of each of 10 crops for each of 1.7 million fields
covering the surface of the Earth, we find that the impact of climate change on these agricultural markets
would amount to a 0.26% reduction in global GDP when trade and production patterns are allowed
to adjust.


Arnaud Costinot                                      Cory B. Smith
Department of Economics, E17-232                     Massachusettts Insitute of Technology
MIT                                                  cbsmith@mit.edu
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02139
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu

Dave Donaldson
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ddonald@stanford.edu
1 Introduction
The warmer climates predicted by climatological models portend a grim future for many
biological systems, such as agricultural plant life, on which human welfare depends. But
just how much will living standards suffer as plants wilt in a hotter world? A large agro-
nomic literature has modeled the implications of such climate change for crop yields, crop
by crop and location by location; see IPCC (2007), Chapter 5 for a review. The goal of our
paper is to quantify the macro-level consequences of these micro-level shocks.
   Our analysis builds on the simple observation that in a globalized world, the impact of
micro-level shocks does not only depend on their average level, but also on their disper-
sion over space. If climate change affects all crops in all countries in a uniform manner,
then there is no room for farmers to adjust what they grow or for countries to adjust what
they import and export. If climate change instead has a differential effect on crop yields
both within and between countries, then adjustments through production and trade pat-
terns may significantly dampen the adverse consequences of climate change. For in-
stance, a country may stop producing a crop whose yields have fallen and import it in
exchange for another crop whose yields have remained constant at home. In short, the
macro-consequences of climate change in a global economy are inherently related to how
it affects comparative advantage across regions of the world. Yet, whether climate change
will affect comparative advantage, both within and between countries, remains an open
question.
   To shed light on the relationship between climate change and comparative advantage,
we take advantage of an extremely rich micro-level dataset on agricultural productivity:
the Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ)
dataset. This dataset uses agronomic models and high resolution data on geographic
characteristics such as soil, topography, elevation and, crucially, climatic conditions to
predict the yield that would be obtainable—crop by crop—at 1.7 million high resolution
grid cells covering the surface of the Earth. The GAEZ dataset is available both under
contemporary growing conditions and under a climate change scenario used by the UN’s
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).1 By comparing productivity for a
given crop under the two scenarios at each of our 1.7 million grid cells, we can therefore
directly observe the evolution of comparative advantage across space, as predicted by
climatologists and agronomists.
   A sample of the GAEZ predictions can be seen in Figure 1. Here we plot, for each
   1 The GAEZ dataset reports post-climate change yield predictions for a total of eleven distinct climate
change scenarios. The results in our baseline analysis, which we describe in this Introduction, are based on
estimates from the Hadley CM3 A1FI model. Section 7.1 presents results for all other scenarios.

                                                     1
                                          Panel (a): wheat




                                           Panel (b): rice

Figure 1: Predicted Yield Changes. Percent changes in yield due to climate change in GAEZ model. Gray
areas denote regions for which predicted yields are zero both before and after climate change.




                                                 2
grid cell around the world, the predicted percentage change in productivity associated
with climate change for two of the world’s most important crops: wheat (panel a) and
rice (panel b). As is clear, there exists a great deal of heterogeneity in the effects of climate
change both across crops and over space—many regions see a differential productivity
change in wheat and rice, and this relative productivity change is different from that of
other regions. Further, the contours of the effects of climate change on rice and wheat
appear not to reflect country borders. Within-country heterogeneity is a central feature of
these data.
  To go beyond the evolution of comparative advantage documented in the agronomic
GAEZ data and quantify the economic macro-consequences of climate change, we need
an economic model of agricultural markets that can predict: (i ) where crops are produced
and, in turn, which productivity changes are relevant and which ones are not; (ii ) how
shocks to the supply of crops affect prices around the world; and (iii ) how changes in
productivity and prices map into consumption and welfare changes. We propose a per-
fectly competitive model of trade in which each country consists of a large number of
‘fields’ with heterogeneous productivity across multiple crops. These are the theoretical
counterparts of the 1.7 million grid cells in the GAEZ data. In this model, comparative
advantage, i.e. relative productivity differences across crops and fields, determines the
pattern of specialization within and between countries, whereas trade costs determine
the level of integration of local agricultural markets.
   Besides the highly detailed GAEZ data, the quantitative predictions of our model de-
pend on three key elasticities: (i ) the elasticity of substitution between different varieties
of the same crop; (ii ) the elasticity of substitution between different crops; and (iii ) the
extent of within-field heterogeneity in productivity, which is unobserved in the GAEZ
data. These three parameters can be separately estimated using trade, output, and price
data in a transparent manner. At the estimated parameter values, we find that the within-
sample fit of our model for output levels, land use, and trade flows is good, including for
moments that were not directly used in our estimation procedure.
   Armed with these three parameters and the detailed knowledge of the pattern of com-
parative advantage across fields and crops around the world, we simulate our model un-
der the no-climate change scenario and explore three counterfactual scenarios. In our first
scenario, we study the consequences of climate change—i.e., a change in the GAEZ pro-
ductivity from contemporary growing conditions to climate change conditions—under
the assumption that countries are free to trade (subject to our estimated trade costs) and
farmers are free to change their output decisions. Under this scenario, we find very het-
erogeneous effects across countries, with some countries like Malawi experiencing dra-


                                               3
matic welfare losses. Overall, climate change amounts to a 0.26% decrease in world GDP.
Since the value of output in our 10 crops is equal to 1.8% of world GDP, this corresponds
to about one sixth of total crop value.
    As mentioned above, a potential source of adjustment to climate change is the ability
of farmers to produce different crops. To shed light on this mechanism, we consider a
second counterfactual scenario in which countries can trade, but farmers cannot reallo-
cate production within each field. Under this scenario, we find that the adverse welfare
consequences of climate change are significantly larger than in the previous scenario. For
the world as a whole, the loss would be three times as large: 0.78% of GDP. This illus-
trates how farmers’ ability to substitute crop production in response to changes in their
comparative advantage—which our micro-level dataset gives us a unique opportunity to
study—may substantially mitigate the ill-effects of climate change.
   Another potential source of adjustment is the ability of countries to change what they
trade with the rest of the world. To explore the quantitative importance of this economic
channel, we consider a final counterfactual scenario in which farmers can reallocate pro-
duction, but export patterns—that is, shares of crop output exported to the rest of the
world—are held fixed before and after climate change. In contrast to the previous coun-
terfactual scenario, the welfare consequences of climate change in this case, a 0.27% loss
in world GDP, remain very similar to those obtained under full adjustment, suggesting
that international trade may only play a minor role in alleviating the consequences of
climate change.
    There is, of course, a great deal of uncertainty about future climate change and how
it will affect crop-yields at various locations. In the final part of our paper, we explore
the sensitivity of our counterfactual results to different assumptions about future climatic
conditions as well as the contemporary growing conditions used in the GAEZ data. We
also discuss the robustness of our results to alternative assumptions about technology,
preferences, and trade costs. Not surprisingly, the large uncertainty about future crop
yields leads to large uncertainty over the welfare consequences of climate change. In-
terestingly, however, the relative importance of production adjustments relative to trade
adjustments remains of similar magnitude across all our robustness checks.
    The literature on international trade and climate change is large and varied, though
mostly based on Computational General Equilibrium (CGE) models. A first group of
papers focuses on the direct impact of international trade on the level of carbon emis-
sions caused by international transportation; see e.g. Cristea, Hummels, Puzzello, and
Avetysyan (2013) and Shapiro (2013). A key insight is that although international trans-
portation negatively affects the environment, the associated welfare consequences are an


                                             4
order of magnitude smaller than the gains from international trade. A second group of
papers focuses on the issue of carbon leakages, i.e. the idea that if only a subset of coun-
tries tax carbon emissions, the level of emissions of non-taxing countries is likely to go
up; see Felder and Rutherford (1993), Babiker (2005), Elliott, Foster, Kortum, Munson,
Cervantes, and Weisbach (2010).
   More closely related to this paper are studies on international trade and adaptation in
agriculture; see Reilly and Hohmann (1993), Rosenzweig and Parry (1994), Tsigas, Fris-
wold, and Kuhn (1997) and Hertel and Randhir (2000). The main difference between
previous papers and the present analysis lies in the level of disaggregation at which we
observe the micro-consequences of climate changes. While the existing literature works
with country averages, we aggregate up in a theoretically consistent manner from more
than a million fields around the world. By feeding this rich micro-data into a general
equilibrium model in which comparative advantage determines the pattern of specializa-
tion, both within and across countries, we are then able to study, quantify and compare
the gains from adaptation to climate change through changes in production and trade
patterns.
   Finally, our analysis is also related to our earlier work, Costinot and Donaldson (2011)
and Costinot and Donaldson (2012), which also uses the GAEZ data to quantify the gains
from economic integration in U.S. agricultural markets from 1880 to 2000 as well as to test
the predictions of the Ricardian model. Theoretically, the present paper departs from our
earlier work by introducing productivity heterogeneity within each field, which simpli-
fies the problem of assigning fields to crops in a competitive equilibrium. Empirically, of
course, neither of our previous papers uses the post-climate change GAEZ predictions,
which are at the core of the present analysis.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates how the evolution
of comparative advantage may mitigate the consequences of climate change in agricul-
tural markets through a simple example. Section 3 develops our theoretical framework.
Section 4 presents the data that feed into our analysis. Section 5 describes our estimation
procedure, our parameter estimates, and measures of goodness of fit of the model. Sec-
tion 6 then presents the results of our counterfactual simulations. Section 7 explores the
sensitivity of our results and Section 8 offers some concluding remarks.


2 A Simple Example
Consider an agrarian economy comprising two symmetric islands, North and South.
Each island consists of two fields, East and West, that can be used to produce two crops,

                                             5
wheat and rice. All fields have the same size and the same wheat-yields and rice-yields
per acre. All consumers have the same preferences. They spend half of their income on
wheat and half of their income on rice. Hence, there exists a competitive equilibrium,
which we assume prevails, such that the relative price of the two crops is one, Western
fields produce wheat, whereas Eastern fields produce rice on both islands.2
    Due to climate change, agronomists expect land productivity to go down in the two
islands, but differentially so across crops and fields. In the Southern island, rice-yields
will be unchanged, whereas wheat-yields will decrease by 50% in the Eastern field and
go down to zero in the Western field. In the Northern island, the situation is the exact
opposite. While wheat-yields will be unchanged, rice-yields will decrease by 50% in the
Western field and go down to zero in the Eastern field.
    The basic questions that we are interested in are: How concerned should inhabitants
of the two islands be about these dire forecasts? By how much will their standards of
living go down after climate change? To what extent can the two islands adapt to climate
change by producing or trading different crops?
   In the present context, answers to these three questions are straightforward. After
climate change, the Northern island has a comparative advantage in wheat, whereas the
Southern island has a comparative advantage in rice. Thus in the new competitive equi-
librium, all Northern fields will produce wheat—which will then be exported South—
whereas all Southern fields will produce rice—which will then be exported North. As a
result, world production and world consumption will be exactly the same as before cli-
mate change. Here, in spite of causing large negative productivity shocks that range from
-50% to -100%, climate change will have no effects on living standards.
   The two islands are unaffected by climate change for two reasons. First, fields can
change what they produce. Second, islands can change what they export and import. In
a counterfactual scenario in which fields can change what they produce, but islands are
under autarky, both islands would be forced to produce both crops. Therefore negative
shocks to rice-yields in the North and wheat-yields in the South would necessarily lower
living standards. The same observation applies to a counterfactual scenario in which
islands are free to trade, but fields cannot change what they produce. The extent of the
welfare losses in both counterfactual scenarios will be our measures of the importance of
international trade and production reallocation for alleviating the adverse consequences
of climate change.
    2 Of course, if crop-yields are exactly the same across all fields, there exist other competitive equilibria.
None of this discussion hinges on the multiplicity of equilibria. Formally, one should think of the equilib-
rium that we focus on as capturing a situation in which Eastern fields have comparative advantage in rice,
albeit an arbitrarily small one.

                                                       6
   Needless to say, the previous example is very special. In particular, it assumes that
climate change creates comparative advantage across fields when there was none. Thus,
by specializing and trading more, islands are able to dampen (fully) the adverse con-
sequences of climate change. If climate change were to weaken comparative advantage,
then islands may adapt instead by diversifying production and trading less. In both cases,
however, the key observation is that, to the extent that climate change affects comparative
advantage across regions of the world, the welfare consequences of climate change may
crucially depend on the ability of a country to change its production and trade patterns.
   The rest of our analysis aims to explore the quantitative importance of these theoretical
considerations in practice. Compared to the simple model presented in this section, we
will now allow for demand differences and trade costs between countries, more than two
crops, and most importantly, more than two types of land in the form of more than a
million fields.


3 Theory

3.1 Basic Environment
We consider a world economy comprising multiple countries, indexed by i ∈ I ≡ {1, ..., I }.
In each country there are two factors of production, labor and land, that can be used to
produce multiple crops, indexed by k ∈ K ≡ {1, ..., K }, and an outside good, which we
think of as a composite of manufactured goods and services. Labor is homogeneous,
perfectly mobile within a country, and immobile across countries. Ni denotes the total
endowment of labor and wi denotes the wage in country i. Land comes in the form of
heterogeneous fields, indexed by f ∈ Fi ≡ {1, ..., Fi }, each comprising a continuum of
heterogeneous parcels, indexed by ω ∈ [0, 1]. All fields correspond to a 5 arc-minute
grid cell in our dataset and there are 1.7 million such grid cells around the world. Due to
                                                                                             f
the curvature of the Earth, grid cells at different latitude cover different areas. We let si
denote the area in hectares of field f in country i.
Preferences. In each country i there is a representative agent who derives utility from
consuming the outside good, Ci0 , and a composite of all crops, Ci :

                                     Ui = Ci0 + β i ln Ci .                                (1)

Since the upper-level utility function in equation (1) is quasi-linear, there are no income
effects. The total demand for crops only depends on a country-specific demand shifter,


                                               7
β i ≥ 0. Since the crops on which we focus account for a small fraction of consumers’ ex-
penditure around the world, we view the absence of income effects as a minor limitation
of our analysis.3
    Aggregate crop consumption, Ci , depends on the consumption of each crop, Cik , which
itself depends on the consumption of varieties from different origins, Ckji :

                                                         1/κ           (κ−1)/κ κ/(κ−1)
                           Ci =         ∑k∈K        βki             Cik                        ,            (2)
                                                         1/σ           (σ−1)/σ σ/(σ−1)
                          Cik   =       ∑ j∈I       βkji            Ckji                           ,        (3)


where κ > 0 denotes the elasticity of substitution between different crops, e.g. wheat
versus corn, and σ > 0 denotes the elasticity of substitution between different varieties of
a given crop, e.g. French versus U.S. wheat. The last preference parameters, βki ≥ 0, and
βkji ≥ 0, are crop-and-country-specific and crop-origin-and-destination-specific demand
shocks, respectively.
   Although crops are fairly homogeneous goods, the assumption that crops enter utility
through a general CES aggregator rather than as perfect substitutes is convenient from
a computational standpoint. It avoids the need to determine, for each crop, whether a
country is a net exporter and who its trading partners are. Here, all countries export each
crop that they produce to all other countries (as long as βkji > 0). Of course, the degree of
substitutability between crops from different countries is, ultimately, an empirical ques-
tion, which we tackle in Section 5.1.
Technology. The outside good is produced under constant returns to scale using labor
only. A0i > 0 denotes labor productivity in country i’s outside sector. In the agricultural
sector, we adopt a parsimonious representation of technology designed to keep the model
transparent, yet flexible enough to harness the vast amount of micro-level data collected
by agronomists. We assume that labor and parcels of land are perfect complements in
                                                fk                                 fk
the production of each crop. By combining Li (ω ) hectares of parcel ω with Ni (ω )




    3 Theassumption of log-preferences, which implies a unit price elasticity, is more restrictive. It rules out
scenarios where consumers may change their total expenditure on crops in response to climate change. If
one thinks, for example, of the outside good as “Health,” one may expect situations in which consumers
may want to spend a higher fraction of their income on the outside good after climate change, perhaps
because climate change destroys rare species that are critical inputs in the pharmaceutical industry. Under
such circumstances, the welfare costs of productivity changes in agriculture would be smaller than those
computed in our paper.

                                                             8
workers, a representative firm can produce
                                                                   n                                 .            o
                           fk              fk                            fk              fk                f
                         Qi     (ω ) =   Ai         (ω ) min           Li     (ω ) ,   Ni     (ω )       νi    (ω ) ,           (4)

             fk
where Ai (ω ) ≥ 0 denotes the total factor productivity of parcel ω in field f if allo-
                                   f
cated to crop k in country i and νi (ω ) > 0 measures the labor intensity of the associated
production process. In the spirit of Eaton and Kortum (2002), we assume that total factor
productivity and labor intensity are independently drawn for each (i, f , ω ) from a Fréchet
distribution:
       n                                                                        o
             f1           1          fK               K        f
  Pr       Ai ( ω )   ≤ a , ...,   Ai ( ω )     ≤a         , νi(ω ) ≤ ν
                                                                                                   
                                                                                 f k −θ
                                                                                   
                                                                             k                    −θ
                                                              = exp −γ ∑k∈K a /Ai       + (ν/νi )       .


where θ > 1 measures the extent of technological
                                   h        i    heterogeneity
                                                         h     within
                                                                 i each field and the
                              fk      fk                   fk         fk
constant γ is set such that Ai = E Ai (ω ) and νi = E νi (ω ) .4 Ai ≥ 0 measures
the comparative and absolute advantage of a field in producing particular goods. The
                                                                                         fk
GAEZ project data give us direct information about Ai ≥ 0 for all crops and all locations
as a function of global temperatures, which will be the core inputs in our quantitative
exercise. Finally, since we do not have access to disaggregated data on labor intensity,
we require average labor intensity νi > 0 to be identical across crops and fields, though
agriculture is allowed to be more labor-intensive in some countries than others.

Market Structure and Trade Costs. All markets are perfectly competitive. The outside
good is freely traded. In the rest of our analysis we use it as our numeraire. In contrast,
international trade in crops k ∈ K may be subject to iceberg trade costs. In order to sell
one unit of a good in country j, firms from country i must ship τijk units. Non-arbitrage
therefore requires the price of a crop k produced in country i and sold in country j to be
equal to
                                                               pijk = τijk pik ,                                                (5)

where pik denotes the local price of the domestic variety of crop k in country i.




                                                   −θ
   4 Formally,                               θ −1
                  we set γ         ≡ Γ         θ          , where Γ(·) denotes the Gamma function, i.e.                 Γ( t)    =
´ +∞
 0    ut−1 exp(−u)du for any t > 0. We relax the assumption that the extent of technological heterogeneity
θ is constant across countries in Section 7.

                                                                        9
3.2 Competitive Equilibrium
In a competitive equilibrium, all consumers maximize their utility, all firms maximize
their profits, and all markets clear.
Utility Maximization. Given equations (1), (2), (3), and (5), utility maximization by the
representative agent in each country requires that
                                                             −σ
                                                βkji τjik pkj
                                  1− κ
                          βkiPik
          Ckji =   βi                1− κ                       1−σ , for all i, j ∈ I and k ∈ K,   (6)
                                                     k
                      ∑l ∈K βli Pil                         k
                                             ∑n∈I β ni τni pn  k


                                  1/(1−σ)
                       k p k 1− σ
             
where Pik ≡ ∑n∈I βkni τni
                             
                           n               denotes the CES price index associated with
crop k in country i.
Profit Maximization. In the outside sector profit maximization requires that wi = A0i
whenever the outside good is produced. Throughout this paper, we assume that labor
endowments, Ni , are large enough for the outside good to be produced in all countries.
Thus we can use A0i in place of the wage wi and treat it as an exogenous parameter from
now on.
  In the agricultural sector profit maximization requires that all parcels of land are: (i )
allocated to the crop that maximizes the value of their marginal product if such value is
greater than the wage bill associated with operating that parcel or (ii ) left unused if the
maximum value of their marginal product is less than the wage bill. Thus given equation
(4), the land allocation can be solved as a simple discrete choice problem. Let
                 n                 n                                             oo
            fk          fk                f             f1                 fK
          πi ≡ Pr pik Ai (ω ) = max A0i νi (ω ) , p1i Ai (ω ) , ..., piK Ai (ω )

denote the probability that a parcel ω of a field f located in country i is allocated to crop k.
                                                             fk
Since there is a continuum of parcels within each field, πi also corresponds to the share
of parcels allocated to that crop.
    Given our distributional assumptions, standard algebra implies

                                       fk θ
                                        
                    fk
                                 pik Ai
                   πi    =                     , for all f ∈ Fi , i ∈ I , and k ∈ K.                 (7)
                                            fl θ
                                      
                            θ             l
                           αi + ∑l ∈K pi Ai

where αi ≡ A0i νi parameterizes cross-country differences in labor costs, either due to dif-
ferences in wages or labor intensity. The higher αi is, the more costly it is to hire workers
to produce crops, and the smaller the share of a field f allocated to any given crop k.

                                                        10
                                                                                                    fk
Likewise, the higher the average value of the marginal product of land, pik Ai , the higher
the share of field f allocated to crop k. In our model, the extent of technological hetero-
geneity, θ, determines the elasticity of the relative supply of land to various crops. When
θ is higher, parcels are more homogeneous within a field, which makes the supply of land
                                                              fk
more sensitive to changes in prices, pik , or productivity, Ai .
                      ´ 1 fk
    Let Qik ≡ ∑ f ∈Fi 0 Qi (ω ) dω denote that the total output of crop k in country i. By
equation (4) and the law of iterated expectations, we must have
                           h                         n                                            oi
                 f   fk       fk          fk                f             f1                 fK
Qik =   ∑ f ∈Fi si πi     E Ai (ω ) pik Ai (ω ) = max A0i νi (ω ) , p1i Ai (ω ) , ..., piK Ai (ω ) .

Given our distributional assumptions, one can also check that

                                                                                      f k −1/θ
 h                         n                                             oi             
    fk          fk                f             f1                 fK           fk
E Ai (ω ) pik Ai (ω ) = max A0i νi (ω ) , p1i Ai (ω ) , ..., piK Ai (ω )    = Ai × π i         .

Note that because of the endogenous selection of fields into crops, the average productiv-
ity conditional on a crop being produced is strictly greater than the unconditional aver-
               f k −1/θ
                 
       fk                   fk
age, Ai × πi            > Ai .
    Combining the two previous expressions with equation (7), we obtain obtain the fol-
lowing expression for the supply of crop k in country i,

                                                                      (θ −1)/θ
                                                     fk θ
                                                     
                       f fk 
                                               pik Ai
        Qik = ∑ f ∈F si Ai                                                       , for all i ∈ I and k ∈ K.   (8)
                                                                       
                    i
                                                                   θ 
                                       θ                       fl
                                    (αi ) + ∑l ∈K        pil Ai

Market Clearing. Since trade in crops is subject to iceberg trade costs, market clearing for
all varieties of all crops requires

                               Qik = ∑ j∈I τijk Cijk , for all i ∈ I and k ∈ K.                                (9)

As discussed above, parcels of land may remain idle if the value of their marginal product
is below the labor cost required to produce on these parcels. Thus, by construction, land
demand is weakly less than land supply at all locations. Finally, under the assumption
that the outside good is produced in all countries, the amount of labor demanded by the
outside sector adjusts to guarantee labor market clearing at the wage equal to A0i .
In the rest of this paper we formally define a competitive equilibrium as follows.
                                                                   
Definition 1 A competitive equilibrium is a vector of consumption, Ckji , output, Qik , and
                                                                                     

prices, pik , such that equations (6), (8), and (9) hold.
           


                                                            11
   In the remainder of this paper we will use the model outlined in this section to study
the global consequences of climate change. In Section 6 below, we will compute com-
petitive equilibria for economies with contemporary agricultural productivities, compute
competitive equilibria for counterfactual economies with post-climate change productiv-
ities, and then compare welfare levels across equilibria. Before presenting these counter-
factual simulations, however, we need to describe the data used in our analysis as well as
how we estimate the unknown structural parameters of our model using these data. This
is the object of Sections 4 and 5, respectively.


4 Data
We work throughout with a sample of the 50 countries and 10 crops that span the vast
majority of world crop agriculture. Our countries account for 89.7% of world crop output
value, and our crops for 71.1%. These countries and crops, along with their shares of total
output across all countries and all crops, are listed in Table 1.
   Our analysis draws on three main types of data: (i ) pre-climate change estimates of
agricultural productivity, at each high-resolution field on Earth for each of our 10 crops;
(ii ) similar post-climate change estimates of agricultural productivity; and (iii ) data on
actual output, land use, prices, and trade flows, by crop, for each country in 2009.


4.1 Pre-Climate Change Estimates of Agricultural Productivity
The first data source on which we draw provides estimates of average productivity dur-
                                                               fk
ing the pre-climate change period. We require a measure of Ai in the model above,
namely the productivity in crop k for a small region of land, which we refer to as a field,
f , in country i. We obtain these measures from the Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ)
project, which is organized under the auspices of the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). Because this
data source is non-standard we provide a lengthy description here.
    Crucially, for our purposes, the GAEZ productivity estimates are available for each
field f regardless of whether field f is actually growing crop k. The GAEZ project pro-
vides these estimates by drawing on state-of-the-art agronomic models of how each crop
k will fare in the growing conditions available at field f . The primary goal of the GAEZ
project is to inform farmers and government agencies about optimal crop choice in any
given location on Earth—that is, to help farmers to know how productive they would be
at crops they are not currently growing.


                                            12
Table 1: Sample Description

Countries (with shares of world output):
 Algeria (0.4%)                Argentina (1.2%)           Australia (0.9%)           Bangladesh (0.8%)
 Brazil (4.8%)                 Burma (1.7%)               Cameroon (0.4%)            Canada (1.3%)
 China (21.2%)                 Colombia (0.7%)            Cote d’Ivoire (0.4%)       D.R. Congo (0.5%)
 Ecuador (0.4%)                Egypt (0.9%)               Ethiopia (0.5%)            France (1.3%)
 Germany (1.2%)                Ghana (0.7%)               Greece (0.4%)              India (9.0%)
 Indonesia (4.1%)              Iran (0.8%)                Italy (0.8%)               Japan (3.0%)
 Kazakhstan (0.4%)             Korea, South (1.0%)        Malawi (0.5%)              Malaysia (0.8%)
 Mexico (0.9%)                 Morocco (0.4%)             Netherlands (0.4%)         Nigeria (3.3%)
 Pakistan (1.1%)               Philippines (0.8%)         Poland (0.4%)              Romania (0.5%)
 Russia (2.0%)                 South Africa (0.4%)        Spain (0.8%)               Sudan (0.4%)
 Thailand (1.3%)               Turkey (1.8%)              Uganda (0.7%)              Ukraine (0.9%)
 United Kingdom (0.6%)         Tanzania (0.6%)            United States (9.3%)       Uzbekistan (0.6%)
 Venezuela (0.7%)              Viet Nam (2.0%)

Crops (with shares of world output):
 Banana (3.4%)        Cotton (3.2%)      Maize (11.4%) Oilpalm (3.2%) Rice (17.3%)
 Soybean (5.6%) Sugarcane (4.7%) Tomato (5.9%) Wheat (10.7%) White Potato (5.6%)
Notes: The 50 most important (by value of all-crop output) and 10 most important (by value of all-country
output) crops, which we use throughout our analysis, where ‘all-crop’ refers to all crops covered in
the GAEZ dataset. The 50 countries sum to 89.7%, and the 10 crops to 71.1%, of the value of all-crop,
all-country world output, respectively. Value of output computed as the local price pki times the quantity
of output Qki , for each crop and country.


   Three inputs enter the GAEZ project’s agronomic model. The first input is a long
vector of attributes describing the growing characteristics at field f . These characteris-
tics include eight different soil types and conditions, elevation, average land gradient,
and climatic variables such as rainfall, temperature, humidity, wind speed and sun expo-
sure. Importantly, GAEZ handles climate conditions particularly carefully. For a given
year, data on the stream of daily weather is used to predict how well a crop will fare as
each date progresses. We use GAEZ output from what the GAEZ project refers to as the
“baseline” period, an average of runs of the GAEZ models for the daily weather records
observed in each year from 1961 to 1990. This has the attraction of averaging, in a co-
herent manner, over the idiosyncrasies of any given year’s weather. As described below,
GAEZ’s treatment of climate under a climate change scenario is similar to that of a histor-
ical scenario.
   The second input is a set of hundreds of model parameters, each specific to crop k, that
govern how a given set of growing characteristics map into the yield of crop k according to
the GAEZ project’s agronomic model. The parameters used by GAEZ are an aggregation
of such parameters found in the agronomic literature and each is estimated through the
use of field experiments at agricultural research stations.
   The third and final input into the GAEZ model is a set of assumptions about the extent

                                                     13
to which complementary inputs such as irrigation, fertilizers, machinery, and labor are
applied to the growing of crop k at field f . Naturally, farmers’ decisions about how to
grow their crops and what complementary inputs to apply affect crop yields in addition
to the land characteristics, such as sunlight exposure, over which farmers have relatively
little control. For this reason the GAEZ project constructs different sets of productivity
predictions for different scenarios regarding the application of complementary inputs.
In the results presented here we use the scenario referred to as “high inputs” (in which
modern machinery, etc., are assumed to be available in the GAEZ agronomic model) with
“rain-fed” water supply. We explore the sensitivity of our results to this assumption in
Section 7.3.
    A field f in our analysis corresponds to a grid cell in the GAEZ data. The size of our
fields, therefore, is governed by the size of the GAEZ data grid cells, which in turn is
governed by the coarseness of climatic data. Since the climatic data is available at the 5
arc-minute level, this determines the size of the GAEZ grid cells and hence the area of a
field in our analysis.5 At the 5 arc-minute level there are around 9 million grid cells on
Earth. After throwing out the many grid cells that lie over bodies of water or ice shelves,
there are just over 2.2 million grid cells on Earth. Focusing on our sample of the 50 most
agriculturally important countries, we are left with 1,683,193 grid cells. The area of these
fields ranges from 8586.3 hectares (at the most equatorial fields) to 1040.2 hectares (at the
most polar fields).
    The GAEZ data are made available as gridded machine-readable files. We map each
grid cell to the country i in which it is located by using a country boundaries (for bound-
aries in 2008) file available from the World Borders Dataset (Thematic Mapping). 6 At
each of the 1,683,193 grid cells, the GAEZ dataset reports predicted yields in tonnes per
hectare for each of our 10 crops.
   Merging the GAEZ data crops to the crops used in other data sources is straightfor-
ward in most cases. An exception concerns the case of rice, where GAEZ reports two
versions of rice (dryland rice and wetland rice) but only the aggregate category, rice, is
available in the FAO data. In this case we use the maximum yield over the two rice op-
                                                                 fk
tions, within each field, as our measure of the productivity Ai in rice (that is, our measure
     f k=rice          f k= drylandrice     f k= wetlandrice
of Ai         = max{ Ai                 , Ai                 }).


    5 Many other inputs are available for 30 arc-second grid cells, which are 100 times smaller than 5 arc-

minute grid cells. The GAEZ procedure is to solve their model at this fine level and average the result at
the coarser 5 arc-minute level, and publish only the latter.
    6 Most grid cells have a unique matching to countries. For grid cells that overlap with country borders,

we assign grid cells to countries based on the country that occupies the largest share of each grid cell.

                                                    14
4.2 Post-Climate Change Estimates of Agricultural Productivity
Our analysis of the impact of climate change on global agricultural markets draws on sci-
entists’ predictions about the impact that climate change will have on crop yields around
                                              fk ′
                                               
the world. In Section 6 below we let Ai            denote post-climate change productivity
for any country i, crop k and field f in our counterfactual scenarios. In order to obtain
                 fk ′
                  
estimates of Ai       , we rely again on the agronomic predictions from the GAEZ project.
   There are two changes that the GAEZ project implements when computing post-
                           fk ′
                            
                                                                            fk
climate change estimates Ai     rather than pre-climate change estimates Ai . The first
and most important one concerns the weather that prevails at field f in country i in each
scenario. Like pre-climate change estimates, post-climate change estimates are based on
an average of runs of the GAEZ models over a 30-year period, only instead of realized
past weather the GAEZ project uses the predicted future daily stream of weather from
2071 to 2100. Estimates of future daily weather series are themselves obtained from an
average of runs of a General Circulation Model (GCM) under a particular Special Report
on Emission Scenarios (SRES) from the IPCC programme.
   The IPCC programme comprises a total of 23 GCM and 40 SRES. Each SRES corre-
sponds to a different “narrative storyline” about the potential evolution of various de-
mographic, social, economic, technological, and environment variables. SRES are broken
down into 4 main “families”—A1, A2, B1, and B2—which vary primarily in terms of their
predicted rates of population and economic growth. Each SRES then maps the previous
variables into predictions about future greenhouse gas and sulfur emissions around the
world, with large variations between scenarios. GCM developed by independent teams
of climatologists, in turn, maps future gas emissions into future climatic conditions, which
can finally be fed into the GAEZ project’s agronomic model.
    Out of all possible GCM-SRES combinations, GAEZ post-climate change productivity
estimates are available for 11 GCM-SRES pairs. In our baseline analysis, we use those
obtained from the Hadley CM3 A1FI model. The A1FI scenario describes a future world
of very rapid economic growth, global population that peaks in mid-century and declines
thereafter, and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient fossil intensive technolo-
gies. Section 7.1 discusses the sensitivity of our results to the use of alternative GCM-SRES
combinations available in the GAEZ dataset. As we will see, results based on the Hadley
CM3 A1FI model provide an upper-bound on the welfare consequences of climate change
in all our counterfactual scenarios.
                                                                         fk ′
                                                                          
    The second change that the GAEZ project implements when computing Ai      rather
       fk
than Ai relates to atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. GAEZ post-climate change esti-


                                             15
mates are available under two types of modeling assumptions: with and without active
plant carbon dioxide fertilization. In the former case, changes in carbon emissions due to
climate change are allowed to have a direct effect on crop yields. In the latter case, they
are not. We use estimates allowing for plant carbon dioxide fertilization throughout our
analysis.


4.3 Agricultural Output, Land Use, Price, and Trade Flow Data
An essential aspect of our analysis is the ability to estimate all of the unknown parameters
in our model in a theoretically consistent manner. This estimation procedure—described
below—requires data on actual output, land use, prices, and trade flows prevailing in a
baseline year. In all cases we use data from 2009, the most recent year for which data from
all sources were available.
    We obtain data on agricultural output, land use and prices from the FAOSTAT pro-
gram at the FAO. The first variable, Qik , measures output of crop k in country i, expressed
in tonnes.7 The second variable, Li , measures the total amount of land in country i al-
located to the 10 crops covered by our analysis, expressed in hectares. And the third
variable, pik , measures the producer price of crop k in country i. We treat this variable as
the counterpart of the local price of crop k in country i, both for consumers and producers,
in our model. Whenever it is missing, we impute the price pik from the fitted values of a
regression of log prices on a country and crop fixed effect.
   For the purposes of measuring trade flows, Xijk , we use UN Comtrade data due to its
denser coverage relative to FAOSTAT trade data. Xijk measures the total value of exports of
crop k from country i to country j, expressed in US dollars. As is standard, we obtain the
value of bilateral trade flows from the imports of reporting countries, that is the countries
that collected the data underlying the trade flow in question, in contrast to the partner
country in any trade flow. Whenever imports are reported missing or zero, but exports
are not, we use the value reported by the exporter instead.
   To concord FAOSTAT crops to those in the Comtrade data we use a concordance table
available from FAOSTAT. The only exception is oil palm, for which the raw version of
the crop, the oil palm fruit, is never traded because the crop is typically immediately
processed into palm oil and oil palm kernels. We therefore compute the value of oil palm
exports as the sum of exports in palm oil and oil palm kernels.


   7 FAOSTAT    reports output in tonnes of “fresh-weight.” In contrast, the GAEZ project reports estimates
of “dry-weight” matter per hectare, excluding the water content of a crop. We use the dry-weight conver-
sion table provided by the GAEZ project to convert the original GAEZ yields to fresh-weight yields.

                                                    16
5 Estimation
To simulate the model described in Section 3, we require estimates of demand- and supply-
side parameters. Sections 5.1 and 5.2 describe how we obtain these. Section 5.3 then
explores the model’s fit given estimated parameters.


5.1 Demand
We proceed in three steps, each corresponding to a different level of our nested demand
system. First, we use data on producer prices, pik , and bilateral trade flows at the crop
level, Xijk , to estimate the elasticity of substitution σ between different varieties of a given
crop as well as a composite of the lower-level demand-shifters, βkij , and trade costs, τijk .
Second, we use the previous estimates to construct price indices at the crop level, Pjk , and
combine them with data on crop expenditures, X kj ≡ ∑i ∈I Xijk , to estimate the elasticity
of substitution κ between crops as well as the mid-level demand-shifters, βkj . Finally, we
use data on total crop expenditures, X j ≡ ∑k∈K X kj , to estimate the upper-level demand-
shifters, β j .
Step 1. By definition, the value of exports of crop k from country i to country j is given
by Xijk = τij pik Cijk . By equation (6), we therefore have
                 

                            1− κ                    1− σ
                       βkj Pjk          βkij τijk pik
         Xijk = β j            1− κ                     1−σ , for all i, j ∈ I and k ∈ K.                              (10)
                           l   l             k       k   k
                    ∑l ∈K β j Pj      ∑n∈I β nj τnj pn

When estimating the lower-level of our demand system, we consider the cases of zero
                                                                      1− σ
and non-zero trade flows separately. If Xijk = 0, we simply set βkij τijk    = 0. If Xijk > 0,
we take logs and rearrange equation (10) as
                                                 
                            ln       Xijk /X kj       = Mkj + (1 − σ) ln pik + εkij ,                                      (11)

                                                                                                               1− σ 
                                                                                               k
where the first term on the right-hand side,                 Mkj   ≡ − ln               , can
                                                                                ∑n∈I :X k >0 β nj        k pk
                                                                                                        τnj n
                                                                                       nj
                                                                                    1− σ             
be treated as an importer-and-crop fixed effect and the final term, ε ij ≡ ln β ij τijk
                                                                     k          k            ,
reflects idiosyncratic demand shocks across varieties of different crops as well as trade
costs. Without loss of generality, we normalize these shocks such that

                                              ∑i∈I :Xijk >0 εkij = 0.                                                      (12)

                                                            17
Table 2: Parameter Estimates

Para-       Estimate                                                                                    1st -stage
                            Method                       Specification                       N
meter         (SE)                                                                                       (F-stat)
                                                      
               5.40                       ln Xijk /X jk = M kj + (1 − σ ) ln pki + εkij ,                 -0.06
    σ                          IV                                                         4,120
                                                              fk
              (1.26)                         ln F1 ∑ f ∈Fi Ai as IV for ln pki                           (19.64)
                                                   i



                                                      
               2.82                        ln X jk /X j = M j + (1 − κ ) ln Pjk + εkj ,                   -0.12
    κ                          IV                                                         408
                                                               fk
              (0.54)                          ln F1 ∑ f ∈F j A j as IV for ln Pjk                        (21.90)
                                                    j



                                                                                    2
                2.46                        minθ,(αi ) ∑i,k ln Qki (θ, αi ) − ln Qki
  θ                           NLS                                                          379           N/A
            [2.30,2.65]                            s.t. Li (θ, αi ) = Li ∀i
Notes: In the first row (estimates of σ) the standard error (SE) and first-stage F-statistic are clustered at the
crop-exporter and crop-importer levels. In the second row (estimates of κ) the SE and first-stage F-statistic
are clustered at the importer level. And in the third row (estimates of θ) the 95 % confidence interval is
estimated via a bootstrap procedure with replacement at the country level.


Equilibrium crop prices, of course, depend on demand shocks, εkij . To address the en-
dogeneity of crop prices, pik , in equation (11), we need exogenous supply shocks that are
correlated with pik , but uncorrelated with εkij . We construct the following instrument based
                                              
                                            fk
on the GAEZ data, Zik ≡ ln F1 ∑ f ∈Fi Ai , which corresponds to the log of the arithmetic
                                 i
average
  h     iof crop k’s   yields across all fields in country i. Our exclusion restriction is that
E Zik εkij = 0.
  The resulting IV estimate of σ is reported in Table 2. We estimate σ = 5.40 (with a
standard error of 1.26 when clustered at the crop-importer and crop-exporter levels), and
(as also reported in Table 2) the instrument is both strong, by conventional standards,
and of the expected negative sign (such that higher productivity leads to lower prices).
8 Although our estimation strategy is very different, this is in line with the estimates of
Broda and Weinstein (2006) whose median elasticity for our crops is equal to 2.6.9
                                                              1− σ
   Having estimated σ, we then solve for the remaining βkij τijk      as residuals. Namely,


    8 In principle, one could estimate a separate elasticity of substitution across varieties within each crop k,

that is a separate σ k for all k. When doing so, we cannot reject (at standard levels of statistical significance)
the null that all σ k s are equal (the p-value of this test is 0.17). This remains true when we expand our sample
to one that includes the 20 most important crops worldwide, in which case we estimate that σ = 5.13
(SE = 1.29). Similarly, we cannot reject (at standard levels) the null that there is a separate σj for each
importing country j (the p-value of this test is 0.08). For simplicity, and in line with the model developed in
Section 3, we therefore focus on one pooled estimate of σ that is the same across all crops and importers.
    9 This is excluding sugarcane and cotton whose GAEZ codes we have not been able to match to the

5-digit SITC codes used in Broda and Weinstein (2006).

                                                        18
                             1− σ
we find    βkij     for all i, j ∈ I and k ∈ K such that Xijk > 0 so that equations (11) and
                      τijk
(12) simultaneously hold for all crops and countries. Although this estimation procedure
does not allow us to identify separately lower-level demand-shifters, βkij , from trade costs,
                                 1− σ
τij , the composite shock, β ij τijk
 k                           k          , is all we need to construct equilibria in Section 6.10

Step 2. The second step of our procedure is similar to the first one: the price index, Pjk ,
plays the role of the individual crop price, pik , whereas crop expenditure, X kj , plays the
role of bilateral trade flows, Xijk .
    For all crops and countries with positive expenditure, X kj > 0, we can again use equa-
tion (10) and take logs to get
                                                      
                                           ln X kj /X j = M j + (1 − κ ) ln Pjk + εkj ,                         (13)

                                                                        1− κ          
where the first term on the right-hand side, M j ≡ − ln                 Pjl      , can now   ∑l ∈K:X l >0 βlj
                                                                                                     j
                                                                    
be treated as an importer fixed-effect and the final term, εkj ≡ ln βkj , reflects idiosyn-
cratic demand shocks across crops.11 Without loss of generality, we again normalize these
shocks such that
                                                             ∑k∈K:Xkj >0 εkj = 0.                               (14)

The key difference between Step 1 and Step 2 is that rather than observe Pjk directly in the
                                               1−σ 1/(1−σ)
                          k            k     k
data, we construct it as Pj = ∑i ∈I β ij τij pik               using data on crop prices, pik ,
                                        1− σ
as well as our estimates of σ and β ij τijk
                                    k          .
   To estimate κ, we still need to address the endogeneity between demand shocks, εkj ,
and prices, Pjk , at that higher level of aggregation. To do so, we now propose to instru-
                                                                            h       i
ment Pjk with Zkj , that is we impose the following exclusion restriction: E Zkj εkj = 0. As
reported in Table 2, our IV-estimate is κ = 2.82 (SE = 0.54, clustered at the importer
   10 Formally,   using equation (6), the good market equilibrium condition (9) can be rearranged in value
terms as                                                            1 − κ                    1− σ
                                                                βkj Pjk           βkij τijk pki
                                      pki Qki =   ∑ j∈I   βj            1 −κ                     1− σ .
                                                                    l   l              k       k  k
                                                             ∑l ∈K β j Pj      ∑n∈I βnj τnj pn
                                                                     1− σ
This only depends on βkij and τijk through the composite shock, βkij τijk   .
          are 2 out of 500 crop-and-country pairs in our dataset that have zero expenditures, i.e. X jk = 0.
   11 There
                                                                            1− σ
For any such pair (k, j), Step 1 of our procedure already implies that βkij τijk   = 0 for all exporters i.
Thus total demand for these two pairs, X jk , is necessarily zero, independently of the value of βkj .

                                                                        19
level). Like in Step 1, once the elasticity of substitution, κ, is known, we can solve for βkj
for all j ∈ I and k ∈ K such that X kj > 0 as residuals using equations (13) and (14).
Step 3. The final step of our procedure is the simplest. Since we have assumed log-
preferences at the upper-level, the demand shifters can be read directly from data on total
expenditure across crops. Specifically, equation (10) implies that β j = X j for all j ∈ I .12


5.2 Supply
                                                           fk
Since the productivity of fields across crops, Ai , is directly observable in the GAEZ data,
the technological parameters that need to be estimated are the extent of technological het-
erogeneity, θ, as well as the country-specific labor cost-shifters, αi . To emphasize the de-
pendence of our supply-side predictions on these unknown parameters, we let Qik (θ, αi )
denote predicted output of crop k in country i as a function of (θ, αi ),

                                                               θ       (θ −1)/θ
                                                          p kAfk
                                             f fk          i i
                     Qik (θ, αi ) ≡ ∑ f ∈F si Ai                                   .                  (15)
                                                                          
                                          i
                                                                      θ 
                                                     θ            l fl
                                                    αi + ∑l ∈K pi Ai

Similarly, we let Li (θ, αi ) denote predicted land allocated to all crops in country i as a
function of (θ, αi ),

                                                                              fk θ
                                                                                         
                                                      f
                                                                        pik Ai
                       Li (θ, αi ) ≡   ∑k∈K ∑ f ∈Fi si                                    θ  .
                                                                                            
                                                                           
                                                                                     fl
                                                              αiθ + ∑l ∈K pil Ai

                                                                                                   f
This is equal to the sum across all crops and all fields of the total field size, si , times the
                                        fk
share of parcels allocated to a crop, πi .
   To estimate (θ, αi ), we proceed as follows. Conditional on θ, we look for a labor-
cost shifter, αi , such that the total amount of land allocated to crops predicted by the
model, Li (θ, αi ), exactly matches the total amount of land allocated to crops in the data,
Li , country-by-country. Since the only role of αi in our model is to determine the share of
agricultural land, we believe that this is the most natural moment to estimate this param-

   12 In   principle, one could have assumed a more general upper-level utility function, Ui = Ci0 +
 αi ζ (ζ −1)/ζ
ζ −1 Ci        ,
              where the own-price elasticity ζ > 0 is allowed to be different from one. Under this as-
sumption, one could estimate ζ in the same way as we have estimated σ and κ. We have experimented
with such an approach, but given the small number of observations at that level of aggregation, i.e. 50, we
obtain very imprecise IV estimates of ζ. By necessity, we therefore assume log-preferences for our baseline
analysis, subject to the caveat discussed in footnote 3.

                                                      20
eter.13 Given a vector of labor cost-shifters (αi ) for all countries in our dataset, we then
search for the extent of heterogeneity θ such that output predicted by the model, Qik (θ, αi ),
best matches output observed in the data, Qik . Formally, we use Non-Linear Least Squares
(NLS) to estimate θ and αi for all i ∈ I as the solution of
                                                                                    2
                               min ∑i ∈I ∑ k∈K            ln Qik (θ, αi ) − ln Qik
                               θ,(αi )


subject to
                                         Li (θ, αi ) = Li , for all i ∈ I .

    Table 2 presents our parameter estimate of θ. We find that θ = 2.46 with a 95% con-
fidence interval given by [2.30,2.65].14 Since θ is inversely related to the within-field,
within-crop productivity dispersion in agriculture, this low estimate of θ suggests that
unobserved land heterogeneity is substantial.15
   The previous estimation procedure differs from our demand-side estimation in two
important ways. First, although our theory predicts that revenue for each field and crop
                                       fk θ
                                        
                           k  fk    k
takes a simple CES form, pi Qi ∝ pi Ai      , we do not have output disaggregated at the
                fk
field-level, Qi . If we did, the revenue elasticity at the field-level,
                                                                     which is governed by θ,
                                                                                     fk
could be estimated using a simple linear regression of ln pik Qi                          on ln pik and field fixed
effects, the same way we estimated σ and κ in Section 5.1. Given an estimate of θ, we
could then infer αi using the values of the field fixed-effects in country i. Here instead,
we need to aggregate output at the country-level for each crop, which breaks down the
log-linearity of our model and leads us to use Non-Linear Least Squares.
   Second, we do not have an instrument to deal with idiosyncratic supply shocks, i.e.
discrepancies between true productivity and GAEZ estimates of crop yields at the field
level. This leads us to adopt the extreme assumption, implicit in the estimation procedure

   13 For one country in our dataset, Egypt, the maximum amount of land that can be allocated to crops
according to the GAEZ data, i.e. the total area with positive crop yields in at least one crop, is strictly less
than the total amount of land allocated to crops in the FAO data. This reflects the fact that we use the same
GAEZ scenario for all countries in our dataset and that this scenario may be a poor description of Egypt’s
growing conditions. In Section 7.3, we explore the sensitivity of our counterfactual results to assigning
different countries to different GAEZ scenarios. For now, we deal with this issue in the simplest possible
way by setting α Egypt = 0 and increasing uniformly the size of all Egyptian fields with positive crop yields
so that L Egypt (θ, 0) = L Egypt .
   14 While there is no closed form for the standard error of θ we use a bootstrap procedure, with replace-

ment at the country level, with 400 replications to estimate the 95% confidence interval.
   15 There is also a large amount of variation between countries in our estimates of the the labor-cost

shifters, αi , though no systematic relationship between αi and country i’s level of development. This is
consistent with the observation that poor countries have lower wages, which tends to push labor costs
down, but also more labor intensive technologies, which tends to push labor costs up.

                                                          21
above, that any difference between predicted and observed output comes from measure-
ment error in output rather than productivity levels. With access to data on field-level
                                                                                        
                                                                                      fk
output, one could deal with measurement error in productivity by regressing ln pik Ai
              
            fk
on ln pik Qi     under the polar assumption that output is measured without errors. This
is the approach followed by Sotelo (2013). Reassuringly, using Peruvian data on crop out-
put disaggregated at the district-level, he finds an estimate of θ equal to 2.06, very close
to ours.


5.3 Goodness of Fit
Before we go on to considering how our model behaves under the counterfactual scenario
of new agricultural productivities brought about by climate change, it is natural to ask
how well the model fits the data within sample. Here, we report several moments—
related to output, land use, and trade flows—as generated by the model at the previously
estimated parameters and compare them to the same moments in the data.

Output. Figure 2 compares log output in the model, as given by equation (15), and in the
data at our preferred estimates of θ and (αi ). In Panel (a), we use the crop prices observed
in the raw data to compute output levels. Hence our demand estimates play no role
here. Panel (a) merely plots the fit of the moment that we use to estimate θ. Panel (b), in
contrast, uses the crop prices predicted by the model, that is the prices that solve the good
market clearing condition (9) given our estimates of demand- and supply-parameters.
  In both cases, there is a positive and statistically significant correlation between the
model and the data. In Panel (b), for instance, a regression of log observed output on
log predicted output, with a constant, yields a coefficient estimate of 0.67 with a standard
error (clustered at the country level) of 0.06. While the fit of the model in terms of log
output indicates that this model is capable of capturing, with some accuracy, the pattern
of international specialization, it is also clear that the absolute level of output in the model
does not fit that in the data particularly well. In particular, the estimated constant in
the regression illustrated in Panel (b) is equal to 4.07, implying that predicted output is
considerably lower than actual output. This is presumably not a first-order concern given
that our analysis focuses on changes in output due to climate change, rather than any
absolute level of output. It is likely that this inability to match output levels stems, at
least in part, from our assumption that agricultural technologies around the world only
differ in terms of their labor intensity. In Section 7.3, we propose an alternative estimation
procedure that deals explicitly with this issue.
   While Figure 2 only focuses on non-zero observations, the fit of the model along the

                                              22
                        20




                                                                                                      20
 log(observed output)




                                                                               log(observed output)
                        15




                                                                                                      15
                        10




                                                                                                      10
                        5




                                                                                                      5
                                  5          10             15     20                                          5           10             15     20
                                          log(predicted output)                                                         log(predicted output)

                              Panel (a) − output fit at observed prices                                    Panel (b) − output fit at predicted prices

Figure 2: Output Fit. Observed output versus predicted output, across all countries i and crops k, where
predicted output in panel (a) is calculated on the basis of FAOSTAT producer prices while that in panel (b)
is calculated on the basis of equilibrium model prices. 45-degree line shown in red.


extensive margin—that is, whether a crop is produced or not—is also relatively strong.
For example, the correlation between a dummy variable for a non-zero in the data, Qik >
0, and that for a non-zero in the model, Qik (θ, αi ) > 0, is 0.71 when using predicted prices
and 0.66 when using observed prices.
   Figure 3 illustrates that the model is more successful in terms of matching relative
revenue levels, even though this moment was not used in our estimation procedure. In
Panels (a) and (b) we plot the revenue share predicted by the model using observed and
predicted prices, respectively, against the equivalent revenue share in the FAO data for
each crop and country. The line of best fit in Panel (b) has a slope coefficient of 0.80
(SE = 0.07, clustered at the country level) and an estimated constant of -0.77; the R2 for
this regression is 0.52. The fit of our model along this dimension is reassuring since the
cross-sectional variation in revenue shares is closely connected to the underlying pattern
of comparative advantage.16
Land Use. Since we will model climate change as a counterfactual shock to land produc-
tivity, a key question is whether our model is able to replicate the observed allocation of

                  16 Figure
            3 suggests that predicted revenue shares are typically lower than observed revenue shares,
especially when using observed prices (Panel a). This is to be expected because the model predicts fewer
zeroes than in the data; that is, conditional on both observed and predicted revenue being positive, the
predicted value will be lower.

                                                                          23
                               −5




                                                                                                                     −5
 log(observed revenue share)




                                                                                       log(observed revenue share)
                               −10




                                                                                                                     −10
                               −15




                                                                                                                     −15
                               −20




                                                                                                                     −20
                                     −20   −15               −10             −5                                            −20    −15             −10             −5
                                                 log(predicted revenue share)                                                        log(predicted revenue share)

                                           Panel (a) − revenue share fit                                                         Panel (b) − revenue share fit
                                               at observed prices                                                                    at predicted prices

Figure 3: Revenue Share Fit. Observed revenue shares versus predicted revenue shares, across all countries
i and crops k, where the predicted revenue share in panel (a) is calculated on the basis of FAOSTAT producer
prices while that in panel (b) is calculated on the basis of equilibrium model prices. 45-degree line shown
in red.


land across crops and countries. Figure 4 sheds light on this issue by plotting land shares
                                                                                                                                                         f    fk
allocated to a given crop in a given country in the model, that is ∑ f ∈Fi si πi /Li , against
                                                                                                                                                                   fk
its value in the data. As before, Panel (a) uses observed prices to compute πi , whereas
Panel (b) uses predicted prices. We find that our model can also match the observed land
allocation, especially when predicted prices are used. In Panel (b), a regression of the
predicted land shares on the observed land shares, with a constant, yields a coefficient
estimate of 0.47 with SE = 0.05 (clustered at the country level) and R2 = 0.27.



Trade Flows. Finally, since one of our main goals is to assess whether international trade
may help alleviate the consequences of climate change, it is important to check that our
model also does a reasonable job at matching the observed cross-section of international
trade flows. Figure 5 plots bilateral trade flows in the model, Xijk , using predicted prices
against the same trade flows observed in the data. Note that since our model allows for
unobserved trade costs and demand shocks, the only reason why the model does not
perfectly match trade data is because predicted prices do not perfectly match observed
prices (which itself comes from the fact that output levels in the model do not perfectly
match output levels in the data). If we were to use observed prices to compute predicted

                                                                                  24
                            0




                                                                                                                            0
                            −5




                                                                                                                            −5
 log(observed land share)




                                                                                                 log(observed land share)
                            −10




                                                                                                                            −10
                            −15




                                                                                                                            −15
                            −20




                                                                                                                            −20
                            −25




                                                                                                                            −25
                                  −25         −20        −15          −10        −5     0                                         −25         −20        −15          −10        −5      0
                                                     log(predicted land share)                                                                       log(predicted land share)

                                        Panel (a) − land share fit at observed prices                                                   Panel (b) − land share fit at predicted prices

Figure 4: Land Use Fit. Observed versus predicted land shares, across all countries i and crops k, where the
predicted land share in panel (a) is calculated on the basis of FAOSTAT producer prices while that in panel
(b) is calculated on the basis of equilibrium model prices. 45-degree line shown in red.


trade flows, all observations would be, trivially, on the 45 degree line. In this sense the
goodness of fit for trade flows illustrated in Figure 5 also provides indirect evidence for
how observed prices compare to model-predicted prices.
  A regression of the predicted trade flows on the observed trade flows, with a constant,
yields a coefficient estimate of 0.78 with SE = 0.02 (clustered at the importer level) and
R2 = 0.74. The main discrepancy between theory and data comes from the fact that the
model predicts an excess of very small bilateral trade flows, i.e. values for which the
log is less than zero, with no counterparts in the data. This is to be expected because, in
the trade data, all bilateral trade flows are reported as integer values of 2009 US Dollars
(which presumably reflects rounding procedures) so the lowest non-zero observation is
1 USD. Since Figure 5 reports log trade flows, these very small numbers lead to average
log trade flows that are smaller on average than those observed in the data (although by
construction total expenditure on crops is the same in the model and in the data).


6 Counterfactual Simulations
In the previous section, we have shown that our model of international trade fits output,
land, and trade data reasonably well, including along some dimensions that were not


                                                                                            25
                                                    25
                                                    20
                                                    15
                              log(observed trade)

                                                    10
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    −5
                                                    −10




                                                          −10   −5   0        5      10      15   20   25
                                                                         log(predicted trade)




Figure 5: Bilateral Trade Fit. Observed bilateral trade versus predicted bilateral trade, across all exporters
i, importers j, and crops k, where predicted trade is calculated on the basis of equilibrium model prices.
45-degree line shown in red.


directly targeted in the estimation procedures of Sections 5.1 and 5.2. We now use our
estimated parameters to simulate our model and quantify the various channels through
which climate change affects agricultural markets in a global economy. To get a sense
of the magnitudes involved, Section 6.1 first describes the average productivity shocks
caused by climate change for all countries in our dataset. Section 6.2 then uses the full
structure of the model to quantify the overall welfare impact of climate change if produc-
tion and trade patterns can fully adjust. Finally, Sections 6.4 and 6.3 explore the extent to
which each of these two margin of adjustments help alleviate the adverse consequences
of climate change.


6.1 First-Order Approach
As discussed in Section 4.2, we model climate change as a shock to crop productivity
                                                               fk ′
                                                                
       fk
from Ai , as measured in the GAEZ data baseline scenario, to Ai     , as measured in the
GAEZ data under the climate change scenario. All other structural parameters are held
fixed at the values estimated in Section 5.
   A simple way to aggregate the consequences of climate change is to compute for each
country in our dataset the following weighted average of the micro-level productivity




                                                                            26
shocks that it is expected to trigger:

                                                                                                              fk                  fk
                                                                    ∆Ai =                   ∑ ∑          ρi ∆Ai ,                                                                             (16)
                                                                                        k∈K f ∈Fi

            fk                    fk
where ρi         ≡ pik Qi /Yi denotes the initial share of country i’s GDP associated with the
                                                                                                     fk ′
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                          fk
                                                                               fk                   Ai            − Ai
production of crop k in field f and                                         ∆Ai             ≡                 fk                   denotes the percentage change in
                                                                                                             Ai
productivity for that particular crop and location.
   The previous formula is attractive for two reasons. First, abstracting from terms-of-
trade movements, ∆Ai provides a first-order approximation to the welfare impact of cli-
mate change in country i, expressed as a percentage change of country i’s GDP.17 Second,
equation (16) relies as little as possible on the structure of the model. Crop prices, pik ,
                                                                                                             fk
country’s GDP, Yi , and productivity shocks, ∆Ai , are directly observable in the data.18
Thus we only need the structure of the model to go from observed revenue shares at the
                                                                                                                                                           fk
country level, ρik ≡ pik Qik /Yi , to revenue shares at the field level, ρi , which, unfortunately,
are not observable in the data. We now describe how we obtain those.
                                                      fk
   To predict revenue shares at the field level, ρi , we first use our model to compute the
                                                                                                                                                       fk               fk
share of crop k’s output associated with field f in country i, φi                                                                                               ≡ Qi /Qik . The same

   17 The argument can be sketched as follows. Let ri ( p, A) and ei ( p, ui ) denote the revenue and expenditure
functions in country i. One can express these two functions as:
                             (                                                            !           )
                                             ˆ                             ˆ            1                                                      1
                                                                                                fk                                                     f                fk
           ri ( p, A)         =        max               Ni A0i + ∑ ∑                       pki Ai (ω ) − ∑ ∑                                      A0i νi (ω )         Li (ω ) dω   ,
                                        fk                                          0                                                      0
                                       Li (ω )                          k   f                                                 k    f
                                                (                                                   )
           ei ( p, ui )       = min ui + ∑ ∑                            pkji Cjik   − αi ln Ci           .
                                        C kji                   j   k

Now consider a change in crop productivity, holding crop prices fixed. The Envelope Theorem implies
                                                                                                                                                                             fk
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                ˆ   1                                                                 ˆ       1                                         dAi (ω )
                                                              fk      fk                                                               fk             fk
      dri ( p, A)         =       ∑∑                    pki dAi (ω ) Li             (ω ) dω = ∑ ∑                                 pki Ai       ( ω ) Li         (ω )         fk
                                                                                                                                                                                        dω,
                                  k      f      0                                                        k        f       0                                              Ai (ω )
      dei ( p, ui )       = 0.
                                  fk                      fk
                              dA i (ω )             dA i
Using the fact that             fk              =        fk    , this implies
                              A i (ω )                  Ai

                                                                                                                                           fk
                                                               dri ( p, A) − dei ( p, ui )        f k dA i
                                                                                           = ∑ ∑ ρi      fk
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                        ri ( p, A)           k f       A                               i

which is the counterpart of equation (16) above.
   18 We obtain GDP data in 2009 for all countries from the World Bank, except Myanmar whose GDP is

taken from the IMF.

                                                                                             27
algebra used to derive equation (8) in Section 3 implies
                                                                                          (1−θ )/θ
                                               fk θ                                 fl θ
                                                                                   
                                             Ai   + ∑l ∈K αiθ                 pil Ai
                            fk
                          φi     =                                                  ,
                                             θ                     θ (1−θ )/θ
                                           gk                       gl
                                   ∑ g∈Fi Ai       αiθ + ∑l ∈K pil Ai


which can be computed using our estimates of αi and θ as well as the GAEZ productivity
                                               fk                          fk         fk
estimates and price data. Given a value of φi , we then use the identity ρi = ρik × φi to
obtain revenue shares at the field level for all crops and countries.19
   Column 2 of Table 3 reports our estimates of ∆Ai for the 50 countries in our dataset.
For the most affected country, Malawi, ∆Ai corresponds to a whopping 38% decrease
in total GDP. For most other countries, the consequences of climate change are an order
of magnitude smaller, but remain non-trivial. For the median country, Indonesia, ∆Ai
corresponds to a 1.26% decrease in total GDP.20
  An obvious reason why the welfare consequences of climate change predicted by our
model may appear modest for most countries is that the crops considered in our analysis
only represent a small fraction of GDP in each country. To get a sense of the role played
by the size of the agricultural sector, Column 1 reports the total value of crop output di-
vided by GDP for each of the 50 countries in our dataset. Not surprisingly, the correlation
between this ratio and ∆Ai is high, -0.85. Malawi, in particular, which was an outlier in
terms of the aggregate productivity shock, ∆Ai , is also an outlier in terms of its crop out-
put to GDP ratio. For Indonesia, the value of crop output divided by GDP is 8.12%. So in
output terms the estimated effect of climate change, -1.26% of GDP, corresponds to a 16%
decrease in total crop value.
   The last row of Table 3 reports
                                   the weighted sum of the productivity shocks across
                          Yi
countries, ∆AW ≡ ∑i ∈I Y ∆Ai , where YW is world GDP. An appealing feature of this
                                     W
statistic is that it is not affected by terms-of-trade effects, which cancel out when summing
up across countries. According to this formula, climate change for the world as a whole
amounts to a 0.34% decrease in world GDP.21 In the next subsection, we demonstrate that
   19 Alternatively,                                                                                    fk
                       one could directly use the predictions of the model in terms of output levels, Qi , and
                                                          fk         fk
compute revenue shares at the field-level as ρ i = pki Qi /Yi . This would lead to different revenue shares
both at the field- and country-level because our model does not perfectly match output levels in the data.
Since our goal here is to rely on the structure of the model as little as possible, we find it preferable to use
                      fk
predicted shares, φi , which allow us to match perfectly observed revenue shares, ρki , at the country level.
   20 Since there is an even number of countries in our dataset, 50, the “median country” refers to the country

such that 24 countries have larger losses and 25 countries have smaller losses in absolute value.
   21 An alternative way to approximate the aggregate consequences of climate change without using at all

the structure of our model would be to compute ∆ Āi = ∑k∈K ρki ∆ Āki , where ∆ Āki denotes the arithmetic

                                                                28
the previous number provides a very good approximation of the welfare consequences of
climate change, at least at the world level, when both production and trade patterns are
allowed to adjust.


6.2 Full Adjustment
To measure the overall welfare consequences of climate change under full adjustment,
we now solve for competitive equilibria before and after climate change. The first equi-
                                                                                   fk
librium is characterized by equations (6), (8), and (9) with crop productivity, Ai , as
measured in the pre-climate change GAEZ data and all other structural parameters as
described in Section 5. The second equilibrium is characterized by the same equations
                                                                               fk ′
                                                                                
and structural parameters, except for crop productivity, which is now set to Ai     , as
measured in the post-climate change GAEZ data.22
    Given quasi-linear preferences, welfare changes can be simply computed as changes
in social surplus, again expressed as a fraction of GDP in the initial equilibrium:

                               (Yi )′ − Yi + ( βi ln Ci − Pi Ci )′ − ( βi ln Ci − Pi Ci )
                     ∆Wi =                                                                ,                   (17)
                                                         Yi

where ′ denotes variables associated with the counterfactual equilibrium. ∆Wi corre-
sponds both to the equivalent variation and the compensating variation associated with
a given counterfactual scenario expressed as a fraction of country i’s GDP in the initial
equilibrium.23 Column 3 of Table 3 reports ∆Wi for all countries in our dataset. While the
welfare consequences of climate change differ across countries, welfare losses tend to be
of the same order of magnitude as what the first-order approximation given in Section 6.1
predicted. For Malawi, the welfare loss is now equal to 49.1%, whereas for the median
country, Malaysia in this counterfactual exercise, the welfare loss is equal to 0.55%. Part
of the discrepancy between the first-order approximation and the predictions of the full
               fk
average of ∆Ai across     all fields f within country i for crop k. At the world level, such an approach would
lead to ∆ ĀW ≡ ∑i∈I YYWi ∆ Āi = −0.21% of world GDP, slightly smaller in absolute value than the average
productivity shock, ∆AW , obtained using the predictions of our model at the field level.
    22 Our counterfactual exercise therefore rules out endogenous technology adoption in the agricultural

sector in response to climate change. Consumption and factor allocations are free to vary in response to
                       fk        fk
TFP shocks from Ai to ( Ai )′ , but production functions remain given by equations (8). Although adding
more margins of adjustment would further mitigate the consequences of climate change, it is not clear
how these extra margins would affect (if at all) the relative importance of changes in production and trade
patterns studied in the next two subsections.
    23 Since the total value of crops predicted by our model is strictly lower than observed GDP for all coun-

tries in our dataset, we implicitly set labor productivity, A0i , such that country i’s GDP in the initial equilib-
rium exactly matches GDP in the data.

                                                        29
Table 3: Baseline counterfactual results
                                                           welfare change (as % of total GDP)
                                    weighted avg.
                      crop output   productivity          full       no production         no trade
                         as % of       change        adjustment       adjustment         adjustment
                       total GDP      (i.e. ∆Ai )     (i.e ∆Wi )       (i.e. ∆WiP )      (i.e. ∆WiT )
Country                    (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)                (5)
Algeria                  2.51           -0.88           -0.94             -1.60              -0.99
Argentina                4.24           0.20             0.54             0.46               0.61
Australia                0.79           -0.23           -0.08             -0.07              -0.07
Bangladesh               12.36          -3.44           -8.18            -12.37              -8.19
Brazil                   3.19           -1.94           -1.47             -2.77              -1.57
Cameroon                 9.38           -3.07           -3.18             -4.40              -3.21
Canada                   0.60           0.26             0.59             0.47               0.63
China                    4.56           -0.46            0.17             -1.81              0.19
Colombia                 2.36           -1.47           -1.75             -3.85              -1.80
D.R. Congo               15.35          -7.04          -10.70            -19.91             -10.71
Cote d’Ivoire            7.30           -2.52           -2.79             -5.19              -3.00
Ecuador                  8.26           -4.61           -0.24             -1.08              -0.16
Egypt                    5.25           -1.96           -0.34             -2.33              -0.97
Ethiopia                 11.93          -3.75           -0.66             -4.97              -0.66
France                   0.33           -0.08           -0.03             -0.02              -0.04
Germany                  0.17           0.01             0.02             -0.01              0.03
Ghana                    10.72          -6.37          -10.63            -17.40             -10.64
Greece                   1.19           -0.13            0.00             -0.05              0.00
India                    7.41           -1.84           -1.65             -2.71              -1.65
Indonesia                8.12           -1.26           -2.53             -5.17              -2.71
Iran                     2.46           -0.94           -0.43             -0.99              -0.44
Italy                    0.38           -0.07           -0.03             -0.08              -0.03
Japan                    0.62           0.04             0.04             -0.09              0.04
Kazakhstan               3.48           -0.49           -0.75             -2.27              -0.78
Korea, South             1.40           0.17            -0.33             -0.68              -0.34
Malawi                   74.92         -38.41          -49.07            -82.36             -49.25
Malaysia                 4.78           -0.35           -0.55             -1.10              -0.58
Mexico                   1.06           -0.39           -0.38             -0.85              -0.40
Morocco                  3.27           -1.57           -1.87             -2.97              -1.92
Burma                    49.81          -5.96          -11.17            -18.20             -11.09
Netherlands              0.33           0.08             0.15             0.02               0.13
Nigeria                  7.92           -2.59           -5.34             -8.68              -5.39
Pakistan                 8.51           -1.74           -1.34             -2.31              -1.27
Philippines              5.65           -1.32           -1.89             -4.04              -1.94
Poland                   0.66           0.06             0.14             0.18               0.15
Romania                  2.80           -0.60           -0.50             -0.57              -0.51
Russia                   1.62           -0.03            1.06             0.10               1.07
South Africa             1.24           -0.54           -0.52             -0.95              -0.52
Spain                    0.43           -0.09            0.01             -0.12              -0.02
Sudan                    3.89           -3.35           -6.84            -10.82              -7.55
Tanzania                 19.56          -5.91           -5.43             -9.70              -5.43
Thailand                 6.05           -2.61           -7.33            -12.02              -7.72
Turkey                   2.85           -0.30            0.15             -0.19              0.14
Uganda                   33.83          -3.82           -3.95             -7.61              -3.96
Ukraine                  5.58           -0.54           -0.19             0.15               -0.11
United Kingdom           0.16           0.00             0.19             0.05               0.21
United States            0.83           -0.14           -0.08             -0.12              -0.08
Uzbekistan               20.76          -2.22            1.43             -1.05              1.43
Venezuela                2.50           -2.24           -3.76             -6.65              -4.01
Viet Nam                 22.50          -4.16           -6.53            -11.52              -6.80
World Total              1.80           -0.34           -0.26             -0.78              -0.27



                                                30
model comes from terms-of-trade effects.
                                         Indeed, we see that for the world as a whole,
                                     Yi
the welfare change ∆WW ≡ ∑i ∈I Y ∆Wi is now equal to 0.26% of World GDP, close
                                      W
to the 0.34% obtained in Section 6.1. Since the value of output in our 10 crops is equal to
1.8% of world GDP, this corresponds to about one sixth of total crop value.


6.3 No Production Adjustment
Taking the previous numbers as our benchmark, we now explore the extent to which
changes in patterns of specialization at the field level can help countries adapt to and
mitigate the consequences of climate change. To do so, we ask the following counter-
factual question. Imagine a world economy in which preferences and technology are as
described in Section 3, but factor allocation cannot adjust to changes in productivity from
          fk ′
           
  fk
Ai to Ai       . How much larger would have been the welfare losses, ∆WiP , around the
world?
  We construct our counterfactual equilibrium under climate change without produc-
tion adjustment as follows. On the supply side, we assume that each parcel ω produces
the same crop (if any) before and after climate change. Thus total output of crop k in
country i in the counterfactual equilibrium is given by

           ′
      Qik        =
                                                                                                                                                o
                                  fk ′
                                                                                   n
           f fk                                           fk                                  f                  f1                 fK
∑        s π E
    f ∈Fi i i
                                Ai       (ω )       pik Ai     (ω ) = max               A0i νi    (ω ) ,   p1i Ai (ω ) , ..., piK Ai     (ω )          ,


                                                                                                                      fk ′                    fk ′
                                                                                                                                             
                 fk
where πi is still given by equation (7). Using the fact that                                                         Ai      (ω ) =          Ai        ×
               
    fk       fk
  Ai (ω ) /Ai , this can be rearranged as

                                ′
                                                               fk ′        f k (θ −1)/θ
                                                                          
                                                      f
                          Qik        = ∑ f ∈F si              Ai          πi                  , for all i ∈ I and k ∈ K.                           (18)
                                                i


Compared to equation (8), which was used to compute output levels under climate change
                                              fk
in Section 6.2, the only difference is that πi corresponds to parcel shares in the initial
                                                                                      fk ′
                                                                                       
equilibrium, not the optimal parcel allocation given the new productivity levels, Ai       .
All other equilibrium conditions are unchanged: the vector of consumption satisfies equa-
tion (6) at the new crop prices and supply equals demand for all varieties of all crops, as
stated in equation (9).
    Column 4 of Table 3 reports the welfare effects of climate change in the absence of fac-
tor reallocation, ∆WiP . For the most affected country, Malawi, the adverse consequences

                                                                               31
of climate change under this counterfactual scenario, -82%, are almost twice as large as
those reported in Section 6.2. For the world as a whole, a similar picture emerges: ∆WWP

is equal to -0.78%, three times the loss obtained when production is allowed to adjust at
the field level.24
   If the productivity shocks caused by climate change had been uniform across crops
and fields, and hence comparative advantage stable, such a margin of adjustment would
have been irrelevant. But this is not the case in our dataset. As Figure 1 already suggested,
there is a considerable amount of heterogeneity across space in terms of the consequences
of climate change. The importance of factor reallocations is best described by plotting the
welfare loss caused by climate change without reallocation against the same welfare loss
with reallocation for all countries in our dataset. In Panel (a), almost all observations lie
well below the 45 degree line.25 This illustrates how farmers’ ability to substitute crop
production in response to changes in comparative advantage—which our extremely rich
micro-level dataset gives us a unique opportunity to study—may substantially mitigate
the ill-effects of climate change.


6.4 No Trade Adjustment
To conclude our quantitative analysis, we turn to the consequences of international trade.
Given the ability of farmers to switch production at the field-level, our goal is to explore
the extent to which adjustments to trade patterns may further alleviate the adverse con-
sequences of climate change. Since international trade flows are the difference between
production and consumption, this last counterfactual exercise will also indirectly shed
light on the importance of adjustments on the demand-side.
    We follow the same basic approach as in Section 6.3. We consider a world economy
in which preferences and technology are as described in Section 3, but international trade
                                                                           fk ′
                                                                            
                                                                 fk
flows cannot adjust in response to productivity changes from Ai to Ai           . Formally,
we assume that in addition to the good market clearing condition (9), consumption and



   24 Using  the same logic as in footnote 17, one can check that the number presented in Section 6.1,
∆AW = −0.34%, remains a first-order approximation to the welfare change without production adjust-
ments, ∆WW  P = −0.78%. Nevertheless, we see that the first-order approximation is much less accurate

under this counterfactual scenario. This reflects larger changes in the price of crops in response to climate
change when factors cannot reallocate across fields. The same price effects also explain why social surplus
                                                                fk
at the world level is not a linear function of productivity, Ai , and, in turn, why ∆AW does not offer a
lower-bound on welfare changes at the world level.
   25 Individual countries may be better off in the counterfactual equilibrium without adjustments because

of strong, positive terms-of-trade effects.

                                                     32
                                               ′         ′
output in this new counterfactual equilibrium, Cijk and Qik , satisfy

                                     ′                ′                             .
              ∑       τk
                  j6=i ij
                                Cijk                  Qik        =        ∑        τ k Ck
                                                                               j6=i ij ij
                                                                                                 Qik , for all i ∈ I and k ∈ K.   (19)


Equation (19) requires total exports of a crop k in country i to remain a constant fraction of
its output.26 If country i is under autarky in the initial equilibrium, equation (19) merely
requires country i to remain under autarky, as in the simple example of Section 2.
   For equation (19) to hold in a competitive equilibrium under the new productivity
           fk ′
            
levels, Ai      , we relax equation (5) and assume that counterfactual crop prices satisfy

                                           ′                   ′
                                     pijk        =   δik τijk    pik , for all i 6= j ∈ I and k ∈ K,                              (20)

where the wedge δik corresponds to the shadow price of the quantity restriction (19). It is
equivalent to an ad-valorem trade tax. A value of δik strictly greater than one corresponds
to an export tax on crop k in country i, whereas a value of δik strictly lower than one
corresponds to an export subsidy. Combining equations (6) and (20), we can rearrange
crop consumption as

                                                   ′ −σ                
                                           1− κ
                                        k ′        pkj             βkji       δkji τji
                                
    ′           βki Pi
    Ckji = β i              1− κ                        ′ 1−σ , for all i, j ∈ I and k ∈ K,
                             ′
                                             
                       l   l               k    k  k     k
               ∑l ∈K β i Pi         ∑n∈I β ni δni τni pn
                                                                                               (21)
                                k      k               k
where we use the convention δji ≡ δj if i 6= j and δji ≡ 1 otherwise. All other equilibrium
conditions are unchanged so that a counterfactual equilibrium can now be defined as
                ′                 ′            ′
consumption, Ckji , output, Qik , prices, pik , and wedges, δik , such that equations
                                                                           

(8), (9), (19), and (21) hold.27
    Column 5 of Table 3 reports the welfare effects of climate change in the absence of


                                                                                     ′             ′
   26 Formally, equation (19) only applies to crops and countries such that Qki , Qki       > 0. If Qki = 0,
we do not impose any constraint since there are no exports to speak of in the counterfactual equilibrium.
   ′
If Qki > 0 but Qki = 0, there may be exports in the counterfactual equilibrium in spite of exports being
zero in the initial equilibrium. In this case, we assume exports remain equal to zero in the counterfactual
equilibrium.
   27 In the few cases in which a country i produces a crop k, but does not consume it, the wedge δ k is not
                                                                                                         i
uniquely determined since country i will always export 100% of its output in the counterfactual equilib-
rium, regardless of the value of δik . In such cases, we simply set δik to one, which is the optimal value from
the world point of view.

                                                                                33
trade adjustments, ∆WiT .28 We see that for the median country in our baseline scenario,
Malaysia, the welfare loss caused by climate change, 0.58%, is of the same order of mag-
nitude as the welfare loss in Section 6.2, albeit slightly smaller due to negative terms-of-
trade effects. Similarly, at the aggregate level, the welfare loss at the world level is now
equal to 0.27%, very close to the 0.26% found in the model with full adjustment.
   Like in Section 6.4, the small impact of international trade on the consequences of
climate change is best seen in Panel (b), which plots the welfare loss caused by climate
change without trade adjustment against the same welfare loss with trade adjustment for
all countries in our dataset. Almost all observations are now around the 45 degree line,
suggesting that for most countries in our dataset, changes in the pattern of exports across
crops do little to alleviate the consequences of climate change.
   In summary, our various counterfactual exercises suggest that climate change will
lower world GDP by 0.26%, but only if farmers can and do adjust to the new climate
by switching what they grow. In an environment in which such production adjustments
are prohibited (or too costly to take place), the decrease in world GDP would be three
times as large (-0.78%). In contrast, trade adjustments, at least as formalized in this sub-
section, appear to play a minor role. Prohibiting changes in export shares across countries
in response to climate change only raises the world GDP loss from 0.26% to 0.27%. We
now investigate the sensitivity of these conclusions.


7 Sensitivity Analysis
We split our sensitivity analysis into two parts. The first part maintains the same assump-
tions and estimated parameters as in our baseline analysis, but uses different forecasts of
                                        fk ′
                                         
productivity after climate change, Ai        , based on alternative general circulation models
and emission scenarios. In short, the economic environment is the same, but the nature
of climate change itself is allowed to vary. The second part instead uses the GAEZ es-
timates associated with the Hadley CM3 A1FI model, but relaxes auxiliary assumptions
about demand, supply, and trade costs. For expositional purposes, we only report welfare
changes for the world as a whole, expressed as a fraction of world GDP.




        all countries, ∆WiT is inclusive of country i’s tax revenues in the counterfactual equilibrium, which
   28 For

may be positive or negative depending on whether countries tax or subsidize exports. Ignoring tax rev-
enues has very little effect on our results.

                                                     34
7.1 Future Climatic Conditions
In our baseline analysis, we use post-climate change GAEZ productivity estimates based
on the predictions of the Hadley CM3 A1FI model. As discussed in Nakicenovic and
Swart (2000), there is substantial amount of uncertainty surrounding various emission
scenarios, with no clear “most likely” or “central” scenario. The goal of this first extension
is to explore the sensitivity of our counterfactual results to alternative climatic predictions.
    In addition to the predictions of the Hadley CM3 A1FI model the GAEZ estimates are
available under 10 other GCM-SRES combinations: the Hadley CM3 model, under sce-
narios B1, B2, and A2; the MPI ECHAM4 model, under scenarios B2 and A2; the CSIRO
Mk2 model, under scenarios B1, B2, and A2; and the CCCma CGCM2, under scenarios
B2 and A2. Each of these general circulation models has been developed independently
by a team of climatologists from a different country and then combined with the emis-
sion scenarios from the IPCC programme. Compared to scenario A1FI, scenario B1 fea-
tures the same pattern of population growth, with peaks in mid-century, but with rapid
changes towards clean and resource-efficient technologies. In contrast, scenarios A2 and
B2 assume that global population is continuously increasing, but with slower and faster
technological change and economic growth, respectively, than under scenarios A1 and
B1.
   Table 4 reports the world welfare changes under the future climatic conditions pre-
dicted by all available combinations of general circulation models and emission scenarios,
with each row corresponding to a distinct combination. Except for the new post-climate
                                fk ′
                                 
change productivity levels, Ai       , all assumptions and estimated parameters are the
same as in previous sections. The first row corresponds to the predictions of the Hadley
CM3 A1FI model, as already presented in Table 3. Table 4 makes it clear that there is a
large amount of uncertainty over how future climatic conditions will affect agricultural
productivity. As can be seen in Column 1, the average change in crop productivity at
the world level, ∆AW , ranges from -0.34% according to the Hadley CM3 A1FI model to
+0.06% according to the CCCma CGCM2 B2 model. Interestingly, most of this variation
comes from the use of different general circulation models rather than alternative assump-
tions on population and economic growth under different emission scenarios, A1FI, A2,
B1 or B2.
  As one might have expected, differences in predicted aggregate productivity shocks,
∆AW , then map into differences in predicted welfare changes under our different counter-
                           P , and ∆W T . Welfare losses are the largest under the Hadley
factual scenarios, ∆WW , ∆WW         W
CM3 A1FI model and the lowest —they are actually gains—under the CCCma CGCM2


                                              35
Table 4: Counterfactual results under alternative future climatic conditions
                                                         world total welfare change (as % of total GDP)
                                  world total weighted        full         no output          no trade
                                  average productivity   adjustment       adjustment        adjustment
                                   change (i.e. ∆AW )     (i.e ∆WW )      (i.e. ∆WWP)       (i.e. ∆WW T )

Climate change scenario                    (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)
Hadley CM3 A1FI (Baseline)               -0.34              -0.26            -0.78             -0.27
Hadley CM3 B1                            -0.13              -0.10            -0.32             -0.10
Hadley CM3 B2                            -0.20              -0.17            -0.44             -0.17
Hadley CM3 A2                            -0.32              -0.24            -0.65             -0.25
MPI ECHAM4 B2                            -0.06              0.01             -0.23              0.01
MPI ECHAM4 A2                            -0.08              0.10             -0.30              0.09
CSIRO Mk2 B1                             -0.12              -0.00            -0.22             -0.01
CSIRO Mk2 B2                             -0.15              -0.04            -0.29             -0.05
CSIRO Mk2 A2                             -0.18              -0.04            -0.39             -0.05
CCCma CGCM2 B2                           0.06               0.15             -0.11              0.15
CCCma CGCM2 A2                           -0.16              -0.03            -0.34             -0.04



B2 model. In terms of relative welfare losses across counterfactual scenarios, however, the
picture that emerges is the same as in Section 6. Without production adjustments, welfare
losses are much larger. In contrast, trade adjustments have very little effect .


7.2 Extensive Margin of Trade
In our baseline analysis, estimated demand parameters are such that if a country does not
buy a crop from a particular country, then it will never buy that crop from that country
                                                                          1− σ
in any counterfactual scenario. As discussed in Section 5.1, we set βkij τijk    = 0. This
implies that the set of exporting countries from which an importing country sources each
crop cannot adjust in response to climate change. While consistent with the theoretical
framework presented in Section 3, this feature of our estimation procedure mechanically
reduces the importance of international trade as a margin of adjustment since changes at
the extensive margin are de facto ruled out.
   Here, we propose to interpret zero trade flows less literally than in Section 5.1 by treat-
ing them instead as random missing observations. Intuitively, this assumption should
now lead us to overestimate the magnitude of changes in trade flows in response to cli-
mate change since zero trade flows are very likely to have lower demand and higher
trade costs
          than     non-zero trade flows in practice. Formally, we start from the estimates,
                1− σ 
εkij ≡ ln βkij τijk      , of the composite of lower-level demand-shifters and trade costs
obtained in Section 5.1 for non-zero trade flows. We then project these residuals on a crop-
and-exporter fixed effect, dik , and a vector of trade barriers, xij , suggested by the previous



                                                 36
Table 5: Counterfactual results under alternative modeling assumptions
                                                                 world total welfare change (as % of total GDP)
                                      world total weighted            full       no production         no trade
                                      average productivity       adjustment       adjustment         adjustment
                                       change (i.e. ∆AW )         (i.e ∆WW )      (i.e. ∆WWP)        (i.e. ∆WW T )

Modeling assumption                            (1)                     (2)             (3)                 (4)
Baseline                                     -0.34                  -0.26             -0.78              -0.27
Treatment of zero trade flows                -0.34                  -0.21             -0.74              -0.23
Heterogeneous non-land inputs                -0.33                  -0.18             -0.70              -0.20
Heterogeneous θ                              -0.34                  -0.24             -0.77              -0.25
Intranational trade costs                    -0.33                  -0.27             -0.78              -0.28



gravity literature:
                                        εkij = dik + χ · xij + ǫijk .                                      (22)

The first term, dik , aims to capture systematic differences in quality across varieties. The
second term, xij , includes the (log) physical distance between the national capitals of
countries i and j; a dummy that is equal to 1 if i = j and zero otherwise in order to
allow for home bias; and a vector of dummy variables for whether countries i and j share
a common border, a common language, colonial ties or whether they are part of a re-
gional trade agreement.29 The final term, ǫijk , captures all other sources of trade costs and
demand differences.
    Row 2 of Table 5 reports world welfare changes results under the assumption that
      1− σ
βkij τijk    = exp(dik + χ · xij ) for all zero trade flows, where dik and χ are obtained by
estimating equation (22) using OLS.30 To ease comparisons, Row 1 again reports our base-
line counterfactual results, as described in Table 3. Not surprisingly, changes in trade
flows at the extensive margin imply that the welfare loss under full adjustment is now
smaller than before, with slightly larger gains from trade adjustments. Here ∆WW and
∆WW T are equal to -0.21% and -0.23%, respectively, compared to -0.26% and -0.27% in Sec-

tion 6. Similarly, the impact of climate change without production adjustment is now
equal to -0.74% rather than -0.78%. Overall, though, we find that the treatment of zero
trade flows has very little effects on our quantitative results.




  29 We  obtain data on geographic barriers from the ‘Gravity dataset’ produced by CEPII. Distance mea-
sures are computed as the (geodesic) distance between national capitals. We obtain very similar results if
we use the population-weighted average distance among each country pair’s largest cities instead.
   30 The crop-and-exporter fixed-effect d k is missing whenever country i does not produce crop k. In such
                                           i
instances, we use the arithmetic average of the crop-and-exporter fixed effects over all crops produced by
country i as our proxy for dki .

                                                     37
7.3 Technological Differences
The GAEZ productivity estimates used in our baseline analysis allow for an unusually
rich amount of heterogeneity, both before and after climate change. To harness this large
amount of micro-level data, we have chosen to use a parsimonious representation of
technology that otherwise severely restricts technological differences across countries. In
practice, one may imagine that beyond land and labor, developed and developing coun-
tries use very different amounts of fertilizers and other complementary inputs. Similarly,
one may imagine that the extent of productivity heterogeneity not measured in the GAEZ
data—and parametrized by θ in our model—may be very different as well in developed
and developing countries.
   To explore the quantitative importance of the first observation, we take advantage of
the fact that, as mentioned in Section 4.1, GAEZ productivity estimates are also avail-
able under different scenarios regarding the application of complementary inputs. In our
baseline results, we have used the scenario referred to as “high inputs” with “rain-fed”
water supply for all countries in our dataset. We now instead assume that productiv-
                                                                                    fk ′
                                                                                     
                                                                          fk
ity estimates for developing countries before and after climate change, Ai and Ai        ,
are given by the scenario referred to as “low inputs” with “rain-fed” water supply. Pro-
ductivity estimates for developed countries as well as other estimated parameters are
unchanged.31 The results of our counterfactual exercises under this alternative assump-
tion are reported in Row 3 of Table 5. Compared to our baseline results, welfare losses
caused by climate change are consistently smaller in all counterfactual scenarios. This
is consistent with the observation that developing countries tend to be more negatively
affected by climate change and that switching from “high inputs” to “low inputs” tends
to reduce agricultural output in these countries. Finally, note that although welfare losses
are smaller in all scenarios, relative differences across scenarios are similar to those pre-
sented in Section 6. As before, production adjustments appear to matter much more than
trade adjustments.
   To explore the quantitative importance of the second observation, we again break
down countries in our dataset into two groups, developed and developing, and estimate
a separate shape parameter for the distribution of within-field, within-crop productivity,
θDeveloping and θDeveloped , using the exact same procedure as in Section 5.2 for each sub-
sample. We find θDeveloping = 2.71 and θDeveloped = 2.29, suggesting more unobserved
heterogeneity on average among developed countries. The implications of this alterna-

  31 Developing  countries correspond to low and lower-middle income countries according to the World
Bank in 2009, whereas developed countries correspond to upper-middle and high income countries. There
are 21 developing countries and 29 developed countries in our dataset.

                                                 38
tive source of heterogeneity across countries for our counterfactual results are reported in
Row 4 of Table 5. Since both θDeveloping and θDeveloped remain close to our baseline estimate
of θ = 2.46, there is very little difference between these new results and those presented
in Section 6. Allowing for different degrees of heterogeneity between developed and de-
veloping countries lead to changes in ∆WW , ∆WW   P , and ∆W T smaller than 0.02% under
                                                             W
our three counterfactual scenarios.


7.4 Intranational Trade Costs
Our baseline model does not impose any restriction on the structure of iceberg trade costs
between countries. They are isomorphic to demand-shifters that can be simply recovered
as residuals in the demand equation (11). In contrast, our baseline model rules out trade
costs within countries. Crops are implicitly assumed to be shipped freely from the fields
in which they are produced to the cities in which they are consumed or the ports from
which they are exported. The goal of this final extension is to explore the robustness of
our results to the introduction of intranational trade costs.
   Compared to the baseline model presented in Section 3, we assume that in any given
country, crops must be shipped from the field in which they are produced to the national
capital in which they will be either consumed locally or traded internationally. Crucially,
                                                                         f
intranational shipments are now also subject to iceberg trade costs, τi , which depend
on the distance between field f and the national capital of country i. This new model
is therefore identical to the baseline model, but for the fact that the relevant, trade-cost
                                                                           fk  f
adjusted productivity of field f for crop k in country i is now equal to Ai /τi .
                                                                               f
   To revisit the results of Section 6, we therefore only need measures of τi . The simplest
way to obtain such measures is to use the OLS estimate, χdist , of
                                                                  theeffect of log-distance
                                                                          1− σ 
on the composite of demand shifters and trade costs, εkij ≡ ln βkij τijk          , computed
in Section 7.2. In our model, the parameter χdist measures the elasticity of trade flows, Xijk ,
with respect to distance. Our OLS estimate implies an elasticity of trade flows with re-
spect to physical distance equal to χdist = −0.83, very much in line with existing estimates
in the literature; see Disdier and Head (2008).
    Under the assumption that international and intranational trade costs vary with dis-
tance in the same way, we can then approximate (log) intranational trade costs by

                                    f               f
                               ln τi = χdist ln(disti )/(1 − σ),                           (23)

           f
where disti denotes the physical distance between field f and the national capital of coun-


                                              39
try i and σ = 5.40 corresponds to the IV estimate obtained in Section 5.1.32 Row 5 of Table
5 reports the results of our counterfactual exercises in the presence of intranational trade
costs as measured by equation (23). These numbers again point towards similar effects of
climate change on world GDP under full adjustment, -0.27%, with changes in production
patterns playing a more important role than changes in trade patterns. In a counterfac-
tual scenario without production adjustments, the welfare loss associated with climate
change would again be -0.78% of world GDP compared to -0.28% in a counterfactual
scenario without trade adjustments. The robustness of our results to the introduction of
intranational trade costs suggests that there is little correlation in practice between the
extent of productivity shocks across fields and their distance to the capital city.


8 Concluding Remarks
A large agronomic literature has modeled the implications of climate change for a variety
of crops and locations around the world. The goal of this paper has been to move be-
yond these micro-level studies and aggregate them together into a coherent, macro-level
understanding of how climate change will affect agricultural markets.
   Aggregating micro-level impacts in a globalized world means that impacts depend
on the simple economics of comparative advantage—that is, the impact of micro-level
shocks do not only depend on their average level, but also on their dispersion over space.
To measure the impact of climate change at the micro-level we draw on an extremely
rich dataset that contains agronomist’s estimates about the productivity—both before and
after climate change—of each crop for each of 1.7 million fields covering the surface of
the Earth. Crucially, the same agronomic model is used to generate both the pre-climate
change and post-climate estimates; all that changes in the agronomist’s calculations is the
climatic data that enters their models, which is drawn from leading climatological models
of climate change.
   Using a general equilibrium model of trade among these 1.7 million fields, we find
that the impact of climate change on these agricultural markets would amount to a 0.26%
reduction in global GDP when trade and production patterns are allowed to adjust. While

   32 If   international trade costs take the general form ln τijk = τ0 + τ ln(distij ), where τ0 is a constant, then
                                                                f                  f
intranational trade costs should be approximated by ln τi = τ0 + τ ln(disti ). Since the OLS estimation of
equation (22) does not allow us to separately identify τ0 , we have omitted this constant term from equation
(23) above. It should be clear, however, that none of our counterfactual results are affected by this normal-
ization. Given our assumption of log-preferences, a change in τ0 would act as a Hicks-neutral TFP shock in
agriculture, which would affect crop prices and welfare levels uniformly, but would leave welfare changes
between equilibria unchanged.

                                                          40
trade adjustments play little role in explaining the magnitude of these effects, our analysis
suggests that production adjustments caused by the evolution of comparative advantage
substantially mitigate the ill-effects of climate change.




                                             41
References
B ABIKER , M. H. (2005): “Climate Change Policy, Market Structure, and Carbon Leakage,”
  Journal of International Economics, 65, 421–445.

B RODA , C., AND D. W EINSTEIN (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541–585.

C OSTINOT, A.,    AND    D. D ONALDSON (2011): “How Large Are the Gains from Economic
  Integration? Theory and Evidence from U.S. Agriculture, 1880-2002,” mimeo MIT.

       (2012): “Ricardo’s Theory of Comparative Advantage: Old Idea, New Evidence,”
  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 102(3), 453–458.

C RISTEA , A., D. H UMMELS , L. P UZZELLO , AND M. AVETYSYAN (2013): “The Contribu-
  tion of International Transport to Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Journal of Envi-
  ronmental Economics and Management, 65(1), 153–173.

D ISDIER , A.-C., AND K. H EAD (2008): “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect
  on Bilateral Trade,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1), 37–48.

E ATON , J., AND S. K ORTUM (2002): “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
   70(5), 1741–1779.

E LLIOTT, J., I. F OSTER , S. K ORTUM , T. M UNSON , F. P. C ERVANTES ,   AND   D. W EISBACH
  (2010): “Trade and Carbon Taxes,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
  100(2), 465–469.

F ELDER , S.,   AND   T. R UTHERFORD (1993): “Unilateral CO2 Reductions and Carbon Leak-
  age: the Consequences of Trade in Oil and Basic Materials,” Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 25, 162–176.

H ERTEL , T.,   AND   T. R ANDHIR (2000): “Trade Liberalization as a Vehicle for Adapting to
  Global Warming,” Agriculture and Resource Economics Review, 29(2), 1–14.

IPCC (2007): Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
  governmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
  United Kingdom.

N AKICENOVIC , N.,       AND   R. S WART (eds.) (2000): Special Report on Emissions Scenarios:
  A Special Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
  Cambridge University Press.

                                                42
R EILLY, J., AND N. H OHMANN (1993): “Climate Change and Agriculture: The Role of
  International Trade,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 83(2), 306–312.

R OSENZWEIG , C.,   AND   M. PARRY (1994): “Potential Impact of Climate Change on World
  Food Supply,” Nature, 367(133-138).

S HAPIRO , J. (2013): “Trade, C02, and the Environment,” mimeo.

S OTELO , S. (2013): “Trade Frictions and Agricultural Productivity: Theory and Evidence
   from Peru,” mimeo University of Chicago.

T SIGAS , M., G. F RISWOLD ,   AND   B. K UHN (1997): Global Climate Change and Agriculture,
  Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. Cambridge University Press.




                                              43
