NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY SHOCKS, ASSET SUPPLY AND PRICING OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Francesco Bianchi
Cosmin L. Ilut
Martin Schneider
Working Paper 20081
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20081

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014, Revised March 2017

We would like to thank Nick Bloom, Joao Gomes, Francois Gourio, Bob Hall, Lars Hansen, Nir
Jaimovich, Konstantinos Theodoridis, Nic Vincent and Amir Yaron as well as workshop and
conference participants at AEA, Boston Fed, Chicago Fed, Cornell, CREI, Duke, LBS, LSE,
Mannheim, Minneapolis Fed, NBER Summer Institute, NYU, Queen's, Philadelphia Fed, Reserve
Bank of Australia, SED, SITE, University of Chicago, UCSD and UT Austin for helpful
discussions and comments. Cosmin Ilut gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF
through grant SES-3331805. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Francesco Bianchi, Cosmin L. Ilut, and Martin Schneider. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uncertainty Shocks, Asset Supply and Pricing over the Business Cycle
Francesco Bianchi, Cosmin L. Ilut, and Martin Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 20081
May 2014, Revised March 2017
JEL No. D8,E3,E4,G1,G3
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates a business cycle model with endogenous financial asset supply and
ambiguity averse investors. Firms' shareholders choose not only production and investment, but
also capital structure and payout policy subject to financial frictions. An increase in uncertainty
about profits lowers stock prices and leads firms to substitute away from debt as well as reduce
shareholder payout. This mechanism parsimoniously accounts for postwar comovement in
investment, stock prices, leverage and payout, at both business cycle and medium term cycle
frequencies. Ambiguity aversion permits a Markov-Switching VAR representation of the model,
while preserving the effect of uncertainty shocks on the time variation in the equity premium.

Francesco Bianchi
Social Sciences Building, 201B
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu
Cosmin L. Ilut
Department of Economics
Duke University
223 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
cosmin.ilut@duke.edu

Martin Schneider
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
schneidr@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Standard business cycle models have trouble reconciling the dynamics of stock prices with optimizing behavior by households and firms. On the household side, standard models assume expected
utility and low risk aversion. As a result, they predict that households choose asset positions so as
to keep the expected return on equity closely aligned with the riskless interest rate. In the data,
however, the conditional expected return on equity is much more volatile; in particular, low stock
prices predict returns that are higher than the riskless interest rate.
On the firm side, standard models assume costless access to external finance. They predict that
shareholders choose investment so as to equate the return on equity and the return on capital. At
the same time, the Modigliani-Miller theorem implies that standard models make no predictions
about capital structure and shareholder payout. Quantitative exercises thus typically specify
exogenous rules for leverage and payout that are not confronted with the data.
Postwar US data shows distinct patterns of comovement between stock prices, debt issuance
and shareholder payout. It is well known that all three variables are procyclical.1 This paper
documents that there is also strong comovement at medium term cycle frequencies.2 In particular,
compared to the 1960s and more recent decades, the 1970s and early 1980s were not only a time
of low stock prices but also saw low debt issuance and shareholder payout.
This paper proposes and estimates a business cycle model that jointly matches the dynamics
of stock prices, leverage and shareholder payout in postwar US data. On the household side,
we depart from standard models by making the representative household averse to Knightian
uncertainty (ambiguity). As in recent work on asset pricing with recursive multiple priors utility,
the household chooses asset holdings so as to keep a worst case expected return on equity aligned
with the riskless interest rate.
On the firm side, we depart from standard models by introducing financing costs, following the
literature on dynamic corporate finance. In particular, our representative firm faces adjustment
costs that encourage dividend smoothing, as well as an upward sloping marginal cost of debt that
is familiar from the ”tradeoff theory” of capital structure. In particular, issuing additional debt is
cheaper than raising equity at low levels of debt, but becomes eventually more expensive as debt
increases. Shareholders maximize the value of the firm by choosing both optimal investment and
determinate optimal leverage and payout ratios.
The key mechanism at the heart of the model is the response of households and firms to changes
in uncertainty. Other things equal, an increase in uncertainty about future profits would lower
the worst case return on equity below the riskless interest rate. Households would then choose to
1

A large asset pricing literature has documented the cyclicality of stock prices (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2010)
and Cochrane (2011) for recent surveys). At the same time, recent work on financial flows, such as Covas and
Den Haan (2011) and Jermann and Quadrini (2012), emphasizes the procyclicality of debt issuance and shareholder
payout.
2
Following Comin and Gertler (2006), we define medium frequencies as those between 8 and 50 years.

1

hold less equity and more bonds. To restore equilibrium, the stock price falls and the conditional
expected return on equity – as measured by an observer such as an econometrician – increases.
Since shareholders are ambiguity averse, an increase in uncertainty also changes optimal capital
structure and payout. Indeed, an increase in uncertainty about future profits increases the worst
case expected cost of debt to firms who are concerned about future financing costs. Firms optimally
respond by cutting debt. The scarcity of external funds further leads them to rely more on internal
funds and hence reduce shareholder payout. Changes in uncertainty thus endogenously generate
the comovement of stock prices, debt and payout observed in the data.
Our estimation allows for two sources of uncertainty: shocks to the marginal product of capital
(MPK) and shocks to a fixed operating cost that affects corporate earnings but does not scale
with production.3 Uncertainty about either source lowers worst case profits and makes debt less
attractive. There is a key difference, however, in the response of investment: while uncertainty
about MPK lowers investment because it lowers the worst case return on capital, uncertainty
about operating cost increases investment since it encourages precautionary savings.
Formally, our model can be represented by a Markov-switching VAR. The two shocks – MPK
and operating cost – follow autoregressive processes. Regime switches allow for occasional large
innovations as well as nonlinear dynamics in MPK. They also affect the conditional volatility
of future innovations as well as agents’ perceived ambiguity. A convenient technical feature
of our setup is that agents’ endogenous response to changes in uncertainty is reflected in the
coefficients of the MS-VAR. Indeed, since ambiguity affects the worst case conditional mean, a
linear approximation of the model solution works well even though uncertainty changes over time.
We estimate the model with postwar US data on four observables: investment, leverage and
the ratios of shareholder payout as well as equity to GDP. We allow for measurement error on all
observables, but show that its role is minor: our two shocks alone, together with occasional changes
in uncertainty, deliver a good fit for the distribution of the observables. We show in particular
that we match key moments of the observables and related statistics like the price-payout ratio at
both business cycle and medium term cycle frequencies.
The estimated model provides a three-part account of how uncertainty drove real and financial
variables in the postwar era. First, shocks to MPK – as well as ambiguity about MPK – drive the
business cycle. Second, a large increase in the volatility of operating cost induced a medium term
cycle in the 1970s and 1980s. A similar increase in volatility occurred during the recent financial
crisis. Finally, the end of the long booms of the 1960s, 1980s, 1990s and early 2000s saw a decline
in ambiguity that was not accompanied by a change in volatility. Those booms ended with a spike
in ambiguity that generated a stock market crash.
3

The operating cost captures reorganization in the corporate sector that redistributes resources away from
shareholders. One example is expenses incurred in ”packaging” earnings in the form of individual firm payouts
such as the cost of mergers, spin-offs or IPO’s, all of which can vary over time because of changes in financial
conditions. Other examples are changes in compensation or the relationship with the government.

2

We also investigate model implications for the riskless interest rate and excess returns, two
series that our estimation does not target. In the data, the riskless rate is stable. Moreover, the
excess return on equity relative to the riskless rate is predictable: a regression of excess returns
on the price-payout ratio show that low prices reliably predict high excess returns – the excess
volatility puzzle. DSGE models driven by uncertainty shocks often struggle to reconcile these
facts. Indeed, excess volatility calls for large movements in uncertainty, whereas stable interest
rates suggest little variation in precautionary savings.
In our model, there is no tension between excess volatility and stable interest rates. This
is because operating cost represents a small share of overall consumption, but a sizable share of
shareholder payout. An increase in uncertainty about operating cost thus discourages stock holding
and lowers the stock price. At the same time, it affects uncertainty about future consumption
only weakly, and the effect on precautionary savings and bond prices is small.
To show further how ambiguity matters for fit, we estimate an alternative model without
uncertainty about operating cost. The alternative model is otherwise identical to our baseline
specification: there are two shocks and nonlinear dynamics in MPK. There is also time varying
uncertainty about MPK, much like in the growing literature on uncertainty shocks in DSGE
models. We find that the alternative model does not fit well: without occasional regime switches
that alter uncertainty about operating cost, it is not possible to fit our four observables. In
particular, the alternative model cannot jointly fit payout and equity value.
The alternative estimation illustrates the issues faced by traditional models once shareholder
payout and investment are included as observables. It must somehow account for volatile stock
prices. Since investment is observable, it cannot rely on large changes in uncertainty about MPK –
this would generate excessive precautionary savings. Since dividends are observable, it cannot rely
on large movements in realized operating cost. In the end, what remains is measurement error.
Moreover, the price volatility the alternative estimation does generate is largely due to fluctuations
in realized operating cost. As a result, the alternative model cannot generate predictability of
excess returns.
A number of papers study asset pricing in production economies with aggregate uncertainty
shocks. Some consider rational expectations models with time variation in higher moments of the
shock distributions. The latter can take the form of time varying disaster risk (Gourio (2012))
or stochastic volatility (Basu and Bundick (2012), Caldara et al. (2012), Malkhozov and Shamloo
(2012)). Another line of work investigates uncertainty shocks when agents have a preference for
robustness (Cagetti et al. (2002), Bidder and Smith (2012), Jahan-Parvar and Liu (2012)). Most
of these papers identify equity with the value of firm capital or introduce leverage exogenously.
In contrast, our interest is in how uncertainty shocks drive valuation, payout and leverage when
shareholders respond optimally to those shocks.
We rely on financial frictions to obtain predictions for payout and capital structure, following
a large literature on dynamic corporate finance (see for example the survey by Strebulaev and
3

Whited (2011)). In particular, we share the perspective of that literature that a firm is not simply
a production technology, but instead makes decisions on how to package cash flows into debt and
equity claims. Several recent papers have emphasized shocks that occur at this packaging stage,
such as costs to raising different types of external funds (e.g. Bolton et al. (2013), Eisfeldt and
Muir (2014) and Belo et al. (2014)).
We also build on a recent literature that tries to jointly understand financial flows and macro
quantities. Jermann and Quadrini (2012), Covas and Den Haan (2011, 2012), Khan and Thomas
(2013) and Begenau and Salomao (2013) develop evidence on the cyclical behavior of debt and
equity flows. The modeling exercises in these papers also point to the importance of shocks to
firm profits other than productivity. In our setup, a key shock is the operating cost, which is also
independent of the marginal product of capital. We differ from the above papers in emphasizing
the effects of uncertainty shocks, and their joint effects on firm decisions and equity risk premia.
There is also recent work that explores whether the interaction of uncertainty shocks and
financial frictions can jointly account for credit spreads and investment. Most of this work considers
changes in firm-level volatility (Arellano et al. (2010), Gilchrist et al. (2010), Christiano et al.
(2014) and Elenev et al. (2016)). Gourio (2013) incorporates time varying aggregate risk and thus
allows risk premia to contribute to spreads. In contrast to our paper, this line of work does not
focus on the determination of equity prices.
At the macro level, our finding that movements in operating cost and uncertainty are important
is also related to Greenwald et al. (2014), who decompose changes in stock market wealth into
three components that they label productivity, factor share and risk aversion shocks. The latter are
responsible for most of the variation in equity prices in their setting and thus play a role similar
to changes in perceived uncertainty shocks in our model. At the same time, our specification
allows for stochastic volatility and thus relates high equity premia in part to the occurrence of
large shocks.
Glover et al. (2011) and Croce et al. (2012) study the effects of taxation in the presence
of uncertainty shocks. Their setups are similar to ours in that they combine a representative
household, a trade-off theory of capital structure and aggregate uncertainty shocks (in their case,
changes in stochastic volatility under rational expectations). While their interest is in quantifying
policy effects, our goal is to assess the overall importance of different uncertainty shocks.
The multiple priors model was introduced by Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989); it was extended
to intertemporal choice by Epstein and Wang (1994) and Epstein and Schneider (2003). It has
since been used in a number of studies in finance and macroeconomics (see Epstein and Schneider
(2010) or Guidolin and Rinaldi (2013) for surveys). In particular, Epstein and Schneider (2008),
Leippold et al. (2008), Sbuelz and Trojani (2008) and Drechsler (2013) consider the effect of time
varying ambiguity on asset prices. Ilut and Schneider (2014) study a tractable linear business
cycle model with ambiguity shocks where all movements in uncertainty come from intangible
information. The present paper instead considers a nonlinear model in which stochastic volatility
4

matters for decisions and focuses on financial decisions and asset prices.
Our estimation strategy follows the literature in using Bayesian techniques for inference of
DSGE models, but also incorporates financial variables and particularly asset prices. We build on
the Markov switching (MS) model introduced by Hamilton (1989), which is now a popular tool for
capturing parameter instability. For example, Sims and Zha (2006) use a MS-VAR to investigate
the possibility of structural breaks in the conduct of monetary policy, while Schorfheide (2005),
Baele et al. (2011), Liu et al. (2011), Bianchi (2013) and Davig and Doh (2013) estimate MSDSGE models.4 We show that the MS-DSGE setup can also accommodate uncertainty averse
agents’ responses to volatility shocks. Indeed, since switches in volatilities have first order effects
on decision rules, agents’ responses are reflected in switches of the constants in the MS-DSGE.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 uses first order
conditions for households and firms to explain the effect of uncertainty shocks on firm asset
supply and asset prices. Section 4 describes our estimation strategy. Sections 5 and 6 discuss
the estimation results by analyzing alternative models where shocks or frictions are shut down.
Section 7 investigates the behavior of real rates and excess return predictability.

2

Model

Our model determines investment, production and financing choices of the US nonfinancial
corporate sector as well as the pricing of claims on that sector by an infinitely-lived representative
household. Firms are owned by the household and maximize shareholder value.

2.1

Technology and accounting

There is a single perishable good that serves as numeraire.
Production
The corporate sector produces numeraire from physical capital Kt−1 according to the production function
α
Yt = Zt Kt−1
ξ (1−α)t ,
(2.1)
where ξ is the trend growth rate of the economy and α is the capital share. The shock Zt to the
marginal product of capital accounts for fluctuations in variable factors including labor.
Capital is produced from numeraire and depreciates at rate δ


Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + 1 − 0.5Θ(It /It−1 − ξ)2 It .
4

(2.2)

An alternative approach models smooth changes in the parameters (see Justiniano and Primiceri (2008),
Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2010) and Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011) for applications in a DSGE model and
Primiceri (2005) and Cogley and Sargent (2006) for applications in a VAR).

5

Capital accumulation is subject to adjustment costs that are convex in the growth rate of
investment It , as in Christiano et al. (2005). This functional form captures the idea that the
investment scale affects the organization of the firm. For example, investing at a scale It requires
allocating the right share of managerial effort to guide expansion rather than oversee production.
Moving to a different scale entails reallocating managerial effort accordingly.

Cost of debt and dividend smoothing
Besides investment, shareholders choose firms’ net payout and their debt level. We introduce
two frictions that are familiar from dynamic models in corporate finance. The first is an upward
sloping marginal cost of debt that gives rise to a tradeoff theory of capital structure.5 The
representative firm can issue riskless one period noncontingent debt at price Qbt . If it issues
f
f
Qbt−1 Bt−1
worth of bonds at date t − 1, it repays Bt−1
at date t. It also incurs the cost
κ



f
Bt−1



1  f 2
= 0.5Ψ t Bt−1 .
ξ

(2.3)

The marginal cost of an extra dollar of debt is thus increasing in the face value of debt.6 Reduced
form convex cost functions such as (2.3) can be derived for example from deadweight costs of
bankruptcy.7
The second friction is an adjustment cost that creates an incentive to smooth shareholder
payout. Every period, shareholders pay
φ (Dt , Dt−1 ) = 0.5Φξ t (Dt /Dt−1 − ξ)2 .

(2.4)

Shareholders thus respond to shocks to cash flow or asset prices by changing payout gradually.
The corporate finance literature has developed various microfounded models to motivate observed
dividend smoothing.8
Operating cost and cash flow
Consider the firm’s cash flow statement at date t. Denoting the corporate income tax rate by
5

The key idea is that an extra dollar of debt is cheaper than an extra dollar of equity at low debt levels, for
example because of tax benefits, but more expensive at high debt levels. The optimal debt level equates the
marginal costs of debt and equity. See Frank and Goyal (2011) and Graham and Leary (2011) for surveys.
6
Binsbergen et al. (2010) estimate the convexity of a reduced form marginal cost function using exogenous
variation in tax benefits. We relate the magnitude of our estimated cost to their findings below.
7
In models with costly bankruptcy, the risk adjusted return on debt is equal to the riskless rate plus compensation
for bankruptcy costs. In our context, the representative firm stands in for the entire corporate sector. The cost κ
can thus be interpreted as the expected bankruptcy cost on a diversified portfolio of corporate bonds that are each
subject to idiosyncratic default risk.
8
The relative merits of asymmetric information and agency cost explanations are the subject of an active debate
based on cross-sectional evidence. See Brav et al. (2005) and Farre-Mensa et al. (2014) for surveys on payout policy.

6

τk , we can write net payout as
f
f
Dt = αYt − It − ft ξ t − κ(Bt−1
) − φ (Dt , Dt−1 ) − (Bt−1
− Qbt Btf )
i
h

f
− τk αYt − Bt−1
1 − Qbt−1 − δQkt−1 Kt−1 − It

(2.5)

The first line records cash flow in the absence of taxation: payout equals revenue less investment,
a fixed operating cost and financing costs as well as net debt repayment. The second line subtracts
the corporate income tax bill: the tax rate τk is applied to profits, that is, income less interest,
depreciation and investment.
The fixed operating cost is motivated by expenditure that is unrelated to the scale of payout and
varies independently from shocks shifting the production technology. Examples include costs from
restructuring of the corporate sector (due to mergers and spin-offs, for example), reorganization of
compensation, compliance with regulation, or lawsuits. We model ft as a resource cost measured
in units of goods. In practice one would expect it to reflect a drop in the labor productivity of
management or other employees not directly related to increasing the scale of production (such as
the legal or human resources department).
Household wealth
We denote the price of aggregate corporate sector equity by Pt . In addition to owning the firm,
the household receives an endowment of goods πξ t and government transfers tr ξ t . We assume a
proportional capital income tax. Moreover, capital gains on equity are taxed immediately at the
same rate. The household budget constraint is then
h
Ct + Pt θt + Qbt Bth = (1 − α) Yt + πξ t + tr ξ t + Bt−1
+ (Pt + Dt ) θt−1
(2.6)


h
− τl (1 − α) Yt + (1 − Qbt−1 )Bt−1
+ Dt θt−1 + (Pt − Pt−1 )θt−1 + πξ t − τc Ct .

The first line is the budget in the absence of taxation: consumption plus holdings of equity and
bonds – equals labor and endowment income plus the (cum dividend) value of assets. The second
line subtracts the tax bill. The income tax rate applies to labor income, interest, dividends as well
as capital gains. The consumption tax rate is denoted by τc .
We do not explicitly model the government, since we do not include observables that identify
its behavior in our estimation. To close the model, one may think of a government that collects
taxes based on the rates τl , τc , τk and uses lump sum transfers to balance its budget. The asset
market clearing conditions then states that bonds issued by the firm equal to bonds held by the
household, i.e. that Btf = Bth , and that equity holdings θt = 1.9
9



f
The goods market clearing condition states Ct + It + ft ξ t + κ Bt−1
+ φ (Dt , Dt−1 ) = Yt + πξ t .

7

2.2

Uncertainty and preferences

We describe the exogenous shocks by a Markov chain st = (Zt , ft , ωt ). There are two continuous
shocks – to the marginal product of capital Zt and to the operating cost ft . In order to capture
nonlinearities, st also contains the time homogeneous finite-state Markov chain ωt . We represent
the continuous shocks as
log Zt+1 = µz (st ) + σz (st ) εzt+1 ,

(2.7a)

ft+1 = µf (st ) + σf (st ) εft+1 ,

(2.7b)

where the random variables εzt+1 and εft+1 are iid and mutually independent with mean zero and
variance one. We further assume that st has a unique invariant distribution. For our estimated
model below, this follows from specific functional forms for the conditional means and volatilities.

We denote the unconditional means by s̄ = Z̄, f¯, ω .
Ambiguity and changes in perceived ambiguity
Ambiguity averse agents observe the state st . However, they are not confident about the
distribution of the continuous shocks in (2.7). Instead, they entertain an entire family of
conditional distributions with different conditional means:
log Zt+1 = µz (st ) + σz (st ) εzt+1 + uzt ,
ft+1 = µf (st ) + σf (st ) εft+1 + uft ,

uzt ∈ [−azt , azt ] ,
h
i
f
f
f
ut ∈ −at , at .

(2.8a)
(2.8b)

Here the random variable azt bounds an interval of mean shifters uzt for the shock log Z – it captures
the degree of ambiguity the agent perceives about Z next period conditional on state st at date t.
Similarly, the random variable aft captures ambiguity about the shock f .
If ambiguity is low, then agents are relatively confident in forecasting shocks. As a result, their
set of conditional distributions is small and each distribution is close to (2.7). In contrast, when
ambiguity is high, then agents do not feel confident about forecasting and entertain a large set of
distributions. Much like volatility, ambiguity is shock-specific: for example, in a state with high
ambiguity about the marginal product of capital (MPK), ambiguity about operating cost can be
low and vice versa.
Ambiguity varies over time with new information. We allow for two sources of time variation.
On the one hand, ambiguity can move together with volatility. It is plausible that in more turbulent
times – that is, when larger shocks are expected – agents also find it harder to settle on a forecast of
the future. On the other hand, ambiguity can move with intangible information that is not reflected
in current fundamentals or volatility. Our estimated model below uses specific functional forms to
parsimoniously capture both possibilities. For now, we describe the joint evolution of ambiguity

8

and other variables by general functions azt+1 = ãz (st+1 , st , azt ) and aft+1 = ãf (st+1 , st , aft ).10
Preferences
How do ambiguity averse agents who entertain multiple distributions make decisions? We
assume recursive multiple priors utility. A consumption plan is a family of functions ct (st , at ) ,
where the state (st , at ) contains the exogenous shocks as well as the agent’s perceived ambiguity
at = (azt , aft ). Conditional utilities derived from a given consumption plan c are defined by the
recursion
U (c; st , at ) = log ct (st , at ) + β

min
E (u
i
i
z
f
(u ,u )∈×i [−at ,at ]

z ,uf

) [U (c; s

t+1 , at+1 )] ,

(2.9)

where the conditional distribution of st+1 on the right hand side is (2.8), with the mean shifters
(uzt , uft ) chosen to minimize expected continuation utility. Finally, the agent maximizes the
recursive multiple priors utility in (2.9) by choosing over available consumption plans.
The ”maxmin” utility function (2.9) captures the idea that lack of confidence in probability
assessments leads to cautious behavior. If azt = aft = 0, the solution to the recursion is the standard
separable log utility with conditional beliefs (2.7). More generally, positive azt or aft imply that
households behave as if the worst case mean is relevant. Importantly, the worst case mean depends
on the consumption plan c that is currently being evaluated.11
With the particular shocks considered in our model, it is easy to solve the minimization step in
(2.9) at the equilibrium consumption plan: the worst case expected cash flow is low and the worst
case expected operating cost is high. Indeed, consumption depends positively on cash flow and
negatively on the operating cost. It follows that agents act throughout as if forecasting under the
worst case mean uft = aft and uzt = −azt . This property pins down the representative household’s
worst case belief after every history and thereby a worst case belief over entire sequences of data.
In what follows, we denote worst case expectations by stars; for example E ∗ Dt+k is the worst case
expected dividend k periods in the future.
To illustrate the asset pricing properties of the model, it is helpful to develop notation for
the ”change of measure” from the true data generating process (2.7) to the agent’s equilibrium
worst case belief. Since the innovations εzt and εft are continuous, and the only difference between
conditional distributions is the mean shifter, there exists a positive stochastic process Xt adapted
to the agent’s information set with Et [Xt+1 ] = 1 such that Et∗ [Yt+1 ] = Et [Xt+1 Yt+1 ] for any
10

Writing ambiguity at+1 as a function of both the current state st+1 and the past state st as well as its own
lag allows the change in ambiguity to depend on unexpected changes in st , such as the innovation εzt+1 . In our
specification below, ambiguity increases when MPK is unexpectedly low.
P∞
11
In the expected utility case, time t conditional utility can alternatively be represented as as Et [ τ =0 log ct+τ ]
where the expectation is taken under a conditional probability measure over sequences that is updated by Bayes’
rule from a measure that describes time
P∞ zero beliefs. An analogous representation exists under ambiguity: time t
utility can be written as minπ∈P Etπ [ τ =0 log ct+τ ] . Epstein and Schneider (2003) shows how a ”rectangular” time
zero set of beliefs P can be derived from a process of one step ahead conditionals such as (2.8) so as to guarantee
that conditional preferences are dynamically consistent.

9

random variable Yt+1 . The adjustment Xt+1 can be thought of as a ratio of densities that shifts
relatively more weight to states of the world that offer low consumption to the agent.

3

Uncertainty shocks, firm financing and asset prices

In this section, we describe the key trade-offs faced by investors and firms and explain how our
model differs from existing production based asset pricing models. On the investor side, we model
perception of uncertainty as ambiguity about means. This approach results in a more flexible
theory of how uncertainty – and in particular the realized volatility of shocks – drives asset prices.
Moreover its technical properties facilitate computation and hence estimation of our model. On
the firm side, we endogenously derive both its real and financial decisions, rather than assume
free adjustment of equity and exogenous leverage. This approach results in additional discipline
on firm payout, a key ingredient in asset pricing models.

3.1

Asset pricing under ambiguity about means

The prices of assets held by the representative agent – in particular debt and equity – must satisfy
the agent’s first order conditions. The information in those conditions can be summarized by
the implied prices of one-period-ahead contingent claims. We follow convention and normalize
contingent claims prices by conditional probabilities to obtain the stochastic discount factor
Mt+1 = β

Ct
Xt+1 ,
Ct+1

(3.1)

where Xt+1 reflects the change of measure to the worst case belief.12 The date t price of any payoff
Πt+1 is QΠ
t = Et [Mt+1 Πt+1 ] .
Precautionary savings and the safe interest rate
To compare the effects of ambiguity and risk, we approximate asset prices via a Taylor
−1
expansion of marginal utility Ct+1
around expected consumption Et Ct+1 .13 The price Qbt of a
safe bond with constant payoff Πt+1 = 1 can be written as
Qbt

=

βEt∗




Ct
Ct
≈β
Ct+1
Et [Ct+1 ]



vart (Ct+1 ) Et [Ct+1 ] − Et∗ [Ct+1 ]
1+
+
Et [Ct+1 ]
(Et Ct+1 )2


.

(3.2)

Here the first factor is the bond price that would obtain under certainty. It reflects intertemporal
substitution: if agents expect consumption to fall, then they want to buy assets and the bond
12

In this section for ease of exposition we set the household tax rate on income, including bond income, to τl = 0.
The appropriate more general formulas allowing for that taxation are presented in Appendix 9.3.
13
Formulas are derived in Appendix 9.1. We follow convention and drop terms of third or higher moments.

10

price is high. The terms in the bracket show the effect of risk and ambiguity on the value of the
safe asset.
Both risk and ambiguity create incentives for precautionary savings. Indeed, if agents worry
that consumption might fall then they want to buy the safe asset and the bond price is higher than
under certainty. Risk and ambiguity differ only in how uncertainty about consumption is described.
Under risk, uncertainty is measured by the conditional variance of consumption; under ambiguity,
it is measured by the difference between the actual and worst case mean of consumption. In either
case, a shock that increases uncertainty increases the bond price and lowers the safe interest rate.

Ambiguity, risk and volatility
A key difference between our model and standard models without ambiguity is the role of time
varying volatility. Without ambiguity, there is a tight connection between agents’ worry about
future consumption on the one hand and the typical size of realized consumption surprises on
the other. Indeed, without ambiguity, the last term in the bracket in (3.2) is zero; perceived
uncertainty is thus perceived risk, which in turn is equal to conditional volatility. As a result, an
increase in uncertainty can lower the safe interest rate only if it is also followed by unusually large
consumption surprises.
Our model also allows agents’ worry to be higher in times when larger consumption surprises
are expected. Our specification of ambiguity (2.8b)-(2.8a) allows for this plausible effect because
the size of the belief set (2.8) can be correlated with volatility. At the same time, ambiguity can
also move in response to intangible information that is uncorrelated with volatility. The relative
size of each source of ambiguity is inferred by our estimation.
The bond price formula (3.2) also illustrates a technical difference between our model and
standard models with risk. While the risk term is a second order term in the Taylor expansion
and contains a second moment of consumption, the ambiguity term is a first order term and
involves only means. As a result, the ambiguity term (but not the risk term) appears also in a
linearized representative agent Euler equation. Our estimation strategy below exploits this fact:
we follow linearization steps to obtain the likelihood. With ambiguity in means, we can do so
without sacrificing precautionary savings effects on the interest rate.
Time variation in uncertainty premia
The price of a generic payoff Πt+1 can be decomposed into expected present value less an
uncertainty premium, which in turn consists of risk and ambiguity premia:
QΠ
t

≈

Qbt Et Πt+1



covt (Ct+1 , Πt+1 ) Et [Πt+1 ] − Et∗ [Πt+1 ]
−
1−
Et Ct+1 Et Πt+1
Et [Πt+1 ]


.

(3.3)

The first factor is the expected present value of future payoffs. The ”volatility puzzle” is that,
for many uncertain assets such as equity, the price is much more volatile than the expected
11

payoff. In other words, the uncertainty premium – the term in brackets – fluctuates over time.
In a stationary environment, this is equivalent to saying that the excess return Qbt Πt+1 /QΠ
t is
predictable by observables such as prices that comove with uncertainty premia.
Investors require positive uncertainty premia on assets that pay off little in ”bad states” when
consumption is low. Equation (3.3) shows that this property is shared by both risk and ambiguity
premia. Indeed, in a DSGE model, consumption and payoff are both endogenous and ”bad states”
can be generated by many exogenous innovations. According to (3.3), a particular innovation
contributes to a positive uncertainty premium if and only if it affects consumption and payoff in
the same direction. It contributes to a positive risk premium because it contributes to a positive
covariance between consumption and payoff. It contributes to a positive ambiguity premium
because the worst case belief about the innovation puts more weight on realizations that lower
consumption and hence also payoff. As a result, the worst case expected payoff is lower than the
actual expected payoff.
As with the precautionary savings term, there are two key differences between the risk and
ambiguity premium. First, a conceptual difference is that the size of the risk premium depends
on the covariance of the payoff with consumption. Higher risk premia must therefore be followed
by unusually close comovement of consumption and payoff.14 In contrast, the ambiguity premium
may also move due to intangible information; large consumption volatility is not required to
generate large uncertainty premia. The second difference is technical: the ambiguity premium
involves means, not second moments, and hence it appears in a linearized Euler equation.
Uncertainty shocks, price volatility and the role of leverage
Comparison of the price formulas (3.2) and (3.3) illustrate the tension that typically exists in
asset pricing models between the twin goals of matching a volatile uncertainty premium and a
stable interest rate. Suppose there is an increase in uncertainty (either risk or ambiguity) about an
innovation that affects both consumption and shareholder payout. Investors then require a higher
uncertainty premium: the stock price falls relative to the expected present value of payout. At the
same time, however, investors attempt to buy safe bonds and push up the bond price and – via
discounting – also the expected present value of payout. The effect on the stock price is generally
ambiguous – a successful model must ensure that the former effect is larger than the latter.
As an extreme example, suppose equity is a claim to consumption next period only. In this
case, uncertainty shocks do not affect the stock price at all. Indeed, if Πt+1 = Ct+1 , then the
precautionary savings terms in (3.2) are identical to the uncertainty premium terms in (3.3),
for both risk and ambiguity. In other words, whatever the nature of uncertainty, an increase
in uncertainty lowers the interest rate (and increases the present value of payoff) by the same
amount that it raises the uncertainty premium. While the uncertainty premium is volatile, and
14

Analogous implications hold for risk preferences that are more complicated than the time separable log utility
case considered here. For example, with Epstein-Zin utility, what matters for risk premia is covariance of asset
payoffs with continuation utility, and hence covariance with state variable that continuation utility depends on.

12

hence excess returns are predictable, the interest rate is as volatile as the premium and the stock
price is constant.
When do uncertainty shocks generate volatile stock prices and stable safe interest rates? A
sufficient condition is that consumption contains a sizable component that is not correlated with
the payoff to equity. To see this, write without loss of generality
Ct+1 = α̂t + β̂t Πt+1 + γt+1 ,

(3.4)

where α̂t and β̂t are based on date t information and γt+1 has mean zero and is orthogonal to
Πt+1 given date t information. An increase in uncertainty could arrive either as an increase in
vart (Πt+1 ) or as an increase in ambiguity Et [Πt+1 ] − Et∗ [Πt+1 ]. In either case, the ratio of the
change in the uncertainty premium in the stock price relative to the precautionary savings term
in the bond price is 1 + α̂t /β̂t Et [Πt+1 ]. Large α̂t and small β̂t thus deliver the desired result.
Uncertainty shocks thus deliver the ”right kind” of price volatility if uncertainty about payout
moves relatively more than uncertainty about consumption. This property underscores the
importance of modeling the dynamics of payout. Existing models with risk typically assume
exogenous leverage: either payout is defined as a power of consumption, or the amount of debt
is fixed as proportional to capital. While this approach mechanically generates a payout series
with the desired property, it is not disciplined by actual data on payout, except perhaps average
leverage. In contrast, our model explicitly derives optimal leverage and payout which are matched
directly to data. We thus impose additional restrictions on a key mechanism for price volatility.

3.2

Payout and capital structure choice

To write shareholder value, we define t-period ahead contingent claims prices M0t = Πtτ =1 Mτ . The
firm thus maximizes
∞
X
E
M0t Dt
t=1

subject to the budget constraint (2.5). Since Mt contains the change of belief Xt , shareholder
value is computed under shareholders’ worst case expectation of payout. Ambiguity (as well as
risk) perceived by shareholders affects the valuation of the firm as well as the actions (such as
investment) shareholders choose for the firm.
Optimal debt issuance
Firms’ optimal choice of debt choice follows classic ”tradeoff theory”: the firm equates the tax
benefit of debt (relative to equity) to the extra financing cost of debt. Let λt denote the multiplier
on the firm’s date t budget constraint (2.5), normalized by the contingent claims price M0t . The

13

first order condition for debt is
h
i


Qbt λt + Et Mt+1 λt+1 τk 1 − Qbt = Et Mt+1 λt+1 (1 + κ0 (Btf )) .

(3.5)

The left hand side is the marginal benefit of issuing an additional dollar of debt. Per unit of debt
the firm raises Qbt dollars of funds today, which is worth Qbt λt dollars inside the firm. Moreover,
the firm expects a tax benefit proportional to the interest payment 1 − Qbt next period. The right
hand side is the marginal cost of issuing debt which includes not only the dollar to be repaid but
also the marginal financing cost.
Without equity adjustment costs, the shadow value of funds is always λt = 1. Since in
equilibrium Qbt = Et Mt+1 , expectations in (3.5) cancel and we get an essentially static tradeoff
between the tax benefit and the cost of debt. At low debt levels, a positive tax benefit implies
that marginal benefit is always higher than marginal cost and some debt is always issued. As debt
rises, marginal cost rises as well until the benefit and cost are equated at the optimal debt level .
In the presence of equity adjustment costs, the basic tradeoff remains the same. However,
future benefits and costs are discounted not with shareholders’ stochastic discount factor Mt+1 ,
but with the firm’s internal stochastic discount factor Mt+1 λt+1 /λt . Since all of the cost but only
part of the benefit of debt accrue in the future, optimal debt is lower if funds inside the firm are
relatively scarce in the future, that is, if λt+1 is expected to be relatively high. In fact, what matters
is shareholders’ uncertainty adjusted expectation: it is optimal to lower debt if shareholders worry
about future scarcity because the conditional volatility or ambiguity about λt+1 is relatively high.
Optimal investment
Firms’ choice of capital reflects familiar principles of investment with adjustment costs. First,
the marginal value of installed capital, Qkt say, reflects the discounted present value of the marginal
benefit of capital. The first order conditions for investment and capital imply


λt Qkt = Et Mt+1 λt+1 (1 − τk )α (kt )α−1 L1−α + (1 − δ)Qkt+1 + δτk .

(3.6)

Without adjustments costs to equity (λt = 1), we have a standard Q-theory equation. The
difference here is that financial frictions again matter for how costs and benefits of capital are
calculated. Since capital is held inside the firm – as opposed to directly by households – future
marginal benefits are discounted by the internal stochastic discount factor of the firm. For example,
a temporary scarcity of funds inside the firm (that is, high λt ) lowers the value of capital.
The second principle is that the difference between the marginal values of installed and
uninstalled capital reflects the marginal adjustment cost. The first order conditions further imply



λt Qkt − (1 − τk ) = λt Qkt ψ1 (it , it−1 ) + Et Mt+1 λt+1 Qkt+1 ψ2 (it+1 , it ) ,

14

(3.7)

where for our functional form the adjustment cost function is defined as ψ (it , it−1 ) = 0.5Θit (it /it−1 −
ξ)2 . In steady state, marginal adjustment cost on the right hand side is zero: installed and
uninstalled capital are worth the same, that is, Qkt equals the after tax value of a dollar.
More generally, temporarily higher Qkt encourages higher investment. Indeed, ψ1 is positive and
increasing in it if it > it−1 , whereas ψ2 is positive and increasing in it if it > it+1 . Optimal
investment thus moves with the value of installed capital Qkt , but any response is limited by the
firm’s desire to stabilize the growth rate of investment.
Optimal payout
To understand the optimal choice of payout, consider first what happens without adjustment
costs to equity. If λt = 1, then debt, investment and capital are determined by (3.5)-(3.7) and
(2.2). In particular, investment decisions proceed as if households were direct holders of capital.
Optimal payout follows as a residual from (2.5). Shareholders freely transfer funds into and out
of the firm in response to investment and tax incentives as well as changes in the operating cost.
The result is a volatile payout series: net changes in equity always quickly satisfy any funding
need. The role of adjustment costs is to add a motive for payout smoothing that allows the model
to match the smoothness of payout in the data.
When deciding payout subject to adjustment costs, shareholders face a similar tradeoff as for
investment. They compare the difference 1 − λt between the value of a dollar outside versus inside
the firm to the cost of paying out the extra dollar. Formally, the firm’s first order condition for
payout is
1 − λt = λt φ1 (Dt , Dt−1 ) + Et [Mt+1 λt+1 φ2 (Dt+1 , Dt )] .
(3.8)
In steady state, the marginal adjustment cost on the right hand side is zero so funds inside and
outside the firm are worth the same: we have λt = 1. More generally, temporarily lower λt (that
is, an abundance of funds inside the firm) encourages higher payout.15 Optimal payout thus moves
against the value of internal funds λt , but any response is limited by the firm’s desire to stabilize
the growth rate of payout.
Firms’ response to shocks
Consider now the firm’s response to shocks. We start with shocks that change current cash
flow, that is actual changes in MPK or operating cost. A negative shock to cash flow temporarily
lowers dividends and makes current funds more scarce relative to funds in the future. From (3.5)
the firm should then borrow temporarily so as to cover the shortfall in funds. Cash flow shocks
thus tend to move payout and debt in opposite directions. If cash flow falls because of a low MPK,
persistence of the shock further lowers the return on investment and hence investment itself. In
contrast, changes in operating cost are unrelated to the return on investment and affect investment
15

Analogously to the case of investment, φ1 is positive and increasing in Dt if Dt > Dt−1 , whereas φ2 is positive
and increasing in Dt if Dt > Dt+1

15

only weakly through the cost of funds.
Consider now the firm’s response to an increase in uncertainty. Under the worst case belief,
future dividends are now low so that funds are scarce, that is, the relative shadow value of funds
Et [Mt+1 λt+1 ] /λt increases. From (3.5), holding fixed the riskless rate, the marginal cost of debt
increases and the firm responds by cutting current debt Btf . At the same time, (3.8) suggests that
the firm will decrease payout already at date t in order to smooth the drop in the growth rate of
payout. As a result, uncertainty shocks make payout and debt move together.16
The nature of the uncertainty shock matters for how the valuation of the firm responds. As
discussed above, uncertainty shocks generate excess volatility in stock prices if uncertainty about
payout moves more than uncertainty about consumption. Since an increase in uncertainty about
MPK implies that future output and consumption become more uncertain as well, it is not suitable
as a driver of the stock market. In contrast, operating cost is a small share of output, but a
sizable share of payout. Shocks to uncertainty about operating cost thus generate the ”right”
kind of volatility. At the same time, firms’ endogenous responses help identify such shocks – if
they matter, large drops in price should coincide with a joint decline in payout and debt. This
comovement is key to inference in our estimation exercise below.

3.3

Linearization and asset prices

In this section, we explain how we compute equilibria. Rather than work through all the equations,
we first sketch the general approach and then focus on the household first order conditions for
assets; the full model solution is described in the appendix. The approximate asset pricing
equations are of interest in their own right since they illustrate how ambiguity delivers simple
linear asset pricing formulas that allow for an equity premium in steady state as well as excess
volatility of stock prices.
Linearization around the worst case steady state
Let wt denote the vector of endogenous state variables. As usual in DSGE models, we can
characterize the law of motion for wt as the solution to a stochastic difference equation. It consists
of (i) first order conditions for the representative agent under the worst case belief as well as
for the firm, (ii) budget constraints and market clearing conditions and (iii) the evolution of the
exogenous state st under the worst case belief. The worst case belief is used in (i) and (iii) because
we are computing the law of motion of the endogenous variables, which depends on agents’ actions
and hence their perception of the future.
The Markov property of the exogenous state process and regularity conditions on the economy
imply that the stochastic difference equation given by (i) − (iii) has a stationary solution with a
recursive representation wt = W (wt−1 , st ). Since it is based on the worst case belief, the law of
16

Uncertainty shocks are transmitted through state prices. The effect we highlight will thus occur more generally
whenever there is a change in state prices that does not affect current cash flow directly.

16

motion W describes the effect of ambiguity on agents’ decision rules. Let s∗ = (Z ∗ , f ∗ , ω) denote
the worst case mean of the exogenous state; since the finite state chain ωt is not ambiguous,
its worst case mean is equal to the true mean ω. The worst case steady state w∗ is defined by
w∗ = W (w∗ , s∗ ).
From the perspective of an outside observer, the joint distribution of the exogenous and
endogenous variables (st , wt ) is described by the function W together with the true evolution

of the exogenous state st that has mean s̄ = Z̄, f¯, ω . The steady state w̄ satisfies w̄ = W (w̄, s̄).
It is typically different from the worst case steady state. Indeed, at the state s̄, agents observe
the true mean shocks Z̄ and f¯, but behave as if those shocks revert to their worst case means Z ∗
and f ∗ , respectively, in the future. Mechanically, agents thus behave as if they are on an impulse
response following an unanticipated shock that took the economy from s∗ to s̄. Intuitively, agents’
actions reflect precautionary behavior in the face of ambiguity about future shocks.
Computation of the model proceeds in two steps. First, we linearize the stochastic difference
equation around the worst case steady state w∗ . We thus find coefficient matrices εww and εws
such that the log deviation of wt from the worst case steady state is represented as
log wt − log w∗ = εww (log wt−1 − log w∗ ) + εws (log st − log s∗ ) .

(3.9)

Second, given an initial condition for w0 , the distribution wt follows (3.9) together with the true
distribution of st . In particular, the true steady state is the vector w̄ that satisfies (3.9) for st = s̄.
As the exogenous state fluctuates around s̄, the approximate solution fluctuates around w̄.17
We evaluate the accuracy of this approximation using the Euler equations errors approach of
Judd (1992). The objective is to evaluate the typical optimization error incurred by agents from
using the proposed linearized policy functions. There are two basic properties of the economy
that matter for this evaluation: first, the endogenous state variables wt−1 are determined by
equation (3.9) together with true distribution of st . Second, at each time t in that sequence of
shocks, agents inside the model form beliefs according to the worst-case conditional probability
distribution Et∗ . Appendix 9.5 presents general computational details and specific quantitative
results for the estimated model discussed in Section 4.
Euler equations for assets
We now illustrate the role of ambiguity for asset prices in steady state as well as in the linear
approximation. From the Euler equations (3.2) and (3.3), the bond price at the worst case steady
state is equal to β and the price payout ratio is equal to β/(1 − β) – the same values as in a steady
17

The steady state of the model is different from both the worst case steady state and the deterministic steady
state. As in the case of risk, averages under the true law of motion are different from the deterministic steady state;
some authors thus label the steady state as the ”stochastic” or ”ergodic” steady state.
In contrast to the risk case, the steady state here is easy to find since it solves a linear equation such as (3.9)
(see also equation (9.6) in Appendix 9.2.2). With risk, the steady state instead solves a non-linear equation, which
typically requires dealing with a pruned state space, since otherwise unconditional moments may not exist (see
Andreasen et al. (2013)).

17

state with perfect foresight. We indicate log deviations from the worst case steady state by hats,
for example we write ĉt = log Ct − log C ∗ . The loglinearized pricing kernel and the household
Euler equation for bonds and equity are then
q̂t = Et∗ [m̂t+1 ],
h
i
p̂t = Et∗ m̂t+1 + β p̂t+1 + (1 − β) dˆt+1 ] ,

(3.10)

where m̂t+1 = ĉt − ĉt+1 and the short term interest rate is r̂t = −q̂t = −Et∗ m̂t+1 .
Stock price and interest rate volatilities
We can use the loglinearized Euler equations to understand the relative volatility of stock
prices and interest rates with ambiguity shocks. Substituting into the Euler equation for stocks,
the price payout ratio can be written as
h
i
∗
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
p̂t − dt = −r̂t + Et β(p̂t+1 − dt+1 ) + dt+1 − dt ] .

(3.11)

The price payout ratio is the worst case expected payoff relative to dividends, discounted at the
riskless interest rate. As in (3.3), an increase in uncertainty can move both the payoff term (if cash
flow becomes more uncertain), and the interest rate (if consumption becomes more uncertain). To
see how these opposing forces shape price volatility, we solve forward to express the price payout
ratio as the present value of future growth rates in the payout-consumption ratio
p̂t − dˆt = Et∗

∞
X




β τ −1 (dˆt+τ − ĉt+τ ) − dˆt − ĉt .

(3.12)

τ =1

If dividends are proportional to consumption, then the price dividend ratio is constant – with
log utility, income and substitution effects cancel. In contrast, if dividends are a small share
of consumption, then uncertainty about dividends will tend to dominate and an increase in
uncertainty can decrease the price dividend ratio.
The steady state and unconditional premia
Average asset premia predicted by the model depend on the average amount of ambiguity
reflected in decisions. In contrast to models with risk, compensation for uncertainty thus appears
already in formulas for steady state prices. To show this, we use the fact that in the absence of
shocks, the equilibrium laws of motion for consumption and payout satisfy the Euler equations.
Let (C̄, D̄) denote steady state consumption and payout. Both are generally above their worst
case counterparts (C ∗ , D∗ ). We denote the log difference in consumption by c̄ = log C̄ − log C ∗
and similarly use the notation d¯ and q̄.
In steady state, agents behave as if they are on an impulse response from (C̄, D̄) to the worst
case steady state (C ∗ , D∗ ). We know that along this (linearized) impulse response, the Euler
18

equations (3.10) hold deterministically. The steady state log bond price therefore satisfies
Q̄ = β exp (q̄) = β exp (c̄ − ĉ1 ) ,
where ĉ1 is the first value along the impulse response. If there is ambiguity about consumption, we
would expect the impulse response to decline towards the worst case. In this case, the bond price
is higher than β, the worst case (and the rational expectations) steady state bond price. In other
words, ambiguity about consumption lowers the interest rate – a precautionary savings effect.
Consider now the steady state price dividend ratio. The log deviation of P̄ /D̄ from the worst
case value β/ (1 − β) is given by (3.12), where the sum is over the consumption and dividend path
along the linearized impulse response. For example, if the dividend-consumption ratio declines
along the impulse response – say because there is a lot of average ambiguity about dividends and
dividends are a small share of consumption – then p̄ − d¯ is negative, that is, the steady state price
dividend ratio P̄ /D̄ is below β/ (1 − β) . The presence of ambiguity thus induces a price discount.
Combining the bond and stock price calculations, the steady state equity premium is18


log P̄ + D̄ − log P̄ + log Q̄ = (1 − β) d¯ − p̄ − (c̄ − ĉ1 ) .
There are two reasons why ambiguity can generate a positive steady state equity premium. First,
the average stock return can be higher than under rational expectations because the price dividend
ratio is lower. This is the first term. Second, the interest rate can be lower. The second effect
is small if dividends are a small share of consumption and ambiguity is largely about dividends.
We emphasize the role of the first effect: it says that average equity returns themselves are higher
than in the rational expectations steady state. Ambiguity thus does not simply work through low
real interest rates.

4

Estimation

In this section we describe the data on real and financial variables, the specific functional forms
for the exogenous shocks and ambiguity as well as our estimation approach.

4.1

Data

Our estimation uses data on investment growth, leverage, the ratios of shareholder payout to GDP
and equity value to GDP. The time period is 1959Q1 to 2011Q3. All firm variables are for the US
18

The log stock return at the steady state is


log P̄ + D̄ − log P̄ ≈ (1 − β) d¯ − p̄ − log β

where we are using the fact that all asset returns are equal to − log β at the worst case steady state.

19

nonfinancial corporate sector. We thus include all nonfinancial firms that are corporations for tax
purposes. In terms of value, however, most fluctuations in financial variables are driven by the
largest firms, which are also publicly traded (see for example, Covas and Den Haan (2011)).
Investment and GDP numbers come from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA),
published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The nonfinancial corporate sector accounts for
about one half of total US GDP. The NIPA accounts are integrated with the Flow of Funds
Accounts (FFA), published by the Federal Reserve Board, from which we take financial variables.
We define net debt issuance as debt issuance less increases in bond holdings. Here we add up
over all fixed income instruments listed in the flow of funds accounts. The idea is that all types of
bonds are close substitutes, at least compared to equity. To quantify a model that delivers a choice
between debt and equity, it thus makes sense to lump all types of bonds together. The market
leverage ratio of the nonfinancial corporate sector is defined as outstanding net debt divided by
the market value of equity. We define shareholder payout as dividends plus share repurchases less
issuance of equity. Since asset flows in raw FFA data are highly seasonal, we compute four quarter
trailing moving averages.

4.2

Dynamics of shocks, volatility, and ambiguity

We need functional forms for the exogenous shocks to MPK and operating cost introduced
in (2.7), as well as for uncertainty about those shocks as in (2.8). We are guided by two
considerations. First, the dynamics of our observables are not easily captured by standard linear
Gaussian dynamics – for example, booms are longer than recessions and return distributions are
heteroskedastic and skewed. This fact motivates the introduction of a finite state Markov chain
to model shock distributions.
The finite state Markov chain ωt = (ηtf , ηtz , vt ) consists of three independent ”regime processes”.
Here vt captures joint movements in volatility and ambiguity, whereas ηtf and ηtz capture movements in intangible ambiguity (that is orthogonal to volatility) about operating cost and MPK,
respectively. Each regime process can take one of two values. Conditional on the realized sequence
of regimes, the shocks are persistent AR(1) processes with Gaussian innovations. We introduce
heteroskedasticity by allowing conditional volatilities to depend on the regime process vt .
The second consideration is that MPK in our model captures not only TFP, but also the
response of (unmodeled) variable inputs such as labor. Previous work has shown that uncertainty
can be an important driver of variable inputs.19 Those findings motivate correlation between
uncertainty about Zt and Zt itself. We assume in particular that a one-unit-innovation to
ambiguity about Zt is associated with a negative κ-unit-innovation to Zt itself. Movements in
19

Ilut and Schneider (2014) study the response of hours worked to an increase in ambiguity about TFP. They
show that more ambiguity makes firms and households act more cautiously, so hours worked and economic activity
contract even if current labor productivity does not change. Time variation in ambiguity induces a time varying
”labor wedge” that accounts for the bulk of variation in hours over the business cycle.

20

Zt (and ambiguity about Zt ) are then subject to both ”small and frequent” Gaussian innovations
and ”large and rare” movements due to regime switches in ηtz and vt .
Our parsimonious setup is not the only way to accommodate regime changes as well as
correlation between MPK and ambiguity. We have conducted preliminary specification analysis
for several more complicated setups – in particular more regimes for volatility, three rather than
two states for each regime process, additional Gaussian forcing processes for ambiguity and a more
general correlation structure between Zt and uncertainty about Zt . We have concluded that the
potential for better fit from those alternatives does not outweigh the additional technical burden.
We now proceed to a formal description of the shock distributions.
Operating cost
It is helpful to think of an innovation to operating cost as drawn in two steps. Nature first
draws a new volatility regime vt+1 for date t + 1, conditional on the current volatility regime vt . It
then draws from a normal distribution with mean zero and volatility σ̃f (vt+1 ). The distribution
of the innovation εft+1 is thus a mixture of two normals with different variances. In terms of the
general notation in (2.7), the conditional mean and variance of ft+1 are now given by

µf (st ) = f¯ + ρf ft − f¯ ,

(4.1a)

σf2 (st ) = E[σ̃f2 (vt+1 ) |vt ],

(4.1b)

where the conditional expectation in the second line is computed from the transition matrix of
the Markov chain vt .
Ambiguity about operating cost depends on intangible ambiguity ηtf as well as on the expected
volatility of innovations to operating cost. The idea here is that agents are less confident about
forecasting the future if they anticipate more turbulence. The function ãf that describes ambiguity
depends only on the current state and takes the multiplicative form
ãf (st , st−1 , at−1 ) = ηtf E [σ̃f (vt+1 ) |vt ] .

(4.2)

The regime ηtf thus measures the role of intangible information per unit of expected volatility.
Since each chain takes on two values, there are four possible values for ambiguity about operating
cost.
Marginal product of capital
Consider now an innovation to ambiguity about Zt , or equivalently a negative κ-unit-innovation
to Zt itself. It is again helpful to think of nature proceeding in two steps. It first draws new regimes
f
z
ωt+1 = (ηt+1
, ηt+1
, vt+1 ) that affect ambiguity analogously to (4.2). It then draws a Gaussian
random variable with mean zero and volatility σ̃z (vt+1 ) that moves Zt one for one. In contrast to
the case of the operating cost, however, our correlation assumption means that regime switches
also affect Zt itself (κ-for-one with ambiguity), and that the Gaussian random variable has a
21

κ −1 -for-one effect on ambiguity.
Some additional notation is helpful in order to describe the distribution of the innovation. We
denote the contribution of regimes to ambiguity about Zt by ãzω and the contribution of regimes
to Zt itself by z̃ω :
ãzω (ωt ) := ηtz E [σ̃z (vt+1 ) |vt ]
z̃ω (ωt ) := −κãzω (ωt ) .

(4.3)

Similarly to the specification above, the Markov chain ηtz measures the role of intangible information per unit of expected volatility.
We can now write the conditional mean and variance of MPK in terms of the general notation
in equation (2.7):

µZ (st ) = log Z̄ + ρz log Zt − log Z̄ + E [z̃ω (ωt+1 ) |ωt ]


σz2 (st ) = E σ̃z2 (vt+1 ) + (z̃ω (ωt+1 ) − E [z̃ω (ωt+1 ) |ωt ])2 |ωt .

(4.4a)
(4.4b)

The conditional mean consists not only of a standard AR(1) mean reversion term, but also adds
the conditional mean of the regime component z̃ (ωt ). Similarly, the conditional variance takes into
account that movements in Zt can occur either because of a Gaussian innovation with volatility
σ̃z (vt+1 ) drawn at date t + 1 or because of a regime switch between at dates t and t + 1.
It remains to specify conditional ambiguity about Zt which can also change because of either
a Gaussian surprise or a regime switch. We allow the impulse response of a Gaussian surprise on
ambiguity to differ from that on Zt itself. Intuitively, uncertainty caused by intangible information
might subside more quickly than the response to MPK since the former captures information
dynamics whereas the latter depends on technology. We define

ãz (st+1 , st , at ) = ρa (at − ãzω (ωt )) − κ −1 log Zt+1 − (log Z̄ + ρz log Zt − log Z̄ ) ,

(4.5)

where ρa is the AR(1) coefficient for ambiguity. The second term represents the innovation to
MPK, multiplied by κ −1 to respect the negative correlation with ambiguity.
The parameter κ measures the strength of the negative response of variable inputs to ambiguity,
which is estimated from the data. If it is close to zero, then there is essentially no response of
variable inputs to ambiguity. Of course, firms may still respond to ambiguity for example by their
choice of investment. At the other extreme, if κ is very large then movements in Zt are driven
by either Gaussian innovations or regime changes, but are accompanied by negligible movements
in ambiguity. Our specification thus effectively nests a nonlinear process for Zt itself that is not
perceived to be ambiguous.

22

4.3

Likelihood-based estimation

Our model has two continuously distributed shocks but four observables. To avoid stochastic
singularity, we introduce measurement error on all observables. Appendix 9.2.2 shows that under
the assumptions of the previous section, the model solution can be represented as a Markovswitching (MS) VAR with conditional moments that depend on the regime. A key technical feature
of our setup is that agents’ endogenous response to changes in uncertainty is reflected in the timevarying constants of the MS-VAR. Indeed, as illustrated in section 3.3, since ambiguity affects
the worst case conditional mean, a linear approximation of the model solution works well even
though uncertainty changes over time. We combine this model solution with a set of observation
equations to obtain a state space system that can be estimated with likelihood based techniques
developed in Bianchi (2013).
We divide parameters into two subsets. The parameters reported in Table 3 are calibrated
up front to match key ratios from the NIPA accounts; further details are in Appendix 9.4. The
parameters reported in Tables 4 and 5 are estimated. We choose priors such that unconditional
means of key variables are centered around values that are a-priori economically sensible; further
details are in Appendix 9.6.
Table 4 contains several parameters for which the estimated modes are similar to values
typically found in the literature: the trend growth rate, the discount factor, the depreciation
rate and the capital share. We now discuss the reported magnitudes of four sets of parameters
that are either nonstandard or for which our estimates are very different from other studies. Those
parameters are displayed in Tables 4 and 5. They govern adjustments costs on investment and
dividends, borrowing costs, operating cost and ambiguity. Identification of the parameters is
discussed in more detail in Sections 5 and 6 below.
Adjustment costs
The parameter Θ scales investment adjustment costs. We estimate a posterior mode of
.93, significantly lower than typical values in the literature that range between 3 and 10.20
The parameter Φ scales dividend adjustment costs. Since the adjustment cost is quadratic,
it determines both the level of adjustment costs and how the cost changes with payout. The
estimated level of adjustment costs is negligible. It is zero at steady state and amounts to only 1.3
basis points of payout even when dividend growth is as high as three model-implied unconditional
standard deviations.
To put the sensitivity of cost to payout in perspective, consider a one time change in payout
away from the balanced growth path. Our estimate implies that the adjustment cost increases
linearly by one cent for every additional dollar of payout. This is again lower than effects found in
the literature. For the cost function in Jermann and Quadrini (2012, JQ), the same experiment
20

See for example Christiano et al. (2005), Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008), Justiniano and Primiceri (2008),
Bianchi (2013) and Ilut and Schneider (2014).

23

implies that the adjustment cost increases linearly by 15 cents for every additional dollar of payout.
In sum, we find lower adjustment costs for both payout and investment. This is even though
we follow other studies in inferring adjustment costs from the smoothness of firm actions, that is,
investment in many business cycle studies and the ratio of equity payout to GDP in JQ. Likely
reasons are that – in contrast to the above papers – we combine both physical adjustment costs
and financial frictions, and that our model relies to a greater extent on uncertainty shocks that
generate different responses than other shocks.
Borrowing costs
The estimated parameter Ψy is a normalized version of the parameter Ψ that controls the
marginal cost of debt in (2.3). Using the posterior mode estimate, the level of the borrowing cost
2
along the balanced growth path 0.5Ψ bf /ξ is only 2 bp of GDP or 2.5% of payout. For the
model dynamics, the key statistic is how much the marginal cost of debt grows with an additional
dollar of debt, that is Ψbf /ξ 2 = 0.0011.
Our estimated sensitivity of borrowing costs is reasonable in light of micro evidence. Indeed,
Binsbergen et al. (2010) use changes in tax law to identify marginal cost curves for debt. They
assume that the marginal cost of interest expense grows linearly with debt, in line with our
functional form. They find that the average firm paying one dollar more in annualized interest
expense (relative to the book value of debt) incurs an additional cost of 14 cents.21 In our model,

annualized interest expense relative to book value is 4 1 − Qb = 0.0093, so that the additional
cost per dollar of interest expense is 0.0011 divided by 0.0093, which equals 12 cents.
Operating cost
For operating cost, we estimate the AR(1) process with heteroskedatic innovations as in (4.1).22
The posterior mode implies an average operating cost of .8% of GDP with a standard deviation
of .25% of GDP. Much like the other frictional costs, operating cost therefore is not an important
item in the aggregate resource constraint. It does however matter for shareholders: on average it
amounts to 9.2% of payout. It is also very persistent with an AR(1) coefficient of .992.
Operating cost displays considerable heteroskedasticity. Volatility of operating cost takes on
two values, selected by the regime process vt . The high value is estimated to be 2.5 times the
low value. Given our specification (4.1)-(4.4), the estimation allows the process vt to also select
different volatilities for MPK innovations. However those estimated values are virtually identical,
so we can interpret vt as simply a shifter of volatility in operating cost.
How much ambiguity?
For each innovation, the magnitude of agents’ perceived ambiguity is parametrized by the
interval of possible worst case means in (2.8). Ilut and Schneider (2014) discuss what sets of
21

In their Table III the estimated slope on interest expense is 4.81 and in their Table II, Sample B, the sample
mean for the interest expense variable is 0.029. This results in an additional average cost of 4.81*0.029=0.14 dollars.
f
f
22
Appendix 9.4 discusses how to map the estimated parameters fy , ς f and ηrf into values for f , f ∗ , ηL
and ηH
.

24

models are consistent with a sample of iid innovations measured by an econometrician. They
propose a bound on worst case means given by twice the standard deviation of the innovation
measured by an econometrician. The basic idea is that agents should not entertain forecasts that
perform badly along the average long sample. If an econometrician estimates a more volatile
process, there is more room for agents’ concern about ambiguity and hence the interval of means
can be wider.
With this bound in mind, consider ambiguity about operating cost. On average, the worst
case mean shifter aft – the extra operating cost agents are concerned about – is equal to 2.3% of
the actual average operating cost f¯, or 2 basis points of GDP. The worst case shifter is thus small
relative to the typical negative innovation observed by investors – it amounts to only 7% of the
average conditional standard deviation.
Perceived ambiguity about operating cost differs significantly across regimes. The worst case
extra operating cost ranges from a low of .9% of average cost when both volatility and intangible
ambiguity ηtf are low, to a high of 8.8% of average cost when both regime processes are high.
Changes in intangible ambiguity play a key role here: the low value is ηtf = .024 standard deviations
whereas the high value is ηtf = .1 standard deviations, a fourfold increase. It follows that even at
its peak, ambiguity about operating cost is well inside the bound of two standard deviations.
Consider now ambiguity about MPK. On average, the worst case mean shifter azt – the extra
decrease in MPK agents worry about – equals 1.25% of the actual average value Z = 1. The shifter
is about as large as a typical observed innovation, at 87% of the average conditional standard
deviation. Perceived ambiguity about MPK also differs across regimes, but its variation is much
less pronounced than for operating cost and comes almost entirely from changes in intangible
information. The low value is ηtz = .8 standard deviations whereas the high value is ηtz = .945
standard deviations. Again we find that estimated ambiguity is well inside the reasonable bound.
Finally, consider the parameter κ in (4.3) that governs the relative size of the perfectly
correlated movements in MPK and ambiguity about MPK. We estimate κ = 5.7, that is, a one
unit change in actual MPK goes along with a 1/5.7 = .18 unit change in ambiguity. This finding
of sizable comovement of output with ambiguity about MPK is consistent with the estimation in
Ilut and Schneider (2014) who explicitly model the response of variable factors to ambiguity.

4.4

Model fit

Figure 1 and Table 1 summarize the data that the estimation must account for. In particular, the
four raw series used in the estimation consist of investment growth, given by the log difference of
investment, the payout-GDP ratio and the equity value-GDP ratio in logarithms, and the leverage
ratio (debt divided by equity value) in levels.23 Figure 1 shows our observables as solid lines as
23

Following standard practice in the DSGE literature, we work with raw data and do not demean or detrend
any series prior to estimation. Stationarity of observables is achieved by taking the growth rate of investment and
ratios for the financial variables. See Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2016) for a recent survey.

25

D/GDP

∆I

-2.5

0.05

-3
0

-3.5

-0.05

-4

-0.1

-4.5

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

Data
Medium cycle

1970

P/GDP

1990

2000

2010

2000

2010

Leverage

1.5

0.6

1

0.4

0.5
1960

1980

0.2
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

1990

Figure 1: The figure reports the raw series used in the estimation (black line) and the corresponding
medium cycle (gray line). The medium term cycle considers the frequency range between 8 and
50 years and is extracted from each series by using a bandpass filter.
well as their medium term movements as lighter gray lines. We define the medium term cycle by a
frequency range between 8 and 50 years and extract the medium term cycle component from each
series using a bandpass filter. Table 1 reports summary statistics for the series and their medium
term cycle components. We also report the correlation between investment growth and the log
dividend yield, as well as between the log payout-GDP ratio and the ratio of net debt issuance
∆B to GDP.
Stylized facts
Four stylized facts stand out about our sample. First, investment moves primarily with the
business cycle. Second, stock prices are not cyclical: the dividend yield, and hence the pricedividend ratio, is essentially uncorrelated with investment growth. Third, financial variables
have large medium term cycle components that are more important than their business cycle
movements. Table 1 shows that medium term cycle components explain more than half of the
variation in every financial series (in particular, 78% of the equity-GDP ratio), but less than one
quarter of investment movements. Moreover, the positive correlation between net debt issuance
and payout relative to GDP is much stronger at medium term frequencies than it is unconditionally.
Fourth, comovement of financial variables with real activity – that is, investment – is very
different at medium term and business cycle frequencies. Over the medium term, payout and
equity value decline relative to GDP as investment growth and leverage increase. This pattern
is especially strong in the 1970s and early 1980s. In contrast, at business cycle frequencies, the
payout-GDP and equity-GDP ratios are procyclical and move with investment, whereas leverage
is countercyclical.
Figure 2 shows the role of observation error in the estimation. The figure reports the data
(dashed line) and the filtered series (solid line) based on the posterior mode estimates. The
difference between the two lines is accounted for by the observation error. The shaded areas
26

indicate 99% error bands. To allow an assessment of fit in terms of stylized facts, Table 1 reports
smoothed model implied counterparts for each of the data statistics described above.
D/GDP

∆I
-2.5

0.05

-3

0

-3.5

-0.05

-4
-4.5

-0.1
1960

1980

2000

1960

P/GDP

1980

2000

Leverage

1.5

0.6

1

0.4

0.5
0.2
1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

Figure 2: Variables used for estimation and filtered series. The figure reports the data (dashed
line) and the filtered series (solid line) based on the posterior mode estimates. The difference
between the two lines is accounted for by the observation error. The gray shaded areas correspond
to 99% error bands.
We cannot expect a model with two shocks to fit four variables perfectly. It is remarkable
therefore how small the estimated measurement errors are. Two notable discrepancies between
data and model are that the model somewhat understates the volatility of payout and that it
allocates a somewhat too large share of variation in equity value to high frequencies. As a result,
the weak overall correlation between investment growth and payout as well as equity value is even
weaker in the model. Nevertheless, the model captures all four stylized facts described above, not
only qualitatively but also quantitatively.

5

Identification of shocks and the role of time varying
uncertainty

How does the model accomplish the fit reported in Figure 2 and Table 1? Our estimation results
point to a three part narrative. First, shocks to MPK – as well as ambiguity about MPK – drive the
business cycle. Second, a large increase in the volatility of operating cost induced a medium term
cycle in the 1970s and 1980s. A similar increase in volatility occurred during the recent financial
crisis. Finally, intangible ambiguity about operating cost increased during the long booms of the
1960s, 1980s, 1990s and early 2000s, all of which ended with a spike in ambiguity. Movements in
27

28

Std deviation
Correlation with ∆ log I
Corr ∆B/Y
100*∆ log I log (D/Y ) log(P/Y ) B/P log(D/Y ) log(P/Y ) B/P log(D/P ) with log(D/Y )
All MC
All MC All MC All MC All MC All MC All MC All MC All MC
2.58 .62
Data
.51 .25 .35 .24
.14 .10 -.01 -.31 .09 -.28 -.27 .13 -.07 -.04 .27 .55
2.58 .62
Model
.44 .21 .34 .19
.14 .09 .07 -.41 .04 -.26 -.23 .19 .05 -.18 .29 .41
Lower uncertainty about operating cost
Only volatility 2.57 .72
.42 .20 .30 .17
.13 .08 .10 -.47 .03 -.54 -.23 .38 -.03 .38 .33 .59
2.61 .58
No ambiguity
.31 .14 .11 .03
.04 .02 .33 -.29 -.10 -.51 -.22 .16 .38 -.20 .60 .59
Reestimated
2.58 .62
.51 .33 .29 .11
.13 .08 .01 -.69 .03 .12 -.27 .09 .01 -.69 .23 .83
Lower uncertainty about marginal product of capital
No ambiguity
3.25 1.10 .58 .48 .45 .26
.21 .13 -.62 -.85 -.06 -.70 .01 .61 -.57 -.62 .59 .96
Lower frictions
Const. leverage 2.54 .86
.67 .10 .43 .20
.24 .09 -.12 -.22 -.03 -.48 .03 .57 -.17 .31 .08 .07
No inv adj costs 4.00 1.76 .46 .18 .34 .20
.14 .09 .26 -.07 .07 -.44 -.18 .27 .24 .30 .23 .56
No div adj costs 2.51 .98
5.34 2.77 .35 .20
.15 .10 .35 -.24 -.04 -.48 .07 .50 .35 -.04 .99 .98
Note: This table reports some key summary statistics for the data, the benchmark model, and a series of alternative
models. The summary statistics are: (1) the standard deviation for the observables used in the estimation; (2)
the correlation of log(D/Y ), log(P/Y ), B/P, and log(D/P ) with the growth rate of investment, ∆ log I; (3) and
the corellation between log(D/Y ) and ∆B/Y.
Each statistic is computed for the raw series (All) and for the corresponding filtered medium term cycle (MC).
The first panel reports the summary statistics for the data and the benchmark model. The second panel reports
the results for alternative models obtained by reducing uncertainty about the operating cost. The third panel
focuses on a model with lower uncertainty about marginal product of capital. Finally, the fourth panel considers
models with lower frictions.

Table 1: Second moments for data, baseline model and counterfactuals

uncertainty give rise to precautionary behavior by firms and investors which alters the comovement
of real and financial variables and generates larger changes in equity prices, leverage and payout.
To establish this narrative in detail, we report the estimation results in three steps. Sections
5.1 and 5.2 explain the separate roles of uncertainty about operating cost and MPK in our baseline
estimation. Section 5.3 then shows that uncertainty about operating cost – a novel ingredient of
our story – is essential in the sense that a reestimated model without it cannot account for the
joint dynamics of macro and financial variables.

5.1

Uncertainty about operating cost

Our estimation infers shifts in uncertainty about operating cost from the comovement of prices
and quantities. To clarify this inference, we first summarize the estimated realization of the
uncertainty regimes. We then discuss comovements induced by a one time increase in uncertainty,
thus quantifying the theoretical responses discussed in Section 3.
Historical evolution of uncertainty
The left panel of Figure 3 displays, for each sample date, the smoothed probability at the
posterior mode that the volatility of operating cost was high. The estimation clearly establishes a
high volatility regime from the mid 1970s to the early 1990s as well as in the wake of the financial
crisis. Ambiguity about operating cost also changes when volatility does not move. The right panel
shows the probability that the process ηtf selects high ambiguity due to intangible information.
Here the estimation draws an interesting parallel between the 1960s and the recent three long
booms in the 1980s, the 1990s and the 2000s. Toward the end of each of those booms, there was a
marked increase in confidence (that is, a drop in ambiguity) about operating cost that resembled
the sustained confidence of the 1960s.
Figure 4 isolates the contribution of uncertainty about operating cost to the estimated realizations of investment growth and the ratio of equity to GDP. To derive it, we start the economy at the
estimated initial state and shut down all innovations except regime switches about the operating
cost. These are drawn based on the estimated regime probabilities at the posterior mode. The
resulting lines display jumps around the regime switches shown in both panels of Figure 3.
The figure shows that uncertainty about operating cost is an important driver of the equityGDP ratio. Changes in volatility had a larger impact than changes in intangible ambiguity – in
particular they played a key role over the medium term cycle as well as during the stock market
correction of the late 2000s. The effect of uncertainty on investment growth is comparatively
smaller. Nevertheless, the increase in volatility in the 1970s did elevate the level of investment for
a number of years, while higher confidence held back investment at the end of long booms.
The middle panel of Table 1 shows that changes in uncertainty are critical for the model
to match stylized facts on both prices and quantities. The row labeled ”No ambiguity” shuts
down any movements in uncertainty about operating cost. As a result, volatilities of all variables
29

Volatility

1
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2
High
Low

0
1960

Ambiguity Operating Cost

1

1970

High
Low

1980

1990

2000

0
1960

2010

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 3: Smoothed regime probabilities. The figure reports the smoothed probabilities at the
posterior mode for the volatility regimes (left panel) and for the regimes capturing ambiguity
about the operating cost (right panel). The smoothed probabilities for the ambiguity regimes
about the marginal product of capital are reported in Figure 6.
except investment growth drop substantially, both overall and at medium term cycle frequencies.
Moreover, without changes in uncertainty the model overstates the cyclicality of the stock market
and the payout-GDP ratio. It then also fails to match the key medium term correlation between
debt issuance and payout relative to GDP.24
The response to an increase in uncertainty
Why does the estimation infer particularly high uncertainty about operating cost in the 1970s
and 1980s, but particularly low uncertainty at the end of major booms? The common denominator
of these episodes is a large common movement in stock prices, payout and debt, but not in
investment. We now show that this joint movement in financial and macro variables closely
resembles the response to a change in uncertainty about operating cost.
Figure 5 displays responses to a one time increase in intangible ambiguity, that is a jump in ηtf
from its low to its high value that is not followed by further regime switches. Up to a scale factor,
the figure also illustrates the response to an increase in volatility.25 The six panels in the figure
show our four observables as well as debt to GDP and the real interest rate. In each panel, the
model is initially in the conditional steady state for the low ambiguity regime. It then experiences
a regime shift to the high ambiguity regime in period 20.
An increase in uncertainty leads to a joint reduction in payout and debt. At the same time, the
24
This counterfactual illustrates an interesting comparison to Tallarini (2000). There, a change in the risk
aversion parameter of the Epstein-Zin representative agent in a model that has only TFP shocks, leads only to a
change in the market price of risk, while quantities are not affected. Moreover, price volatility and even the size of
premia also change little. Our results are similar in that increased concern with one source of uncertainty – about
operating cost – has a larger effect on asset pricing moments than on real moments. However, the details are quite
different and in particular price volatility itself is directly affected.
25
Due to nonlinearity, the response to a decrease in ambiguity is not exactly the mirror image of the response to
an increase. However, it is qualitatively very similar and hence not shown separately.

30

P/GDP

∆I
1.8

0.05

1.6
1.4
0

1.2
1

-0.05

0.8
0.6

-0.1
1960

Actual
Counterfactual

1970

1980

0.4
1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 4: Evolution induced by draws for the regimes sequences of volatility and intangible
information about the operating cost, based on the smooth probabilities of Figure 3.
stock market plummets. The price effect is strong enough that leverage of the corporate sector
rises even as debt shrinks. The stock market crash is not due to an increase in interest rates
– in fact the real rate even declines slightly along with investor confidence. In contrast to the
decline in all financial ratios, investment growth increases on impact. All responses are persistent,
with the stock price, interest rate and debt/GDP ratio even exhibiting large permanent changes.
Permanent effects are to be expected since the economy converges to a new regime-dependent
steady state after the initial regime switch.
The intuition for these responses follows from the firm and household optimality conditions
in Section 3. An increase in uncertainty makes agents fear scarcity of resources in the future. In
particular, households fear lower consumption and increase precautionary savings: their discount
factor Mt+1 increases and the safe interest rate falls. This force would be present even in the
absence of financial frictions. In addition, uncertainty about operating cost makes shareholders
fear scarcity of resources within the firm. The firm’s internal discount factor Mt+1 λt+1 /λt thus
increases in part because shareholders fear a higher cost of capital.
Precautionary savings generates higher investment. At the same, financial frictions imply that
extra investment is not funded by more leverage, but by reducing payout. Indeed, holding fixed
the interest rate, an increase in the firm’s discount factor increases the worst case marginal cost
of repaying debt. On top of that, a lower interest rate lowers the tax benefit of debt. With higher
investment and lower debt, a decrease in payout follows from the firm budget constraint. In the
presence of adjustment costs, the firm draws out the decrease to smooth the growth of payout.
The drop in the stock price is due to an increase in the uncertainty premium. In the notation
of Section 3.1, the future payoff of equity is Πt+1 ≡ Pt+1 + Dt+1 . An innovation to uncertainty
about operating cost then triggers the two opposing forces present in equation (3.3): a higher
uncertainty premium Et [Πt+1 ] − Et∗ [Πt+1 ] lowers the price whereas a lower interest rate raises

31

20

#10

-3

"I

D/GDP

0

0

P/GDP

-0.1
10

-0.2

0

-0.4

-0.2
-0.3

20

40

60

Leverage

20
0

0.15
0.1

#10-3

40

60

RIR

0

40

60

Debt/GDP

-0.02

-1

0.05

20

-0.04

-2

0
20

40

60

20

40

60

20

40

60

Figure 5: Impulse response for a switch from a regime of low ambiguity to a regime of high
ambiguity about the operating cost. The switch occurs in period 20.
the price as the present value of cash flow increases. The uncertainty premium effect dominates
because payout Dt is a small fraction of overall consumption Ct .26 The drop in the stock price
thus goes along with an increase in the excess return measured by an econometrician while interest
rates are stable.
What flavor of uncertainty?
So far we have emphasized the similarity between changes in volatility and changes in intangible
ambiguity. Both types of uncertainty generate precautionary behavior and measured risk premia
that lower stock prices. How does the estimation decide that the 1970s and 1980s as well as the
Great Recession were characterized by volatile operating cost? In the raw data in Figure 2, both
episodes exhibit sharp variations in leverage and payout relative to GDP. The estimation uses the
high volatility regime to account for these movements.
To isolate further the role of each type of uncertainty, the row labeled ”volatility only” in
Table 1 shows moments when intangible ambiguity is shut down but movements in volatility are
retained. We can compare it to the baseline model to see the impact of intangible ambiguity alone
as well as to the row ”no ambiguity” to see the effect of volatility.
Time variation in volatility is overall more important for dynamics than intangible ambiguity.
Indeed, when intangible ambiguity is shut off, the standard deviations of all observables are close
26

The asset market clearing condition θt+1 = 1 implies that the price Pt+1 disappears from the determination
of equilibrium consumption Ct+1 in the household budget constraint. Instead, the uncertain payoff Πt+1 matters
for Ct+1 only from its effect through the payout Dt+1 . In the notation of equation (3.4), this means that there is a
large α̂t , not directly affected by the uncertainty about cash flow, and a small β̂t .

32

to those in the baseline model. At the same time, intangible ambiguity plays an important
role in fitting correlations. In particular, the ”volatility only” specification strongly overstates
the negative correlation between the stock market and investment growth at medium term cycle
frequencies. While both sources of uncertainty induce a negative correlation, shutting down the
intangible information channel shifts the weight towards the stronger medium cycle correlation
effects coming through the volatility regimes.
Our estimated high volatility regime is quite different from regimes found in work on the ”Great
Moderation”. The latter work is concerned with drops in the volatility of macro variables between
the early 1980s and the Great Recession.27 In contrast, our high volatility regime is identified by
changes in the volatility of financial variables together with low asset prices. While it also starts
in the mid 1970s, it also includes the financial market turbulence of the late 1980s which saw the
savings and loan crisis and the 1987 stock market crash.

5.2

Uncertainty about the marginal product of capital

The left panel of Figure 6 shows the estimated joint evolution of MPK and ambiguity about MPK.
As a backdrop, the dashed black line is investment growth, the observable most closely associated
with MPK. The blue solid line is the contribution of MPK to investment growth. Since our model
solution is linear, that contribution represents a scaled version of the shock Zt itself.
Comparing the two lines we conclude that shifts in MPK account for the bulk of movements
in investment. In contrast, the solid blue line in the right panel of Figure 6 shows the minor
contribution of realized operating cost to investment growth. Movements in uncertainty about
operating cost also account for a minor variation, as shown in Figure 4 and discussed earlier.
According to the shock specification (4.4)-(4.5), movements in MPK (and ambiguity about
MPK) have both a Gaussian component and a discrete component due to regime switches. The
shading in the left panel of Figure 6 indicates the posterior probability that the regime process ηtz
takes on its high value, so ambiguity about MPK is high and MPK itself is low. Comparison with
Figure 3 shows that ηtz is much less persistent than uncertainty about operating cost. Instead, its
role is to generate relatively frequent non-Gaussian movements.
The response to MPK shocks
How does the estimation identify joint movements in MPK and ambiguity about MPK as
drivers of business cycle fluctuations? Whatever is the driving force behind those fluctuations
must account for business cycle movements in investment as well as procyclical comovement in
payout and debt. At the same time, however, it must not generate large fluctuations in the stock
market and in leverage. We now show that our correlated shock to MPK and ambiguity about
MPK has these properties.
27

See, for example, Justiniano and Primiceri (2008), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2010) and Bianchi (2013).

33

Contribution of Operating cost

Contribution of MPK block

0.8
0.7

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

Investment growth

Prob. High MPK Ambiguity

0.9

0.6

0

0.5

-0.02

0.4

-0.04

0.3

-0.06

-0.06

-0.08

-0.08

-0.1

-0.1

0.2
0.1
0
1960

High MPK Amb.
Actual
Counterfactual

1970

1980

1990

2000

0
-0.02
-0.04

2010

1960

Actual
Counterfactual

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 6: Shock decomposition for investment growth. In both panels, the solid line refers to
the counterfactual simulation, whereas the dashed line corresponds to the actual data. In the left
panel, the counterfactual shuts down all disturbances except for those affecting MPK: Shocks to
MPK and regime changes in the level of ambiguity about MPK (right scale). This plot also reports
the smoothed probability at the posterior mode of being in the high MPK ambiguity regime (left
scale). In the right plot, the counterfactual shuts down all disturbances except for the shocks to
the operating cost.
A decrease in MPK and an increase in ambiguity about MPK have distinct and partially
offsetting effects on investment and the real interest rate. On the one hand, a decrease in the
persistent shock Zt lowers both the current and the expected MPK. Much like in a standard real
business cycle model, it lowers investment and it increases the real interest rate. On the other
hand, an increase in ambiguity about MPK lowers the worst case expected return on capital while
current MPK is unaffected. The response is dominated by a precautionary savings effect that
increases investment and decreases the real interest rate. However, the effect of investment is
dampened by the lower worst case return on investment.
There are also offsetting effects on financial variables. A time of low MPK is a bad time for
a firm to invest, but a good time to issue debt: future funds within the firm are relatively more
abundant and the higher interest rate raises the tax benefit of debt. The increase in debt and
decrease in investment are large enough to allow higher payout, even though current cash flow is
lower. In contrast, higher ambiguity about future MPK makes future funds uncertain and lowers
the real interest rate, thus decreasing debt issuance. Since investment is also higher and current
cash flow is unchanged, the budget constraint implies that payout must decrease.
To quantify the two opposing forces, the sixth row in Table 1, labeled ”lower uncertainty about
marginal product of capital: no ambiguity”, shuts off ambiguity to leave a shock to MPK only.
Relative to the baseline model, all volatilities are higher, as one would expect if one of two opposing
forces is eliminated. Moreover, the counterfactual produces stronger correlation between payout
on the one hand and investment and debt on the other. Ambiguity about MPK thus helps the
34

model to simultaneously account for the cyclical fluctuations in these three quantity variables –
shocks to MPK alone would create too strong of an association.
In contrast to ambiguity about operating cost, ambiguity about MPK does not help generate
stock price volatility: the latter is higher under the counterfactual that eliminates ambiguity
about MPK. The reason is the precautionary savings effect discussed in Section 3.1. While higher
ambiguity about future payoff induces an uncertainty premium that decreases the equity price, the
precautionary savings motive lowers the interest rate and increases the present value of payoffs.
At the estimated parameter values, the second effect is sufficiently strong so as to dominate.

5.3

Is uncertainty about operating cost essential?

The results in Section 5.1 show that if we shut down variation in uncertainty about operating cost –
keeping other estimated parameters the same – then the model performance worsens dramatically,
especially for stock market volatility. It follows that variation in uncertainty about operating cost
plays a key role within the narrative of the data provided by our model. We cannot yet conclude,
however, whether a more parsimonious model without variation in uncertainty about operating
cost could also get close to the data and baseline model, thus supplying a quite different narrative.
To answer the latter question, the row labeled ”reestimated” in Table 1 reports results from an
alternative estimation without any uncertainty about operating cost; in particular the possibility
of regime switches as in Figure 3 are left out. Otherwise, this alternative model is driven by the
same two shocks as before and allows for variation in uncertainty about MPK. As for the baseline
estimation, we allow for measurement error on all observables.
While one would expect the more parsimonious alternative model to perform worse than the
baseline model, its lack of fit is striking. Measurement error is now needed to account for 25%
of overall variation in the equity-GDP ratio, and for 80% of the variation of that ratio over the
medium term cycle. This is although the model overstates variation in payout over the medium
term cycle by 60% relative to the data. The need for measurement error to account for low
frequency movements is a clear sign of misspecification. Moreover, the alternative model is unable
to account for the correlation patterns over the medium term cycle; in particular, it makes the
equity-GDP ratio and the dividend yield counterfactually strongly countercyclical.
Since the alternative model does not allow for uncertainty about operating cost, it might rely on
movements in MPK and uncertainty about MPK to generate asset price volatility. The discussion
in Section 3.1 suggests that this is an uphill battle: while a decrease in MPK (as well as an increase
in ambiguity in MPK) will tend to lower expected payoff, it also makes investors discount those
payoffs at a lower real interest rate, leaving the stock price relatively stable. The estimation deals
with this dilemma by introducing a counterfactually large medium term component in payout,
driven largely by realized operating cost. As we show in Section 7 below, this feature implies that
the model cannot generate excess return predictability, in contrast to the baseline model.
35

The results here have broader significance for production based asset pricing models driven by
”business cycle shocks” such as TFP together with time varying volatility of those shocks. While
it may be possible for such models to generate a lot of price volatility, especially if the payout series
is not fit to the data, it is important to check whether the volatility in payout and prices indeed
arises at the right frequencies. Comparison of our two estimations suggests that while business
cycle shocks – in our case, to MPK and ambiguity about MPK – can generate sensible movements
in investment that are only weakly connected to the stock market, they cannot simultaneously
generate the observed comovement over the medium term cycle.

6

The role of frictions

Throughout our discussion, firms’ optimal choice of leverage and payout has been central to our
interpretation. To quantify the importance of this margin, we now contrast our model to one with
constant leverage. We also discuss the role of different adjustment costs for firm behavior.

6.1

Endogenous leverage

Our paper differs from existing production based asset pricing exercises in that leverage and payout
are determined endogenously in the model and matched to their counterparts in the data. Existing
papers typically consider frictionless models of the firm and choose constant book leverage, that
is, debt is proportional to the capital stock:
Bt = ϑKt .

(6.1)

Payout is then determined as a residual from the firm budget constraint. In a frictionless model,
this (or any other budget feasible) exogenous specification can be justified by the Modigliani-Miller
theorem. However, it is not disciplined by data except that ϑ is selected to match average leverage.
In this section we show that the endogenous choice of leverage plays a key role for the
performance of our model. The seventh row in Table 1, labeled ”constant leverage”, considers
a counterfactual that sets debt as in equation (6.1), with payout determined as a residual. All
other parameters and shock realizations are the same as in the baseline case. A key property
of the reduced form policy function for debt is that the change in debt is now closely tied to
investment; debt responds to shocks only to the extent that those shocks move investment. In
contrast, we have shown that under the optimal policy function firms respond to shocks that move
the perceived future cost of funds – such as uncertainty about operating cost – even if the effect
of such shocks on investment is relatively small.
In the constant leverage counterfactual, volatilities of the financial variables increase relative
to the baseline model, but the share of variation at medium term cycle frequencies declines to a

36

level that is much lower than in the data. This is what one would expect since financial decisions
are now mechanically tied to investment, a variable that fluctuates mostly over the business
cycle.28 For the same reason, the correlation between investment growth and (market) leverage
becomes counterfactually high and positive. Finally, the procyclical comovement of debt issuance
and payout virtually disappears. In the baseline model, the latter key fact is driven by the response
of optimal leverage choice to uncertainty shocks that make investment and debt issuance move in
opposite directions, in sharp contrast to (6.1).29

6.2

The role of adjustment costs

Our baseline model assumes adjustment costs to the rate of change in investment and payout.
The last two rows in Table 1 report moments from counterfactuals that shut down those costs,
again everything else equal.
Investment adjustment cost
The main effect of dropping investment adjustment costs (that is, Θ = 0) is that investment
becomes more volatile. This is not surprising – adjustment costs play the usual role of smoothing
investment. At the same time, the volatilities of payout and leverage change little – the additional
movements in investment track internal cash flow, but do not generate movement in external
finance. What also stands out in the table is that adjustment costs are key to matching the
comovement of stock prices and investment over the medium term cycle. In particular, an increase
in uncertainty about operating cost in the counterfactual model generates a stronger precautionary
increase in investment together with lower stock prices as before. As a result, negative comovement
between the equity-GDP ratio and investment over the medium term cycle becomes too strong.
The fact that adjustment costs are not crucial for price volatility distinguishes our model from
many existing production based asset pricing models. Indeed, the traditional approach is to work
with TFP shocks only and to identify the value of an unlevered firm with the capital stock. In the
absence of adjustment cost the stock price is then constant. With higher adjustment costs, the
stock price becomes more volatile, at the cost of making investment more smooth. This tension
makes it hard to match price and quantity volatility jointly. Our model start from a different view
of the firm – based on packaging of payout subject to financial frictions – together with uncertainty
shocks, so that this tension does not arise.
28

The counterfactual here simply shuts down optimal leverage and payout choice given our estimated parameters.
It thus serves to establish the importance of optimal leverage choice in the context of our model. However, the
stylized facts we have emphasized point to a more general problem for models that impose the mechanical link in
equation (6.1): any model the matches the cyclical dynamics of investment will have trouble matching the medium
term cycle dynamics of debt.
29
Our constant leverage counterfactual also exhibits countercyclical payout. This property is familiar from
existing production based asset pricing models with volatility shocks. In those models, investment and hence debt
tends to respond negatively to volatility shocks; dividends work as a residual that has to compensate by moving
in the opposite direction. Along this dimension, our model makes uncertainty shocks work because it allows for an
endogenous leverage.

37

Dividend adjustment cost
The main effect of dropping dividend adjustment costs (that is, Φ = 0) is that dividends
become more volatile. In addition, there is a notable increase in the volatility of investment
growth at medium term cycle frequencies, whereas volatilities of leverage and the equity-GDP
ratio change little. Without dividend adjustment costs, the firm first order conditions (3.5)-(3.7)
simplify: the investment decision works as if households were direct holders of capital, while debt
remains determined by a tradeoff theory of capital structure. Payout is determined as a residual
from the budget constraint of the levered firm and hence becomes excessively volatile.
Dividend adjustment costs are also important to generate the right type of comovement over
the medium term cycle. As in the baseline model, an increase in uncertainty about operating cost
– the key driver of the medium term cycle – jointly lowers payout, debt and the stock price and
increases investment. The absence of dividend adjustment costs results in a stronger reduction
in payout that in turn allows a stronger increase in investment. At the same time, the stock
price – which reflects worst case present values – is less sensitive to the stronger impact response
and reacts much like in the baseline model. The upshot is a medium term cycle with excessive
comovement in payout and debt, investment and the equity-GDP ratio as well as investment and
leverage.

7

The real interest rate and excess volatility

The results reported so far show that our model can match the volatility of the payout yield – or
equivalently, the price-payout ratio. While this is promising, it does not yet demonstrate that it
generates the right kind of volatility. As discussed in Section 3.1, stock prices can move because of
(i) changes in the expected present value of cash flows, or (ii) changes in premia for uncertainty.
The literature has established that the bulk of volatility is due to (ii) – the excess volatility
puzzle. This section shows that our model also has this property.
In particular, we need to make sure that we do not obtain volatile stock prices because there
are counterfactually large movements in the real interest rate. Our estimation did not target the
real interest rate, so it might in principle use rate movements to shift the present value of payout.
It would thereby generate the wrong type of stock price volatility (i) . The power of discounting
implies that our model may not be a good model of the stock market even though it does a good
job matching the joint distribution of prices and payout.
The volatility of the model implied real interest rate is 1% per year. It has an autocorrelation
coefficient of .5 and is mildly procyclical – the correlation coefficient with investment is .2. As a
concrete data counterpart, we rely on a state space model of interest rate and inflation dynamics

38

estimated by Piazzesi et al. (2013).30 The resulting series has a volatility of 2%, an autocorrelation
coefficient of .8 and its correlation with investment is .1. Both the model series and its data
counterpart thus share standard properties of real interest rate series in the literature: they are
stable, persistent and not particularly cyclical.
The real return on short bonds thus looks very different from the real return on equity. In our
data, the average equity premium is 5.2% per year and the volatility of equity returns is 17.6%.
The model also produces an equity premium of 5.2% as well as a return volatility of 19.8%. In
both the model and the data, the autocorrelation of stock returns is small at .1. We conclude that
the model replicates the unconditional high risk and high return in stocks relative to bonds.
Predictability of excess returns
We use a standard diagnostic for time varying premia: we regress excess return on stocks on
the dividend yield. As shown in Section 3.1, if price were equal to expected present value, then
we should see no predictive power – both the slope and the R2 should be equal to zero. We define
the one period log excess return on stocks relative to the safe interest rate by
xet+1 = log(Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) − log Pt + log(Qbt )

(7.1)

and define h-period excess returns by summing up one period excess returns.
Table 2 reports results for predictive regressions with horizon one, two and five years, comparing the data and the baseline model. To be consistent with the estimation approach, our
construction of returns is also based on measures of payout and equity value from the Flow of
Funds Accounts. The predictive regressions exhibit familiar patterns and magnitudes from the
asset pricing literature: the regression slopes are significantly positive and both slopes and R2 s
increase with the forecast horizon.31 The model reproduces both patterns; in fact, it slightly
overstates the predictive power of the dividend yield.
Ambiguity and predictability
How does the model generate excess volatility of stock prices and a stable real interest rate?
The key mechanism is that uncertainty about operating cost has persistent effects on the dividend
yield but not on the real interest rate. Indeed, an increase in uncertainty lowers prices and increases
the dividend yield as investors require more compensation to hold stocks. However, since operating
cost is a small share of output, worst case expectations of future consumption and hence the real
rate remain stable. As the shock mean reverts, so does the stock price. An econometrician thus
finds that low prices are followed by high excess returns. Investors do not exploit this predictability
because they do not want to bear the ambiguity associated with high premia.
30

Since indexed bonds were not traded in the US before 1997, estimates of real interest rate always involve
assumptions on inflation expectations. The advantage of a state space approach is that it separates slow moving
and transitory components of the inflation process, thus yielding a better fit of inflation dynamics.
31
Since we are using the statistic only as a diagnostic tool, we report OLS standard errors in both the data and
model regressions.

39

We confirm that ambiguity about operating cost is critical for predictability in our model
by rerunning the predictive regressions for the alternative model introduced in Section 5.3. The
bottom rows of Table 2 shows that the alternative model is not successful on that front: while
the slopes have the right sign and the results look good for short horizon, there is essentially no
predictability at the five year horizon, in contrast to the data and the baseline model. It follows
that ambiguity about MPK is not enough to generate the right type of stock market volatility.
Table 2: Predictability of future excess returns by current dividend yield
Statistic
Data

Baseline model

Alternative model

1 year
0.0986
0.0262
0.0653
0.1504
0.0307
0.1077
0.0997
0.0229
0.0865

Slope
(s.e.)
R2
Slope
(s.e.)
R2
Slope
(s.e.)
R2

Horizon
2 years
0.1611
0.0330
0.1068
0.2503
0.0381
0.1801
0.1551
0.0293
0.1241

5 years
0.3669
0.0406
0.3040
0.4280
0.0518
0.2643
0.1061
0.0379
0.0392

Note: This table reports results for regressing future excess returns on stocks on a constant and the dividend
yield log(Dt /Pt ). The horizon columns report results based on summing up the one period returns xet+1 , defined
in equation (7.1), for one, two or five years ahead. Slope refers to the coefficient on the dividend yield, (s.e.) refers
to the OLS standard errors and R2 to the regression R-squared. The alternative model, introduced in Section 5.3,
is a re-estimated model without any uncertainty about operating cost.

8

Conclusion

How to reconcile the behavior of real activity and equity prices is a long standing question in
macro finance. To provide a solid foundation for understanding aggregate fluctuations and the
effects of policy, it would be desirable to work with DSGE models that can jointly match firm cash
flows and their valuation. This paper contributes to that agenda by proposing one such model.
Introducing time varying ambiguity on the household side and financial frictions on the firm side
delivers a parsimonious account of postwar US data. More broadly, we emphasize four takeaways
for the agenda as a whole.
First, it is worthwhile to look beyond business cycle frequencies. To understand postwar asset
price dynamics, it is not enough to simply generate ”high risk premia in recessions”, a common
theme in the literature. A narrow focus on the business cycle ignores the large medium term
cycle component in stock prices. We show that this point is even more salient once we care
40

about matching corporate cash flows and leverage. Our results suggest that shocks that drive the
business cycle are unlikely to account for the right type of price volatility, even if a mechanism
that generates time varying risk premia is added to the model.
Second, time varying uncertainty is useful not only to relate asset prices and investor behavior,
but also to understand firm financial decisions. Previous work has shown that time varying
uncertainty – whether risk or ambiguity – can reconcile excessively volatile prices with moderate
volatility in consumption and cash flow. This works because uncertainty shocks add extra
”discount rate” volatility to the stochastic discount factor. This paper describes a mechanism
by which discount rate volatility – and hence uncertainty shocks – affect shareholder value
maximization so as to generate observed comovement in prices, investment, payout and leverage
at different frequencies.
Third, our model assigns an important role to uncertainty about shocks that affect corporate
earnings but do not scale with production. In our view such shocks are particularly plausible
once one thinks about the corporate sector not simply as a production technology, but instead an
organization that expends resources in order to package cash flows into financial claims. Operating
cost can then then represent a sizable share of shareholder payout but still remain a small share
of overall consumption.
Compared to standard uncertainty shocks about productivity, uncertainty about operating
cost is promising for explaining asset prices. In particular, our results show that it reduces the
standard tension between excess volatility of stock prices and stable interest rates. Moreover, it
changes the comovement of stock prices and shareholder payout with investment by encouraging
precautionary savings when stock prices are low.
While we have provided some motivating examples for operating cost, it would be valuable to
develop more direct evidence on the nature of these costs, their variability as well as uncertainty
perceived about them by investors. A particularly interesting question is to what extent uncertainty arises at the level of the individual firm or only at the level of the corporate sector as a
whole (where it might reflect, for example, reorganization via mergers and acquisitions). In the
former case, the first order effects of ambiguity about operating cost as we have modeled them
could also help understand also the cross section of stock returns.
Finally, our model demonstrates by example that recursive multiple priors utility with ambiguity about means offers a tractable way to analyze DSGE models with time varying uncertainty.
This tractability allows us to represent the model as an MS-VAR and estimate it by likelihood
methods. Adding ambiguity about means is thus a straightforward way for DSGE modelers to
augment their models with quantitatively sensible asset pricing implications.

41

References
Andreasen, M. M., J. Fernández-Villaverde, and J. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2013): “The
pruned state-space system for non-linear DSGE models: Theory and empirical applications,”
NBER Working Paper 18983.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. Kehoe (2010): “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in
Uncertainty,” FRB of Minneapolis, Research Department Staff Report.
Aruoba, S. B., J. Fernandez-Villaverde, and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2006): “Comparing
Solution Methods for Dynamic Equilibrium Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 30, 2477–2508.
Baele, L., G. Bekaert, S. Cho, K. Inghelbrecht, and A. Moreno (2011): “Macroeconomic Regimes,” Columbia University working paper.
Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2012): “Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand,” NBER
Working Paper 18420.
Begenau, J. and J. Salomao (2013): “Firm financing over the business cycle,” Mimeo.
Belo, F., X. Lin, and F. Yang (2014): “External equity financing shocks, financial flows, and
asset prices,” NBER Working Paper 20210.
Bianchi, F. (2013): “Regime Switches, Agents’ Beliefs, and Post-World War II U.S. Macroeconomic Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, 80, 463–490.
Bidder, R. and M. Smith (2012): “Robust Animal Spirits,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
59, 738–750.
Binsbergen, V., H. Jules, J. R. Graham, and J. Yang (2010): “The cost of debt,” The
Journal of Finance, 65, 2089–2136.
Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2013): “Market timing, investment, and risk
management,” Journal of Financial Economics, 109, 40–62.
Brav, A., J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely (2005): “Payout policy in the
21st century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 483–527.
Cagetti, M., L. P. Hansen, T. Sargent, and N. Williams (2002): “Robustness and
Pricing with Uncertain Growth,” Review of Financial Studies, 15, 363–404.
Caldara, D., J. Fernández-Villaverde, J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and W. Yao (2012):
“Computing DSGE models with recursive preferences and stochastic volatility,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 15, 188–206.
42

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of political Economy, 113, 1–45.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk shocks,” The American
Economic Review, 104, 27–65.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011): “Presidential address: Discount rates,” The Journal of Finance, 66,
1047–1108.
Cogley, T. and T. J. Sargent (2006): “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and
Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 262–302.
Comin, D. and M. Gertler (2006): “Medium-term business cycles,” The American Economic
Review, 96, 523–551.
Covas, F. and W. J. Den Haan (2011): “The Cyclical Behavior of Debt and Equity Finance,”
The American Economic Review, 101, 877–899.
——— (2012): “The Role of Debt and Equity Finance Over the Business Cycle,” The Economic
Journal, 122, 1262–1286.
Croce, M. M., H. Kung, T. T. Nguyen, and L. Schmid (2012): “Fiscal policies and asset
prices,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 2635–2672.
Davig, T. and T. Doh (2013): “Monetary Policy Regime Shifts and Inflation Persistence,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Del Negro, M. and F. Schorfheide (2008): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models (And How it
Affects the Assessment of Nominal Rigidities),” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 1191–1208.
Drechsler, I. (2013): “Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices,” The Journal of
Finance, 68, 1843–1889.
Eisfeldt, A. L. and T. Muir (2014): “Aggregate Issuance and Savings Waves,” NBER
Working Paper 20442.
Elenev, V., T. Landvoigt, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2016): “A Macroeconomic Model
with Financially Constrained Producers and Intermediaries,” Working Paper.
Epstein, L. and T. Wang (1994): “Intertemporal Asset Pricing under Knightian Uncertainty,”
Econometrica, 62, 283–322.
Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider (2003): “Recursive Multiple-Priors,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 113, 1–31.
43

——— (2008): “Ambiguity, information quality, and asset pricing,” The Journal of Finance, 63,
197–228.
——— (2010):
forthcoming.

“Ambiguity and Asset Markets,” Annual Review of Financial Economics,

Farre-Mensa, J., R. Michaely, and M. Schmalz (2014): “Payout Policy,” Annual Review
of Financial Economics, 6, 75–134.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, J. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and M. Uribe
(2011): “Risk Matters. The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks,” American Economic Review, 101,
2530–2561.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, and J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2010):
“Fortune or Virtue: Time-Variant Volatilities Versus Parameter Drifting in U.S. Data,” NBER
Working Papers 15928.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and F. Schorfheide (2016): “Solution
and estimation methods for DSGE models,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 527–724.
Foerster, A., J. Rubio-Ramirez, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2015): “Perturbation
Methods for Markov-switching DSGE Models,” Quantitative Economics, forthcoming.
Frank, M. and V. Goyal (2011): “Trade-off and Pecking Order Theories of Debt,” Handbook
of Empirical Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, 2, 135.
Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989): “Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-unique Prior,”
Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18, 141–153.
Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2010): “Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
investment dynamics,” Unpublished working Paper.
Glover, B., J. F. Gomes, and A. Yaron (2011): “Corporate taxes, leverage, and business
cycles,” Unpublished working Paper.
Gourio, F. (2012): “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” The American Economic Review, 102,
2734–2766.
——— (2013): “Credit risk and disaster risk,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5,
1–34.
Graham, J. R. and M. T. Leary (2011): “A review of empirical capital structure research
and directions for the future,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 3.

44

Greenwald, D. L., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2014): “The Origins of Stock Market
Fluctuations,” NBER Working Papers 19818.
Guidolin, M. and F. Rinaldi (2013): “Ambiguity in Asset Pricing and Portfolio Choice: A
Review of the Literature,” Theory and Decision, 74, 183–217.
Hamilton, J. D. (1989): “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time
Series and the Business Cycle,” Econometrica, 57, 357–384.
——— (1994): Time Series Analysis, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ilut, C. and M. Schneider (2014): “Ambiguous Business Cycles,” American Economic
Review, 104, 2368–2399.
Jahan-Parvar, M. and H. Liu (2012): “Ambiguity Aversion and Asset Prices in Production
Economies,” Unpublished working Paper.
Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2012):
American Economic Review, 102, 238–271.

“Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”

Judd, K. L. (1992): “Projection Methods for Solving Aggregate Growth Models,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 58, 410–452.
Judd, K. L. and S.-M. Guu (1997): “Asymptotic Methods for Aggregate Growth Models,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21, 1025–1042.
Justiniano, A. and G. Primiceri (2008): “The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic
Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 98, 604–41.
Khan, A. and J. K. Thomas (2013): “Credit shocks and aggregate fluctuations in an economy
with production heterogeneity,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 1055–1107.
Leippold, M., F. Trojani, and P. Vanini (2008): “Learning and asset prices under ambiguous
information,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 2565–2597.
Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson (2010): “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return
Tradeoff,” in Handbook of Financial Econometrics, ed. by Y. Ait-Sahalia and L. Hansen, Elsevier
Science B.V., North Holland, Amsterdam, 617–690.
Liu, Z., D. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2011): “Sources of the Great Moderation: A RegimeSwitching DSGE Approach,” Quantitative Economics, 2, 251–301.
Lubik, T. A. and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for indeterminacy: an application to US
monetary policy,” The American Economic Review, 94, 190–217.
45

Malkhozov, A. and M. Shamloo (2012): “News Shocks, Volatility Shocks, and Asset Prices,”
Unpublished working paper.
Piazzesi, M., J. Salomao, and M. Schneider (2013): “Trend and Cycle in Bond Premia,”
Mimeo.
Primiceri, G. (2005): “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy,”
Review of Economic Studies, 72, 821–852.
Santos, M. S. (2000): “Accuracy of Numerical Solutions using the Euler Equation Residuals,”
Econometrica, 1377–1402.
Sbuelz, A. and F. Trojani (2008): “Asset prices with locally constrained-entropy recursive
multiple-priors utility,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32, 3695–3717.
Schorfheide, F. (2005): “Learning and Monetary Policy Shifts,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
8, 392–419.
Sims, C. A. (2002): “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” Computational Economics,
20, 1–20.
Sims, C. A. and T. Zha (2006): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?”
American Economic Review, 91, 54–81.
Strebulaev, I. A. and T. M. Whited (2011): “Dynamic models and structural estimation
in corporate finance,” Foundations and Trends in Finance, 6, (1-2).
Tallarini, T. D. (2000): “Risk-sensitive real business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
45, 507–532.

46

9

Appendix

9.1

Approximations for bond and stock prices

In this appendix we derive the approximate formulas for bond and stock prices used in Section
3.1. As in the text, the change of measure from the true distribution to the worst case belief is
described by a stochastic process Xt+1 adapted to the agent’s information set and with Et Xt+1 = 1
such that Et∗ Yt+1 = Et Yt+1 Xt+1 for any random variable Yt+1 .
−γ
We use a second order Taylor approximation of marginal utility Ct+1
around expected consumption Et Ct+1 :
γ (γ + 1)
(Et Ct+1 )−γ−2 (Ct+1 − Et Ct+1 )2
2
!
γ (γ + 1) (Ct+1 − Et Ct+1 )2
(9.1)
+
2
(Et Ct+1 )2

−γ
Ct+1
= (Et Ct+1 )−γ − γ (Et Ct+1 )−γ−1 (Ct+1 − Et Ct+1 ) +

= (Et Ct+1 )−γ

1−γ

Ct+1 − Et Ct+1
Et Ct+1

−γ
Consider the bond price. Substituting for Ct+1
from (9.1), we obtain:

Qbt = βEt∗



"
−γ 
Ct+1
≈ βCtγ Et (Et Ct+1 )−γ
Ct−γ

Ct+1 − Et Ct+1 γ (γ + 1) (Ct+1 − Et Ct+1 )2
+
1−γ
Et Ct+1
2
(Et Ct+1 )2

!

#
Xt+1

Omtitting terms that contain third or higher moments, we arrive at equation (3.2) in the text,
where we use the case γ = 1 :
Qbt



Et Ct+1 − Et∗ Ct+1
Ctγ
γ (γ + 1) vart (Ct+1 )
+γ
≈β
1+
(Et Ct+1 )γ
2
Et Ct+1
(Et Ct+1 )2

Consider now the price of a generic payoff Πt+1 :
QΠ
t



−γ
Ct+1
Πt+1 Xt+1
Ct−γ



−γ
Ct+1
(Πt+1 − Et Πt+1 ) Xt+1
Ct−γ

= βEt



which can be written as
QΠ
t

=

Qbt Et Πt+1

+ βEt



Substituting for Ct from the bond price equation, we obtain:
b
QΠ
t = Qt

 −γ
!
Et Ct+1
(Πt+1 − Et Πt+1 ) Xt+1
 −γ

Et Πt+1 +
Et Ct+1
Xt+1

47

−γ
Using Ct+1
from (9.1) and after omitting terms containing third or higher moments, the price
Π
Qt becomes


b
1 +
QΠ
t = Qt Et Πt+1

Et∗ Πt+1



−1

− Et Πt+1 − (Et Ct+1 ) γcovt (Ct+1 , Πt+1 ) 


E∗C
−Et Ct+1
Et Πt+1 1 − t t+1
Et Ct+1

(9.2)

In applications such as ours, the expected excess return Qbt Et Πt+1 /QΠ
t − 1 is on the order of
a few percentage points. As a result the big fraction in the bracket on the right hand side is
also of that order of magnitude. At the same time, the fraction in the denominator on the right
hand side – the percentage difference between the true and worst case one step ahead expected
consumption levels – is also on the order of a few percentage points. We thus drop the fraction in
the denominator and rearrange to obtain the approximate formula (3.3) in the text, where we use
γ=1:


γcovt (Ct+1 , Πt+1 ) Et Πt+1 − Et∗ Πt+1
Π
b
−
Qt = Qt Et Πt+1 1 −
Et Πt+1 Et Ct+1
Et Πt+1

9.2
9.2.1

Markov-switching VAR representation of the equilibrium
Regime processes

We can write the equilibrium representation of our model as a Markov-switching VAR (MS-VAR)
in the DSGE state vector containing all the variables of the model. The interval of one-step ahead
conditional means given by [−ait , ait ] for each shock i has a component that is affected by the
uncertainty chains ωt , as shown by formulas (4.2) and (4.5). The chains are stationary and ergodic
and their dynamics are the same under the true and worst case dynamics.
The worst case steady state depends on the long run averages of intangible information and
standard deviation, given by η i and σ i . As intangible information ηti or the standard deviation σti
fluctuate around their respective long run means, there are ”shocks” to ambiguity ait and therefore
shifts in the constants of the MS-VAR representation.
Formally, for each shock i = z, f, we define the vector of linear deviations of the product
i
ηt E [σ̃i (vt+1 ) |vt ] from its ergodic values of η i σ i . We then introduce a vector of dummy variables
to load the appropriate volatility-ambiguity combination. The vector follows a four-state Markov
chain, which is obtained by mixing the two independent chains ηti and vt . Following Hamilton
(1994), we can write the VAR representation of this composite Markov chain as







i

σ
eη1,1,t
iσ
eη1,2,t
iσ
eη2,1,t
iσ
eη2,2,t









 = H ηi σ 





i

σ
eη1,1,t−1
iσ
eη1,2,t−1
iσ
eη2,1,t−1
iσ
eη2,2,t−1

48





 
 
+
 
 

i

η σ
υ1,t
ηi σ
υ2,t
ηi σ
υ3,t
ηi σ
υ4,t








(9.3)

i

σ
where eηm,n,t
= 1ηti =m,vt =n is an indicator operator if at time t the intangible ambiguity regime m
ηi σ
and the volatility regime
n
are
in
place,
where
m,
n
∈
{1,
2}.
The
realizations
of
the
shock
υ
t
h i i
i
i
are such that Et−1 υtη σ = 0. The transition matrix is H η σ = H η ⊗ H σ .
For example, consider the case when the intangible information about the operating cost is
f
in regime 1, normalized to be the higher value ηH
of intangible ambiguity, and the volatility
f
regime 1 is in place, corresponding to a value σ1 for the standard deviation of the operating
fσ
fσ
cost shock. Then the indicator eη1,1,t
= 1 and the rest of the three eηm,m,t
= 0. This means
that our system of equations
will load the amount
of ambiguity about the operating cost to be
i
h
f
f
f
σ
σ
σ
is the persistence parameter giving the
) , where H11
+ σ2 (1 − H11
equal to af (1, 1) = ηH σ1 H11
probability of the volatility chain to remain in regime 1. When the economy is in this regime
combination, the equations get zero weight on the other three ambiguity realizations af (m, n).
i
iσ
In this case, the realization of the υtη σ shock such that eη1,1,t
= 1 makes the linear deviation
af (1, 1) − η f σ f hit the economy as a discrete shock. Generally, by augmenting the DSGE state
i
vector with the vectors eηt σ we control for the first order effects of the shifts in intangible ambiguity
and volatility.
Given these first-order shifts, we proceed to linearize the rest of the equilibrium conditions of
the model. We use an observational equivalence result according to which our economy behaves
as if the agent maximizes expected utility under the worst-case belief. Given this equivalence,
we use standard perturbation techniques that are a good approximation of the nonlinear decision
rules under expected utility. This allows us to solve the model using standard solution algorithms,
such as gensys by Sims (2002). The model solution assumes the form of a Markov-switching VAR
that allows for changes in the volatility and in the constants:

b t−1 + Rσ̃(vt )εt
b t = C(ωt ) + T w
w

(9.4)

b t is a vector containing the DSGE states of the model. Notice that changes in uncertainty
where w
have first order effects captured by changes in the constants of the MS-VAR. Not all variables of
b t are observable. We then combine the solution with a set of observation equations,
the vector w
obtaining a model in state space form that can be estimated with likelihood based techniques.
9.2.2

Solution method

Here we describe further details on the representation and approach to solving the model with
regime switching ambiguity and volatility. The objective is to obtain the equilibrium matrices
C, T and R in the law of motion of equation (9.4). The steps of the solution are the following:
1. Guess and verify the worst-case scenario. As discussed in detail in Ilut and Schneider (2014),
the solution to the equilibrium dynamics of the model can be found through a guess-andverify approach. To solve for the worst-case belief that minimizes expected continuation
49

utility over the i sets in (2.9), we propose the following procedure:
(a) guess the worst case belief uz , uf




(b) solve the model assuming that agents have expected utility and beliefs uz , uf .
(c) compute the agent’s value function V

(d) verify that the guess uz , uf indeed achieves the minima.
The following steps detail the point 1.b) above. Here we use an observational equivalence
result that makes use of the fact that our economy can be solved as if the agent maximizes

expected utility under the belief uz , uf . Given this equivalence, we can use standard
perturbation techniques that are a good approximation of the nonlinear decision rules under
expected utility. In particular, we will use linearization. When we refer to the guess below,


we use uz , uf = −az , af .
2. Compute worst-case steady states
(a) Compute the ergodic values η i and σ i for the two shocks i = z, f .
(b) Based on the guess above compute the worst-case steady states for the shocks Z ∗ and
f ∗ . Denote by s∗ = (Z ∗ , f ∗ , ω) the worst case mean of the exogenous state where, since
there is no ambiguity about the finite chain ωt , ω equals its true mean.
(c) Compute the worst-case steady state w∗ of the endogenous variables. For this, use the
FOCs of the economy based on their deterministic version in which the one step ahead
expectations are computed under the guessed worst-case belief.
3. Dynamics:
(a) Linearize around (w∗ , s∗ ) by finding the coefficient matrices from linearizing the FOCs.
To accommodate the presence of discrete shocks, we introduce a series of dummy
variables corresponding to the different regime combinations. These dummy variables
provide the VAR representation of the MS chains as in equation (9.3) and will multiply the corresponding deviation of ηti E [σ̃i (vt+1 ) |vt ] from its own steady state η i σ i .
The linearized FOCs can be written in the canonical form used for solving rational
expectations models:
h
i0
f
z
Γ0 w
br,t = Γ1 w
br,t−1 + Ψ ε0t , υtη σ0 , υtη σ0 + Πψt
where w
br,t includes the DSGE state vector wt as well as the dummy variables controlling
the regime in place. This vector represents deviations around the worst-case steady
state (w∗ , s∗ ).
50

h i i
(b) Given that the shock vt is defined such that Et−1 υtη σ = 0, a standard solution method
to solve rational expectations general equilibrium models can be employed. The solution
can then be rewritten as a VAR with stochastic volatility
i0
h
f
z
w
br,t = T ∗ w
br,t−1 + Rσ̃(vt ) ε0t , υtη σ0 , υtη σ0

(9.5)


(c) Verify that the guess uz , uf indeed achieves the minima of the time t expected
continuation utility over the sets in (2.9).
4. Equilibrium dynamics under the true data generating process (DGP). The above equilibrium
was derived under the worst-case beliefs. We need to characterize the economy under the
econometrician’s law of motion. There are two objects of interest: the steady state of our
economy and the dynamics around that steady state.
(a) The steady state, denoted by w. This is characterized by shocks, including the volatility
regimes, being set to their ergodic values under the true DGP. The steady state w is
found by taking the linearized solution, adding Rz η z σ z and subtracting Rf η f σ f :
w − w∗ = T ∗ (w − w∗ ) + Rz η z σ z − Rf η f σ f

(9.6)

where Rz and Rf are the equilibrium response to positive innovations to zbt and fbt ,
respectively.
(b) Dynamics. The law of motion in (9.5) needs to take into account that expectations are
b r,t ≡
under the worst-case beliefs which differ from the true DGP. Then, we define w
wr,t − w and use (9.5) together with (9.6) to obtain:
h
i0


f
z
b r,t = T ∗ w
b r,t−1 + Rσ̃(vt ) ε0t , υtη σ0 , υtη σ0 + Rz (azt−1 − η z σ z ) − Rf aft−1 − η f σ f (9.7)
w
(c) Define the matrix T accordingly to represent the law of motion in (9.7) as
h
i0
f
z
b r,t = T w
b r,t−1 + Rσ̃(vt ) ε0t , υtη σ0 , υtη σ0
w

(9.8)

Intuitively, under the econometrician’s DGP the economy responds to the exogenous
state variables controlling uncertainty differently since the implied worst-case expectations are not materialized in the current shock processes.
b r,t in a way that the Markov-switching
Finally, we can partition out the state vector w
(MS) regimes show up as time-varying constants in the law of motion described by

51

(9.8). In particular, this allows us to rewrite (9.8) as equation (9.4):
b t−1 + Rσ̃(vt )εt
b t = C(ωt ) + T w
w
i

i

i

σ
η σ
σ
b t contains the same state variables of w
b r,t , except the regime dummies eη1,1,t
where w
, e1,2,t
, eη2,1,t
,
ηi σ
and e2,2,t for i = z, f, which have been replaced with the MS constant C(ωt ). To avoid
further notation, the matrices T and R in (9.4) are the appropriate partitions of the
b t . Thus, the
corresponding objects in (9.8) so that they only capture the effect of w
DSGE model is represented as a Markov-switching VAR (MS-VAR), where the changes
in the constant arise from the first order effects of the composite regimes of stochastic
volatility and intangible information that jointly affect ambiguity.

9.3

Equilibrium conditions for the estimated model

Here we describe the equations that characterize the equilibrium of the estimated model in Section
4. To solve the model, we first scale the variables in order to induce stationarity. The variables
are scaled as follows:
Yt
Kt
It
Ct
ct = t , yt = t , kt = t , it = t
ξ
ξ
ξ
ξ
Financial variables:
pt =

Pt
Dt i Bti
,
d
=
, b = t ; i = f, h
t
ξt
ξt t
ξ

The borrowing costs:


f
κ Bt−1
ξt

2

Ψ 1  f 2 φ (Dt , Dt−1 )
Φξ 2
dt
−1
=
b
;
=
2 ξ 2 t−1
ξt
2
dt−1

We now present the nonlinear equilibrium conditions characterizing the model, in scaled form.
The expectation operator in these equations, denoted by Et∗ , is the one-step ahead conditional
expectation under the worst case belief µ0 . According to our model, the worst case is that future
zt+1 is low, and that the financing cost ft+1 is high.
The firm problem is
X f
max E0∗
M0,t Dt
subject to the budget constraint
"

#

2

bft−1
Φξ 2
dt
b
dt = (1 − τk ) αyt −
1 − Qt−1 − it − ft −
−1
ξ
2
dt−1
bft−1 b
Ψ 1  f 2
k kt−1
−
b
+
δτ
q
−
Q + bft Qbt
k t−1
2 ξ 2 t−1
ξ
ξ t−1

52

(9.9)

and the capital accumulation equation
"

2 #
(1 − δ)kt−1
Θ 2 it
kt =
+ 1− ξ
−1
it
ξ
2
it−1

(9.10)

f
f
Let the LM on the budget constraint be λt M0,t
t and on the capital accumulation be λkt M0,t
t .
Then the scaled pricing kernel is

mft+1

1 − τl
ξ t+1
ct
.
≡ Mt+1 t = β
ξ
ct+1 1 − τl βEt∗ [ct / (ct+1 ξ)]

The FOCs associated with the firm problem are then:
1. Dividends:





dt
dt+1
f
2 dt+1
2 1
− 1 − Et mt+1 λt+1 Φξ 2
−1
1 = λt 1 + Φξ
dt−1 dt−1
dt
dt
2. Bonds:
Qbt λt

=

1
Et∗ mft+1 λt+1
ξ


1 − τk 1 −

Qbt



Ψ
+ bft
ξ

(9.11)

(9.12)


(9.13)

3. Investment:
"

#
2


i
i
t
t
1 − τk = Qkt
− 1 − Θξ 2
−1
+
it−1
it−1
it−1


2
it+1
∗ f λt+1 k
2 it+1
+ Et mt+1
Q Θξ 2
−1
λt t+1
it
it
Θ
1 − ξ2
2



it

(9.14)

λk

where Qkt ≡ λtt .
4. Capital:
λt+1 K
R
ξλt t+1
 α−1
(1 − τk )α kξt
L1−α + (1 − δ)Qkt+1

1 = Et∗ mft+1
k
≡
Rt+1

Qkt

(9.15)

+ δτk

The household problem is as follows:
max E0∗

X

β t log ct



bht−1
b
1 − Qt−1 +
(1 + τc )ct + pt θt = (1 − τl ) (1 − α)yt + π + dt θt−1 +
ξ
bh
1
+ pt θt−1 − τl (pt − pt−1 )θt−1 + t−1 Qbt−1 − bht Qbt + tr
ξ
ξ

53

(9.16)

Thus, the FOCs associated to the household problem are:
1. Bond demand:

ct 
1 − τl 1 − Qbt
Qbt = βEt∗
ξct+1

(9.17)

2. Equity holding:
pt =

βEt∗

ct



ct+1

τl
(1 − τl ) (pt+1 + dt+1 ) + pt
ξ


(9.18)

The market clearing conditions characterizing this economy are:

Φξ 2
c t + it +
2



dt
dt−1

bht = bft
2
Ψ 1  f 2
− 1 + ft +
b
= yt + π
2 ξ 2 t−1

(9.19)
(9.20)

θt = 1
corresponding to the market for bonds, goods and equity shares, respectively.
Thus, we have the following 11 unknowns:
kt , it , bft , bht , Qbt , pt , ct , dt , Qkt , λt , mft
The equations (9.10), (9.11), (9.12), (9.13), (9.14), (9.15), (9.17), (9.18), (9.19), (9.20) give us 10
equations. By Walras’ law, we can use one of the two budget constraints in (9.9) and (9.16) (using
θt = 1). This gives us a total of 11 equations.

9.4

Rescaling parameters

We estimate a subset of the parameters, with values reported in Tables 4 and 5. The other
parameters are fixed, as reported in Table 3, to match some key ratios from the NIPA accounts.
Table 3: Calibrated parameters
τl
τk
τc
πy ty
0.189 0.193 0.09 0.3 0.21
For the steady state calculation of the model it is helpful to rescale some parameters. Specif∗
ically, denote by yGDP
the worst-case steady state measured GDP, where measured GDP equals
total goods y + π minus financing costs. Then, define the following ratios:
πy =
fy =

π
∗
yGDP

f
∗
yGDP

, ty =

tr
∗
yGDP

; 1 + ςf =

54

; Ψy =

Ψ

∗
yGDP
f∗ f
ηLf
; ηr = f

f

η

(9.21)
(9.22)

Let us first discuss the normalizations in (9.21). Total measured GDP in our model corresponds
to the non-financial corporate sector (NFB) output plus goods produced by the other productive
sectors- financial, non-corporate and household. We associate the firm in our model with the
NFB sector and thus πy is set to match goods produced by other productive sectors divided by
measured GDP. The ratio ty equals government transfers (including social security and medicare)
plus after-tax government wages divided by measured GDP. Finally the parameter Ψy is estimated
and after computing the level of the economy it implies a value of Ψ.
The tax parameters are computed as follows: τl equals total personal taxes and social security
contributions divided by total income, where the latter is defined as total wages plus dividends. τk
equals NFB taxes divided by NFB profits and τc equals NFB sales taxes divided by NFB output.
The parameters in (9.22) are estimated and control the size of the operating cost. First, fy
determines f , the value of the steady state cost under the true DGP. The parameter ς f controls
by how much higher is f ∗ , the worst-case steady state operating cost, compared to f . This
normalization is helpful because it allows us to use meaningful priors on this ratio in terms of the
type and the size of prior mean. Since
f∗ = f +

ηf σf
(1 − ρf )

then based on ς f we compute:
η f = (1 − ρf ) ςf f /σ f
where f is obtained after solving for the level of the economy. Finally, the parameter ηrf , which
has a beta prior, determines the value of η f in the regime of low ambiguity about the operating
cost, as compared to its ergodic value of η f :
ηLf = ηrf η f
Based on the estimated transition matrix for the ambiguity regimes, the value of η f in the
regime of high ambiguity about the operating cost is easily computed as:
f
ηH
=

f
η f − pη,f
L ηL

1 − pη,f
L

where pη,f
L is the ergodic probability of the regime of low ambiguity about the operating cost
computed using the estimated transition matrix H η,f .
Finally, the effect of a unit increase in ambiguity about the marginal product of capital on the
realized Zt is given by the parameter κ, which we normalize as
κ=ζ

p
z

ηL

55

3
.
1 − ρ2a

We use a Beta prior on the estimated parameter ζ, which allows for a simple interpretation of the
size of the typical Gaussian innovation to ambiguity. Indeed, this parametrization implies that
even in the low intangible information regime,
negativeGaussian innovation equal to 3ζ times its
 ap
−1
unconditional standard deviation, given by κ 1 − ρ2a
, still keeps the azt value non-negative.

9.5

Accuracy of approximation

We evaluate the accuracy of the approximation using the approach in Judd (1992), which is to
characterize the normalized Euler Equation Errors (EEE). To describe the approach, it is useful
for exposition to consider the household’s optimality condition for bonds, given by equation (9.17)
as
Qb (wt−1 , t )
1
= βEt∗
,
(9.23)
b
c(wt−1 , t ) [1 − τl (1 − Q (wt−1 , t ))]
ξc(wt , t+1 )
where c and Qb represent the household’s consumption and bond price functions, respectively. Date
t model variables are determined in equilibrium as policy functions of the state variables wt−1 and
innovations t . Date t + 1 variables then respond to wt and t+1 . The Et∗ operator indicates that
the conditional expectation is formed under the equilibrium worst-case belief.
Since the solution method used is only an approximation, equation (9.23) will not hold exactly
when evaluated using the computed decision rule ĉ and price function Q̂b , say. We define the Euler
equation error function as
h

i
βĉ(wt−1 , t ) 1 − τl 1 − Q̂b (wt−1 , t )
r(wt−1 , t ) = 1 −

Q̂b (wt−1 , t )

Et∗

1
ĉ(wt , t+1 )

(9.24)

We can evaluate the error function at any any point (wt−1 , t ). Such evaluation involves
integration under the worst case density. To evaluate its magnitude, Judd and Guu (1997) interpret
this error as the relative optimization error incurred by the use of the approximated policy rule.
For example if r(wt−1 , t ) = 10−3 , then the agent is making a $1 mistake for each $1000 spent.
As discussed in detail in the solution methods literature (see Aruoba et al. (2006)), the EEE is
also important because, under certain conditions, the approximation error of the policy function
is of the same order of magnitude as the size of the EEE. Correspondingly, the change in welfare
is of the square order of the EEE (Santos (2000)). Compared to most of the literature, which
typically deals with Gaussian shocks, our disturbances also have discrete jumps, in the form of
Markov-switching (MS) regimes. A recent exception is Foerster et al. (2015), where they also
compute EEE for simple MS regime models.
It is first useful to recall that the solution method described in section 9.2.2 produces the linear
law of motion under the worst-case beliefs described by equation (9.5). To simulate the economy
under the true DGP we have shown how we obtain the law of motion in (9.8). The objective of
the accuracy exercise is to evaluate the EEE in (9.24) for the economy that the econometrician
56

analyzes and takes to the data. There are two basic properties of this economy: (1) the realized
shocks are drawn under the econometrician’s DGP, and (2) for each moment in that sequence of
shocks, agents inside the model form beliefs according to the worst-case conditional probability
distribution.
To compute the error in (9.24), we perform the following specific steps:
i

1. We simulate a path for MS regimes by drawing the innovations υtη σ . Besides the intangible
information component, the other part of a regime is the volatility of the Gaussian innovations. Conditional on this path, we simulate a path for the Gaussian shocks εt . Notice that
the path for regimes matters at this step because it affects the volatility in place at time t.
The two types of innovations constitute the t innovation in (9.24).
2. For a given path of innovations, we use the law of motion in (9.8) to compute the dynamics
of the economy. This generates a simulated path for the state vector wt−1 . In particular,
we also obtain ĉ(wt−1 , t ) and Q̂b (wt−1 , t ) in (9.24) by using the law of motion in (9.8).
Notice that these policy functions are based on: (i) the state of the economy given by the
path of innovations under the econometrician’s DGP, and (ii) worst-case beliefs about the
conditional probability distribution of future states.
3. At this stage we are interested in evaluating the conditional distribution of the object
ĉ(wt , t+1 ) in (9.24). An efficient method to integrate over next period’s state is to use
optimally selected Gaussian-Hermite (GH) quadrature points and weights. In selecting these
points we take into account the possible regimes for volatility for next period, given the
volatility state today.
4. We evaluate next period’s policy functions at the optimally selected GH points and given the
current state wt that was obtained in step 2. To construct the future values of variables, we
use the law of motion in (9.5), which is the behavior of the economy that the agent expects
to see under the worst-case belief. In particular, we evaluate the function ĉ(wt , t+1 ) under
this law of motion.
5. Conditional on a particular volatility regime next period, we integrate over the resulting
values of ĉ(wt , t+1 ) evaluated at the different GH points in step 4. Then we integrate over
the next period’s possible volatility regimes by using the probabilities to transition out of
the current volatility regime. This double integral gives us the conditional average value
Et∗ ĉ(wt , t+1 ).
6. At each point t in the simulated path we have now the necessary ingredients to compute the
Euler error in (9.24). We obtained ĉ(wt−1 , t ) and Q̂b (wt−1 , t ) from step 2 and the conditional
expectation Et∗ ĉ(wt , t+1 ) from step 5. We simulate the economy for a large number of times
57

and drop a large initial fraction of the samples to insure the error is computed for the ergodic
distribution.
So far we have discussed only one Euler equation. Our model has six Euler equations.
These equations are the firm’s optimality for dividends, bonds, investment and capital, given
by equations (9.12), (9.13), (9.14) and (9.15), as well as the household’s optimality for bonds
and equity, given by equations (9.17) and (9.18). For each of these equations, we evaluate
the unit-free EEE following the general logic of the six steps outlined above. In particular, we
simulate our economy evaluated at the posterior mode, for 100 samples, each of 10,000 periods
with the first 1,000 being dropped. We report the absolute EEE in base 10 logarithms to ease
interpretation. The average absolute errors are, in the order of the six equations stated above, as
follows: (−3.2, −2.1, −2, −2.4, −2.1, −2.7) .
Foerster et al. (2015) compare accuracy for different solution methods of MS models. There
they analyze a standard RBC model with one endogenous state variable and MS productivity
shocks for which they report the same order of magnitude of the EEE as we find in our model.
We interpret this as evidence that the numerical accuracy of our approximation is reasonable,
especially in the context of a larger model like ours, with six endogenous state variables.

9.6

Priors and posteriors for model parameters

In DSGE models, there is often a set of free parameters that control the steady state values of key
variables. For example, in papers that are focused on monetary policy the steady-state output
growth, inflation rate, and real interest rate, are controlled by three different parameters (for
example Lubik and Schorfheide (2004)). This property makes it easy to specify priors such that
the unconditional means of the variables are centered around values that are a-priori economically
sensible.
Instead, in our model, the steady state is a function of several model parameters because it
depends on the actual solution of the model. Therefore, the priors for the estimated parameters
are chosen as follows. We first specify loose independent priors for the different parameters of
the model. These priors are described in Tables 4 and 5. We then specify a prior on the steady
state of the observables, inducing a joint prior on the model parameters. This second set of priors
is described in Table 6. Our approach is in line with the methods developed by Del Negro and
Schorfheide (2008) and allows us to take into account that the steady state depends on the actual
solution of the model.
Here we describe in detail how the joint prior is implemented. For each draw of the parameters


θ, the posterior p θ|Y T is given by the product of the likelihood ` θ|Y T and the prior p (θ) (up
to a constant that is common across all parameter values):


p θ|Y T = ` θ|Y T p (θ)
58

In turn, our approach implies that the prior on the parameter vector p (θ) is the product of two
components. The first component depends on the independent priors for the different parameters
of the model. The second component depends on the steady state. This can in turn be expressed
as a function g (·) of the parameter vector θ. Therefore, we have:
Q
p (θ) = [ ni=1 pi (θi )] ∗ pg (g (θ))
Independent priors

Joint prior

 Q

Combining the two expressions, we get p θ|Y T = ` θ|Y T [ ni=1 pi (θi )] g (θ) . Intuitively,
our approach restricts the parameter space by giving more weight to parameter combinations
that imply economically sensible values for the steady state. Computationally, the extra cost is
negligible and consists of evaluating the density function pg (g (θ)) . The steady state g (θ) is always
computed when solving the model, therefore it does not represent an additional computational
cost.
Table 4: Priors and posteriors for structural parameters
Description

Param

Standard
Growth rate
100 (ξ − 1)
Discount factor
100 (β −1 − 1)
Capital depreciation
δ
Capital share
α
Frictions
Dividend adjustment
100Φ
Investment adjustment
Θ
Cost of borrowing
100Ψy

M ode

Posterior
M ean
5%

0.4543
0.6875
0.0067
0.2451

0.4562
0.6762
0.0063
0.2451

0.4281
0.6480
0.0051
0.2369

95%

Prior
T ype M ean StDev.

0.4926
0.7098
0.0075
0.2545

G
G
B
B

0.5
0.3
0.01
0.3

0.05
0.2
0.005
0.1

0.0199 0.0194 0.0159 0.0232
0.9273 0.9067 0.8504 0.9657
0.2109 0.2034 0.1937 0.2144

G
G
G

0.4
1
0.5

0.3
0.5
0.4

Note: T ype refers to the prior parameter distribution, where B refers to Beta, G to Gamma, IG to Inversegamma and D to the Dirichlet distribution. Posterior percentiles are obtained from nine chains of 5,000,000 draws
generated using a Random walk Metropolis algorithm. We retain one out of every 1,000 draws. Appendix 9.4
discusses the normalization implied by the parameter Ψy .

59

Table 5: Priors and posteriors for shock parameters
Description
Intangible Z ambig. regimes
High ambiguity
Low ambiguity
Persistence High
Persistence Low
Negative effect on Z
Intangible F ambig. regimes
Low/high ambiguity
Worst-case/True F
True F/Worst-case GDP
Persistence High
Persistence Low
High volatility regime
Z
F
Persistence of regime
Low volatility regime
Z
F
Persistence of regime
Persistence Gaussian
Z
F
Intangible Z ambiguity

Param
M ode

Posterior
M ean
5%

z
ηH
ηLz
η,z
H11
η,z
H22
ζ

0.9449
0.8021
0.6019
0.6879
0.6996

0.9423
0.7987
0.5971
0.6916
0.6859

ηrf
ςf
100fy
η,f
H11
η,f
H22

0.3379
2.9070
1.2861
0.9933
0.9901

0.3430
2.9069
1.2720
0.9925
0.9898

Prior
M ean St.dev.

95%

T ype

0.9057
0.7699
0.5867
0.6694
0.6514

0.9698
0.8199
0.6084
0.7179
0.7094

B
B
D
D
B

0.5
0.5
0.8333
0.8333
0.5

0.25
0.25
0.1034
0.1034
0.25

0.3158
2.8575
1.2300
0.9881
0.9882

0.3773
2.9471
1.3263
0.9960
0.9913

B
G
G
D
D

0.5
3
2
0.8333
0.8333

0.2
1
1.5
0.1034
0.1034

z
100σ̃H
f
100σ̃H
σ
H11

1.4271 1.4343 1.3837 1.4870
0.7338 0.7404 0.6487 0.8388
0.9974 0.9976 0.9963 0.9988

IG
IG
D

0.6
1
0.8333

0.3
0.5
0.1034

100σ̃Lz
100σ̃Lf
σ
H22

1.4535 1.4601 1.4097 1.5156
0.2999 0.3121 0.2779 0.3516
0.9991 0.9993 0.9988 0.9997

IG
IG
D

0.6
1.0
0.8333

0.3
0.5
0.1034

ρz
ρf
ρa

0.9762 0.9754 0.9727 0.9779
0.9923 0.9922 0.9914 0.9927
0.8876 0.8823 0.8714 0.8939

B
B
B

0.7
0.7
0.7

0.2
0.2
0.2

Note: T ype refers to the prior parameter distribution, where B refers to Beta, G to Gamma, IG to Inversegamma and D to the Dirichlet distribution. See note to Table 4 on obtaining the posterior percentiles. Appendix
9.4 discusses the normalization of the estimated ζ into κ and how to map the estimated parameter ηrf , ς f and fy
f
f
into values for f , f ∗ , ηL
and ηH
.

60

Table 6: Priors and posteriors for steady state of observables
Variable
100∆I
B/P
D/Y
P/Y

Posterior
M ode M ean
5%
95% T ype
0.4533 0.4551 0.4272 0.4913
N
0.0442 0.0445 0.0407 0.0487 IG
0.0872 0.0879 0.0847 0.0911
N
7.4723 7.6752 7.3521 7.9894
N

Prior
M ean st.dev.
0.47
0.03
0.1
0.06
0.08
0.02
7
1

Note: T ype refers to the prior parameter distribution, where N refers to Normal and IG to Inverse-gamma
distribution. The observables are: investment growth (∆I), firm debt to equity value ratio (B/P ), dividend to
GDP ratio (D/Y ) and equity price to GDP ratio (P/Y ). The priors for the latter two variables are expressed here
in levels. See note to Table 4 on obtaining the posterior percentiles.

61

