NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA LAWS ON MARIJUANA, ALCOHOL,
AND HARD DRUG USE
Hefei Wen
Jason M. Hockenberry
Janet R. Cummings
Working Paper 20085
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20085

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We appreciate helpful comments on earlier drafts of this work from Sara J. Markowitz and David H.
Howard. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hefei Wen, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on Marijuana, Alcohol, and Hard Drug Use
Hefei Wen, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings
NBER Working Paper No. 20085
May 2014
JEL No. I18,K32
ABSTRACT
21 states and the District of Columbia currently have laws that permit marijuana use for medical purposes,
often termed medical marijuana laws (MMLs). We tested the effects of MMLs adopted in seven states
between 2004 and 2011 on adolescent and adult marijuana, alcohol, and hard drug use. We employed
a restricted-access version of the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) micro-level
data with geographic identifiers. For those 21 and older, we found that MMLs led to a relative increase
in the probability of marijuana use of 16 percent, an increase in marijuana use frequency of 12-17
percent, and an increase in the probability of marijuana abuse/dependence of 15-27 percent. For those
12-20 years old, we found a relative increase in marijuana use initiation of 5-6 percent. Among those
aged 21 or above, MMLs increased the frequency of binge drinking by 6-9 percent, but MMLs did
not affect drinking behavior among those 12-20 years old. MMLs had no discernible impact on hard
drug use in either age group. Taken together, MML implementation increases marijuana use mainly
among those over 21, where there is also a spillover effect of increased binge drinking, but there is
no evidence of spillovers to other substance use.

Hefei Wen
Emory University
Department of Health Management
and Policy
1518 Clifton Rd
Atlanta GA, 30322
hwen2@emory.edu
Jason M. Hockenberry
Department of Health Policy and Management
Rollins School of Public Health
Emory University
1518 Clifton Rd
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
jason.hockenberry@emory.edu

Janet R. Cummings
Emory University
Department of Health Management
and Policy
1518 Clifton Rd
Atlanta GA, 30322
jrcummi@emory.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
As of April, 2014, 21 states and the District of Columbia have implemented medical
marijuana laws (MMLs) which permit marijuana use for medical purposes. An additional twelve
states1 are considering similar legislation. Medical marijuana bills are also likely to land on the
legislative agenda in many of the remaining states. Understanding the behavioral and public
health implications of this evolving regulatory environment is critical for the ongoing
implementation of the MMLs and future iterations of marijuana policy reform. Despite the
growing consensus about the relief medical marijuana can bring for a range of serious illnesses,
concerns have been voiced that MMLs may give rise to increased marijuana use in the general
population and increased use of other substances. Legislative and public attention have focused
on these issues, but the empirical evidence is limited.
We contribute to the literature on the effects of marijuana liberalization policies by
examining effect of the implementation of MMLs in seven states between 2004 and 2011 on
marijuana, excessive alcohol use, and hard drug use. To examine the effects of MML
implementation, we exploited the geographic identifiers in a restricted-access version of the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) micro-level data and estimated two-way
fixed effects models with state-specific linear time trends.
With respect to marijuana use itself, we found that MML implementation led to a 1.4
percentage point or a 16 percent relative increase in the probability of past-month marijuana use
for adults aged 21 or above, and a 12-17 percent increase in the frequency of past-month
marijuana use for this age group. In this age group, MML implementation also resulted in a 1527 percent increase in the probability of marijuana abuse/dependence. Among adolescents and
young adults aged 12-20, we found a 0.3-0.5 percentage point or a 5-6 percent relative increase
in the probability of marijuana use initiation attributable to MML implementation.
1

12 states with pending medical marijuana bills include Florida, Kansas, Kentucky, Minnesota, Missouri,
New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.
1

In addition to the increases in marijuana use, MML implementation also increased the
frequency of binge drinking among those aged 21 or above, partially through the increase in
simultaneous use of the two substances. In contrast, MML implementation did not affect
underage drinking among those aged 12-20. Hard drug use among both age groups was
unaffected.
Overall, our findings indicate that MML implementation increased marijuana use, but
had limited impacts on other types of substance use (i.e., underage drinking, cocaine use, and
heroin use), except for binge drinking among adults of legal drinking age.
The article proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background information on medical
marijuana and state MMLs, and outlines the theoretical framework. Section 3 summarizes the
existing literature. Section 4 describes the data sources, variable measurement, and identification
strategy. Section 5 presents the estimated policy effects, and the robustness checks. Concluding
remarks are given in the last section of the article.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1. Prevalence & Risks of Marijuana Use, & Federal Prohibition
Marijuana is the most widely used illicit drug in the United States. In 2011, 18 million
Americans were current (i.e., past-month) marijuana users. The prevalence of current marijuana
use has increased over time from 5.8% in 2004 to 7.0% in 2011 (SAMHSA 2012). Marijuana use
has been associated with an increased risk of cognitive impairment, respiratory and
cardiovascular problems, immune deficiency, psychotic symptoms, and the development of
marijuana abuse/dependence (See Hall and Degenhardt (2009) for a comprehensive review).
Marijuana use is also shown to have temporary negative effects on driving ability (Asbridge,
Hayden, and Cartwright, 2012), memory and learning (Riedel and Davies, 2005), as well as
school and work performance (Lynskey and Hall, 2000; Wadsworth, et al., 2006). Furthermore,
studies also suggest a positive correlation between marijuana use and other substance use such as
2

binge drinking and cocaine use (Wagner and Anthony, 2002a). Considering the high prevalence
and potential risks of marijuana use, the federal government continues to classify marijuana as a
schedule I controlled substance and prohibits marijuana use for any purpose.
2.2. Medical Value of Marijuana, & State MMLs
By classifying marijuana as a schedule I controlled substance, the federal government has
concluded that marijuana has “no currently accepted medical value”. However, a growing body
of evidence supports to the efficacy and safety of marijuana as medical therapy to alleviate
symptoms and treat diseases. Marijuana can effectively and safely serve as an antiemetic and
appetite stimulant to relieve nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy and anorexia
associated with HIV/AIDS, as an analgesic to ease chronic pain caused by neuropathy and
fibromyalgia, and as an antispasmodic to help combat multiple sclerosis (See Ben Amar (2006)
for a comprehensive review). Other medical applications of marijuana such as treating epilepsy
(Pertwee, 2012), dementia (Campbell and Gowran, 2007), and Tourette’s (Singer, 2005) have
also been studied and shown promise (See, for instance, Krishnan, Cairns, and Howard, 2009;
Gloss and Vickrey, 2012).
In the last two decades, this growing scientific evidence on marijuana’s medicinal value
propelled many states toward a more tolerant legal approach to medical marijuana. Since 1996,
when California signed the Compassionate Use Act into law (Proposition 215) and became the
first state in the U.S. to permit the medical use of marijuana, a total of 21 states and the District
of Columbia passed MMLs (Table 1). These laws protect patients from state prosecution for their
use of marijuana in treatment recommended by a qualified doctor for an eligible condition
(Hoffmann and Weber, 2010).
In contrast to the state MMLs, federal law prohibits marijuana use for any purpose under
the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) of 1970. A 2005 Supreme Court decision (Gonzales v.
Raich) reaffirmed that federal law enforcement has the authority to prosecute patients for
3

medical marijuana use in accordance with state laws (Gostin, 2005). It is only recently that the
Obama administration and the Department of Justice clarified the position that federal law
enforcement resources should not be dedicated to prosecuting persons whose actions comply
with their states’ permission of medical marijuana (Hoffmann and Weber, 2010). This change in
the prosecutorial stance strengthened the legitimacy of existing MMLs and paved the way for the
passage of new MMLs.
2.3. Potential Spillover Effect of MML
In principle, an MML should only provide protection for medical marijuana patients. In
practice however, the legal protection intended for the patients may have a spillover effect on
marijuana use in the non-patient population. The spillover effect may arise from three key
dimensions of the existing MMLs that create a de facto legalized environment for marijuana use
in the general population. First, although the MMLs typically specify a list of conditions that are
eligible for medical marijuana2, most MMLs include in their list a generic term “chronic pain”,
rather than specific diseases causing the pain (e.g., neuropathy, fibromyalgia, rheumatoid
arthritis, etc.) (Pacula, et al., 2013). The interpretation of “chronic pain” can extend the medical
marijuana patients beyond the original legislative intent to those to whom research evidence has
demonstrated a therapeutic benefit, analogous to the practice of off-label prescribing of other
medications. The concern with this spillover effect is similar to that of prescription opioid
medications. Namely pain can often be non-descript and difficult to verify medically, and lack of
vigilance on the part of prescribers can effectively lead to recreational use of drugs intended to
be used as medicine.

California is the only exception that allows medical marijuana for any condition “for which marijuana
provides relief” and leaves the interpretation almost entirely to the discretion of doctors.
2

4

Second, some MMLs do not mandate a patient registry and renewal system. This,
coupled with the loosely-defined eligibility criteria, further blurs the boundary between the
targeted patients and the non-patient population (Cohen, 2010).
Third, MMLs provide medical marijuana patients with access to the drug by allowing
regulated dispensaries and/or home cultivation. These supply channels exist in a legal grey area
and may proliferate as a result of the reduced threat of prosecution under the protection of the
MMLs (Pacula, et al., 2014).3 In particular, Andersen, Hansen, and Rees (2013) provided
empirical evidence that MMLs have led to a substantial increase in the supply of high-grade
marijuana. As the medical marijuana supply rises, the non-patient population may also gain
access to the drug, akin to how prescription opioids eventually find their way into the street drug
market. This is most likely to occur in places where marijuana possession is decriminalized,
prosecution of a marijuana offense is local law enforcement’s “lowest priority”, and federal
interference in marijuana regulation is limited (Sekhon, 2009). In addition to those specific
provisions of the laws, MMLs symbolize liberalization of marijuana policy, which in turn, may
give rise to normalization of marijuana use behavior in society (Hathaway, Comeau, and
Erickson, 2011).
On top of the spillover of marijuana use from medical marijuana patients to the nonpatient population, the potential interdependence of substance use may lead to a further spillover
from marijuana use to the use of other psychoactive substances.4 A “joint intoxication model”
derived from Marshallian demand functions assumes that an individual with the goal of
intoxication chooses from a range of intoxicants (i.e., both licit and illicit substances including
3

Anderson and Rees (2014), however, found discrepancies between the time when states passed their
MMLs and the time when states explicitly allowed dispensaries, which Pacula and colleagues (2014) did
not make a clear distinction. They also found potential measurement errors in counting the number of the
dispensaries that actually operated. Data on the medical marijuana retail sales and marijuana-related
emergency department (ED) visits in the Denver area did not provide evidence that dispensaries were an
important contributor to the increase in marijuana use among Coloradans (Anderson and Rees, 2014).
4

However, if the increased marijuana use arising from an MML is not for recreational purpose (i.e.,
“intoxication”) but for medical purpose only, the use of other substance is unlikely to be affected.
5

alcohol, “soft drugs” like marijuana, and “hard drugs” such as cocaine and heroin), each
differing in their anticipated effects on the individual’s intoxication experience and in their
expected costs comprised of both market prices and non-market consequences (e.g., health risks,
legal penalties, social sanctions, etc.). An exogenous shock to the cost of one intoxicant,
therefore, may shift the individual demand for other intoxicants, through the interaction between
the intoxicants in the individual’s utility function under one’s budget constraint (Chaloupka and
Laixuthai, 1997; Pacula, 1998).
Assuming marijuana has a downward sloping demand, the effect of an MML on
marijuana use should be unequivocally positive. The effect on other substance use, however, can
be positive or negative, depending on the relative magnitude of the income and substitution
effects (Chaloupka and Laixuthai, 1997; Pacula, 1998). Specifically, contemporaneous
substitution of marijuana for another substance in response to the implementation of an MML is
most likely to occur for substances whose pharmacological effect is the most similar to that of
marijuana; whereas a complementary relationship is most likely to occur between marijuana and
another substance if their combined use produces a synergistic interaction (Moore, 2010). In
addition to the contemporaneous relationship between marijuana use and other substance use,
there may also be a progression from the demand for marijuana to the craving and thus future
demand for a more powerful substance with more intense and longer-lasting effects (Kandel,
1975; Kandel, 2002).
2.4. Pharmacologic Evidence on the Relationship between Marijuana & Other Substances
Marijuana and alcohol target many common neural pathways in human brains
(Maldonado, Valverde, and Berrendero, 2006). On the one hand, marijuana use produces
rewarding and sedative effects that are comparable to the effect of alcohol use (Boys, Marsden,
and Strang, 2001; Heishman, Arasteh, and Stitzer, 1997), especially low-dose alcohol

6

consumption5 (King, et al., 2011). In this case, when MML lowers the cost of marijuana use, an
individual may substitute marijuana for alcohol to achieve a similar experience of euphoria and
relaxation, perhaps with fewer immediate negative physical symptoms (e.g. hangovers).
Conversely, the overall intoxication experience may be enhanced by the simultaneous use
of marijuana and alcohol together (Boys, Marsden, and Strang, 2001). Evidence from one
randomized control trial (RCT) suggests that ethanol facilitates the absorption of delta 9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which in turn, leads to more episodes and a longer duration of
euphoria reported by human subjects. Higher doses of ethanol can expedite euphoria and
lengthen its duration (Lukas and Orozco, 2001). This scenario points towards a competing
hypothesis that marijuana and alcohol are complements rather than substitutes, and MMLs
should increase the use of both substances.
Marijuana is also widely portrayed as a “gateway” drug, essentially inducing the use of
drugs with more serious health, legal and social consequences (Kandel, 1975; Kandel, 2002).
One hypothesized pathway is through pharmacological mechanisms: once users tolerate the
psychoactive effects of marijuana use, they may crave and seek out more powerful drugs with
more intense and longer-lasting effects. This pharmacological mechanism would thus predict a
positive effect of MML implementation on the subsequent use of hard drugs.
Nonetheless, the pharmacological account of the gateway hypothesis is difficult to
identify empirically in the absence of controlled experiments on humans6 (Caulkins, et al., 2012;
Anthony, 2012). An alternative to this pharmacological mechanism is that the observed
hierarchical sequence from marijuana use to hard drug use may simply reflect common
5

High-dose alcohol consumption, in contrast, tends to lower sedation and heighten stimulation (King, et
al., 2011).
6

Although converging lines of evidence from experimental animal models suggest interactions between
the cannabinoid and opioid system, they are insufficient and inconclusive to date (see, for instance,
Ledent, et al., 1999; Cadoni, et al, 2001; Klein, 2001; Navarro, et al., 2001; Solinas, Panlilio, and
Goldberg, 2004; Ellgren, Spano, and Hurd, 2007; Cadoni, Valentini, and Di Chiara, 2008; DiNieri and
Hurd, 2012; Cadoni, et al., 2014).
7

predisposing factors rooted in genetic or environmental factors coupled with an exposure
opportunity mechanism through which marijuana users may be introduced to a shared market or
subculture of hard drugs (Morral, et al., 2002; Wagner and Anthony, 2002a). If predisposing
factors and exposure opportunities are the primary mechanisms that lead to transition from
marijuana use to hard drug use, then an MML should not result in an increase in hard drug use
because the predisposing factors and exposure opportunities7 for hard drug use remain
unaffected.
3. PREVIOUS LITERATURE
3.1. Literature on MMLs & Marijuana Use
Empirical evidence is inconclusive with respect to the effect of MMLs on marijuana use
in the general population. The cross-sectional correlation found in earlier studies (e.g., Cerdá, et
al., 2011) largely comes from the underlying high prevalence of marijuana use in MML states
prior to the laws (Wall, et al., 2011). Later studies that addressed state heterogeneity generally
found no within-state variation in marijuana use attributable to an MML (Harper, et al., 2012;
Lynne-Landsman, et al., 2013; Anderson, Hansen, and Rees, 2012). Nonetheless, these previous
studies focused on youth marijuana use and on measures of current marijuana use. The adult
population, with different underlying risk attitudes, budget constraints, and exposures to drug
markets and subculture, is likely to respond differently to an MML. Furthermore, an MML may
have consequences for other previously overlooked dimensions of marijuana use. And such
dimensions as initiation and abuse/dependence may have differential elasticities8 and expected
harms.

7

The existing MMLs help marijuana users gain access to the drug through medical marijuana
dispensaries and home cultivation, which are unlikely to expose the marijuana users to the market or
subculture of hard drugs.
8

Although the literature on differential elasticities of marijuana demand is thin, Manning, Blumberg, and
Moulton (1995) provided evidence for differential responses to alcohol prices between light, moderate,
and heavy drinkers.
8

3.2. Literature on Marijuana & Other Substances
Through the increased marijuana use, a further consequence of an MML could also be the
spillover to the use of other psychoactive substances (e.g., excessive alcohol use and hard drug
use). Identification of the spillover effect in an observational study hinges on the isolation of the
exogenous variation in substance use arising from policy/price shocks from the endogenous
variation due to “common factors” or “exposure opportunities.”
Epidemiological studies have attempted to rule out the common genetic and
environmental factors through a discordant twin design or panel data analysis (Lynskey, et al.,
2003; Fergusson, Boden, and Horwood, 2006). Lynskey and colleagues (2003) compared
substance use between monozygotic twins in the Austrian Twin Register to remove their shared
genetic and environmental influence. Fergusson, Boden, and Horwood (2005) analyzed 25-year
longitudinal substance use data of a birth cohort in the New Zealand Christchurch Health and
Development Study, and included individual fixed effects to control, statistically, for the
heterogeneity in genetic and environmental factors that do not change over time. According to
these studies, the estimated effect of marijuana use on excessive alcohol use and hard drug use
shrinks, but remains significant even when through the study design. However, a major
limitation of the monozygotic twin comparison is that it cannot remove the unshared
environmental influence that contributes to different decisions about substance use in identical
twins. A limitation of the fixed effects method is that it cannot control for the time-variant
environmental factors evolving with age or specific to a life stage that contribute to the substance
use progression in individuals.
Another limitation of the literature is that the prior studies have not examined the effect
of marijuana use on the use of other substances within the context of an MML. Even if marijuana
use, in general, does lead to excessive alcohol use and hard drug use, those who use marijuana in
response to the implementation of an MML may differ from a typical marijuana user in drinking
9

behavior and other substance use. Thus, we cannot draw any inference about the effect of an
MML from what is observed among those who use marijuana regardless of the law.
Economic studies rely on the exogenous shocks in policy/price related to one substance
to estimate a joint demand function for the target substance itself (e.g., alcohol and cocaine) and
its potential complements/substitutes (e.g., marijuana). Previous studies have exploited changes
in state excise taxes on beer (Pacula, 1998), the minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) (DiNardo
and Lemieux, 2001; Yörük and Yörük, 2011, 2012; Crost and Guerrero, 2012) composite market
prices of alcohol (Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999) and market prices of cocaine (Saffer and
Chaloupka, 1999; DeSimone and Farrelly, 2003). Although they generally found a direct
policy/price effect on the use of the target substance itself that follows a downward sloping
demand curve, the downstream effect on marijuana use is mixed. Chaloupka and Laixuthai
(1997), DiNardo and Lemieux (2001), Crost and Guerrero (2012), and Crost and Rees (2013)
found evidence for a substitution between marijuana and alcohol, whereas Pacula (1998), Saffer
and Chaloupka (1999), and Yörük and Yörük (2011, 2013) found evidence supporting the
complementarity hypothesis. Moreover, evidence from Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) and
DeSimone and Farrelly (2003) suggests a complementary relationship between marijuana and
cocaine.
Not only is there a lack of consistent evidence, it is also difficult to extrapolate the effect
of an MML on alcohol use/cocaine use from the estimated reduced-form effect of alcohol- or
cocaine-related policy/price on marijuana use or the implied structural relationship between
marijuana use and alcohol use. This difficulty arises out of the nature of the underlying
Marshallian demand function, which does not require symmetric relationships between
substances (i.e., from substance A to B vs. from substance B to A), nor does it require symmetric
responses to policy/price changes (i.e., permissive policy/lower price vs. restrictive policy/higher
price). Thus it is possible for marijuana to be a substitute for alcohol when alcohol regulations
10

become more restrictive (e.g., blue laws that ban Sunday sales of alcohol for off-premises
consumption) but for alcohol be a complement to marijuana following a shift towards more
permissive marijuana policies (e.g., MMLs).9
3.3. Significance of Our Study
To inform the current debate on MMLs, we examine the effect of state implementation of
MMLs between 2004 and 2011 on marijuana, alcohol, and hard drug use for both adolescent and
adult populations. Our study advances the existing literature by: (i) providing the first estimates
of the effect of MML implementation on adult marijuana use using micro-level data; (ii)
estimating directly a reduced-form effect of MML implementation on alcohol use and hard drug
use, rather than an implied contemporaneous relationship induced by alcohol- or hard drugrelated policies/price; and (iii) estimating the effect of MML implementation on a full range of
substance use outcomes with differential elasticities and expected harms, including current use
and frequency, initiation, and abuse/dependence.
4. METHODS
4.1. Data Sources
Eight years of cross-sectional data were pooled from a restricted version of the National
Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) 2004-2011 (CBHSQ, 2013). NSDUH is a nationally
and state-representative10 survey sponsored by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA), and the primary source of information on substance use behavior by
9

Anderson, Hansen, and Rees (2013) provided one of the most direct evidence within the context of
MMLs that states with MMLs saw a reduction in alcohol-related traffic fatalities. However, due to the
ambiguity in the policy effect on marijuana use in the first place, this finding does not necessarily imply
that alcohol is a substitute for (or a complement to) marijuana. In fact, when taking into account the key
components of MMLs, Pacula and colleagues (2013) concluded that the finding from traffic fatalities are
more consistent with a complementarity hypothesis.
10

The NSDUH sampling is designed as state-based with an independent, multistage area probability
sample within each state and the District of Columbia. The eight states with the largest population (i.e.,
California, Florida, Illinois, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas)10 have an annual
sample size of about 3,600 each. For the remaining 42 states and the District of Columbia, each has a
sample size of about 900 annually.
11

the U.S. civilian, noninstitutionalized11 population aged 12 or above. Adolescents and young
adults aged 12 to 25 are oversampled in the survey.
The majority of the NSDUH interview is conducted by self-administrated audio
computer-assisted self-interviewing (ACASI), a highly private and confidential mode that
encourages honest reporting of substance use and other sensitive behaviors (Johnson, Fendrich,
and Mackesy-Amiti, 2010). The response rates range from 73% to 76% between 2004 and 2011.
4.2. Variable Measurement
4.2.1. Dependent Variables
Marijuana Use Outcomes:
NSDUH provides information on the recency and frequency of the use of each substance,
the timing of the first use of each substance, and the assessment of substance abuse/dependence
based on DSM-IV diagnostic criteria (APA, 2000). This information allows us to examine the
effect of MML implementation on a full range of marijuana use outcomes with differential
elasticities and expected harms, including current marijuana use and frequency, marijuana use
initiation, and marijuana abuse/dependence. Four measures of marijuana use outcomes were
created accordingly: (i) a dichotomous indicator assessing whether a respondent used marijuana
during the past month prior to the interview; (ii) the number of days during the past month that a
respondent used marijuana, which is an unconditional frequency ranging from 0 to 30; (iii) a
dichotomous indicator for using marijuana for the first time during the past year; (vi) a
dichotomous indicator for being classified as abuse of or dependence on marijuana during the
past year according to DSM-IV criteria.
Alcohol Use Outcomes:

11

Institutionalized individuals (e.g. in jails/prisons or hospitals), homeless or transient persons not in
shelters, and military personnel on active duty were excluded from the NSDUH sample.
12

As noted above, empirical support exists both for a substitution and for a complementary
relationship between marijuana use and alcohol use. An explanation for this contradiction, as we
mentioned in Section 2.4., is related to the dose of alcohol consumption: lower-dose alcohol
consumption is hypothesized to be replaced by marijuana use (King, et al., 2011), whereas
higher-dose alcohol consumption is hypothesized to be accompanied by marijuana use (Lukas
and Orozco, 2001).
Therefore, for alcohol use outcomes, we examined any alcohol use as well as binge
drinking. By doing so, we accounted for the differences in the elasticity of demand for alcohol
and consequent effect of MML implementation across different levels of drinking intensity.
Binge drinking, in the NSDUH, is defined as having five or more drinks on the same occasion on
at least one day during the past month12. We created the following measures for alcohol use: (i)
the total amount of drinks consumed during the past month, (ii) the unconditional frequency of
alcohol use counting the number of days alcohol was consumed during the past month, (iii) the
unconditional frequency of binge drinking days,13 and (iv) the probability of being classified as
having alcohol abuse/dependence during the past year.
We also created a dichotomous indicator to assess whether a respondent used marijuana
while drinking alcohol during the past month.14 This measure of simultaneous use of marijuana
and alcohol can provide further insight into the contemporaneous complementarity between the
two substances.
Hard Drug Use Outcomes:

A commonly used alternative defines “binge drinking” as five or more drinks for men and four or more
drinks for women consumed on one occasion (Wechsler, et al., 1995). Our estimates are robust to this
gender-specific definition (not shown).
12

13

Carpenter and Dobkin (2009), for instance, find evidence for the differential elasticity of alcohol
demand along the distribution of drinking intensity and frequency.
14

The question about simultaneous use of marijuana and alcohol is not included in NSDUH 2004 and
2005 surveys, while the MMLs in Vermont and Montana both came into effective in 2004. Thus we
cannot estimate the effect of these two states’ implementation of the MMLs on this outcome.
13

We focus our analysis of hard drugs on cocaine and heroin, not only because they are
widely prevalent15 and highly dangerous16, but also because these are the two substances most
often linked to the potential gateway effect of marijuana use (Kandel, 2002). We created
dichotomous indicators for: (i) past-month cocaine use and heroin use, and (ii) past-year
initiation of the two drugs.
4.2.2. Independence Variables
MML-Implementation Indicator:
The recent launch of the Data Portal system by the CBHSQ provides us with access to
state identifiers in micro-level NSDUH data, allowing us to create a dichotomous indicator for
the implementation of a MML in a given state during a given year. As summarized in Table 1,
during 2004-2010, MMLs came into effect in seven states in various years. The MMLimplementation indicator was assigned a value of 1 for each full year subsequent to the effective
date of the laws17, and a value of 0 for the remaining years and for the control states. Control
states include those that did not have any MML by the end of 2010 (i.e., “no MML states”). Note
that we excluded eight states that had an MML in place prior to 2004 (i.e., “always MML

15

The prevalence rates of past-month use of cocaine and heroin are 0.6% and 0.1%, respectively. The
combined total of past-month cocaine users and heroin users accounts for 19% of the illicit drug users
who use substances other than marijuana during the past month. When we further exclude the nonmedical use of psychotherapeutic drugs, 55% of the remaining past-month illicit drug users (i.e., who use
substances other than marijuana and psychotherapeutic drugs) used cocaine or heroin or both during the
past month.
16

For instance, the Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs (ISCD) in the U.K., led by the former
chief government drugs adviser, assessed the individual and societal harmfulness of 20 substances
including tobacco, alcohol and 18 commonly used illicit drugs, and concluded that heroin, cocaine, and
methamphetamine were the most harmful drugs to individuals, whereas alcohol, heroin, and cocaine were
the most harmful to others (Nutt, King, and Phillips, 2010).
17

The effective date of the MMLs cannot be matched precisely with the survey date of the NSDUH,
which raises concerns about measurement error: the years during which MMLs came into effective and
the first full years after the effective date of MMLs may capture a mixture of pre-MML and post-MML
behaviors. Nonetheless, this potential misclassification is unlikely to bias our findings because the
estimates are consistent when we excluded these years and when we reclassified the pre-/post-MML
periods.
14

states”), because all but Hawaii amended their laws during the study period.18 We also excluded
Maryland, Arizona, and Delaware, which fall short of being classified as “MML states” during
the study period: Maryland passed two laws in 2003 and in 2011 favorable to medical marijuana,
albeit not legalizing it; Arizona and Delaware did not begin to implement MMLs until 2011. Our
main analyses, therefore, excluded these states from the control group.
Covariates:
We controlled for individual-level and state-level factors that are correlated with both the
individual choice to use substances and with state decisions about MMLs. Individual-level
covariates for adolescents and adults include: (i) age (linear and squared terms), (ii) gender, (iii)
race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic White, Hispanic, non-Hispanic African/Black, non-Hispanic Asian,
or other racial/ethnic origins), (iv) self-reported health (excellent, very good, good, or fair/poor
health), (v) past-month cigarette smoking (daily smoker, non-daily smoker, or non-smoker), (vi)
urban residence (living in a metropolitan, micropolitan, or non-core-based statistical area), (vii)
family income relative to federal poverty level (living below 100% FPL, 100%-200% FPL, or
above 200% FPL). For adults, we also included measures of: (i) marital status (never married,
married, divorced/separated, or widowed), (ii) educational attainment (less than high school,
high school graduate, some college, or college graduate), (iii) college enrollment (full-time
enrolled, part-time enrolled, or non-student), and (iv) employment status (full-time employed,
part-time employed, unemployed, or not in labor force).
In addition to the individual-level demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, we
also controlled for the time-variant state-level economic and policy environment. State-level
economic measurements include: (i) unemployment rate, (ii) average personal income, and (iii)
We concerned that when including the “always MMLs states” in our control states, the estimated effect
of MML implementation may be clouded by the effect of the policy tweaking and amendment of the
existing MMLs. Therefore, we decided to exclude those “always MML states” from main analyses. We
included those states in a set of sensitivity analyses and added an indicator for the amendment of the
existing MMLs in a given “always MML states” during a given year. Our main findings were robust to
the inclusion of “always MML states” in the model specification (Table 7 & 8).
18

15

median household income of the state. Three additional continuous measures were created to
capture relevant changes in the state policy environment concerning beer taxes between 2004
and 2011: (i) specific excise taxes levied per gallon at the wholesale or retail; (ii) ad valorem
excise taxes levied as a percentage of the retail price for on-premises sales (e.g., bars,
restaurants); and (iii) ad valorem excise taxes for off-premises sales.19 Another major policy
change that occurred during the study period was related to marijuana decriminalization:
Massachusetts, California, and several cities and counties in other states relaxed penalties for
recreational marijuana use or placed it “the lowest law enforcement priority.” We excluded these
decriminalization areas from the analytic sample.20
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the marijuana, alcohol, and hard drug use
outcomes in 2004 and 2011, separately for “no MML states” vs. “MML states”. For most of the
outcomes, the 2004 and 2011 statistics in the “MML states” mirrored those in the “no MML
states”. For the outcomes including the probability of past-month marijuana use, the number of
marijuana use days, the number of binge drinking days, and the probability of simultaneous use
of marijuana and alcohol among adults aged 21 or above, as well as the probability of marijuana
initiation among adolescents and young adults aged 12-20, we observed slightly higher
probabilities/counts in the “MML states” than those in the “no MML states” in 2004. By 2011,
however, these probabilities and counts diverged markedly.21

19

We did not control for the market price of cocaine or heroin. The most commonly used source is the
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration’s System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE)
dataset. Empirical studies often find that STRIDE prices are not predictive or only weakly predictive of
drug use (Horowitz, 2001). As French and Popovici (2009) pointed out, “part of difficulty here is that
conventional prices for illicit drug are not readily available and alternative measures are not yet found.”
Nonetheless, fluctuations in cocaine prices and heroin prices are unlikely to be correlated with the MML
implementation, thus omitting these variables is unlikely to bias our results.
20

The estimated effects of MML implementation are robust to the alternative specifications in which we
included the decriminalization areas in our sample and included as a covariate an indicator for the
implementation of marijuana decriminalization in these areas (not shown).
21

A more rigorous regression approach that we discuss in the next section can help identify to what extent
this observed divergence can be attributed to the MML implementation during 2004-2011.
16

Table 3 reports the descriptive statistics for the individual-level and state-level covariates
we included in the regressions for the entire analytic sample.
4.3. Identification Strategy
To identify the effect of MML implementation on individual marijuana, alcohol, and hard
drug use, we estimated the following two-way fixed effects models:
Yi,s,t = f(β0 + β1 MMLs,t + β2 X1 i,s,t + β3 X2 s,t + ρs + τt + ρs t + εi,s,t)
where i denotes an/the individual, s denotes the state, and t denotes the year. Yi,s,t
represents the four marijuana use outcomes, the six alcohol use outcomes, and the four hard drug
use outcomes discussed above. MMLs,t is the policy indicator for the implementation of an MML
in a state s during a year t. X1 i,s,t is the full vector of individual-level covariates. X2 s,t includes the
state-level economic indicators and beer tax rates. The two-way fixed effects are captured in our
models by ρs and τt to account for the time-invariant state heterogeneity as well as the national
secular trend and common shocks related to substance use. We also added state-specific linear
time trends ρs t to account for the unobserved state-level factors that evolve over time at a
constant rate (e.g., social norms and sentiments towards substance use).
This two-way fixed effects method can be viewed as an extension of the difference-indifferences (DD) framework to fit multi-unit and multi-time models that go beyond the
traditional two groups (i.e., treatment vs. control) and two periods (i.e., pre vs. post)
(Wooldridge, 2001). It can produce consistent estimates unless there were concurrent shocks to
substance use that affected the outcomes only in the “MML states”. To our knowledge, no such
concurrent shocks existed.
Standard errors were clustered at the state level to correct for the serial correlation. The
clustered standard errors allow for arbitrary within-state correlation in error terms but assume
independence across the states (Bertrand, et al., 2004).

17

We stratified the sample into two age groups, adolescents and young adults aged 12-20
(N ≈ 183,600) and adults aged 21 or above (N ≈ 219,400). We chose age-21 as the cutoff point in
light of the previous evidence of an age-21 discontinuity in both alcohol use and marijuana use
(Crost and Guerrero, 2012; Yörük and Yörük, 2011, 2012).22 We tested four cut-off points in our
analyses, age-18, age-21, age-25 and age-30. Only the age-21 stratification, which also coincides
with the legal drinking age, produced significant and meaningful differences in the estimated
policy effect between age groups.
We estimated Probit regressions for the dichotomous dependent variables in our study.
The other four discrete dependent variables we studied (i.e., the unconditional number and
frequency measures) possess “excess zeroes” and positive skewness compared to a standard
normal distribution, which requires a more flexible estimation approach than an ordinary least
squares (OLS) estimation. A generalized linear model (GLM) with gamma distribution and log
link23 was estimated for the total amount of drinks during the past month among those aged 21 or
above. For the total amount of drinks among those aged 12-20, on the other hand, we estimated a
two-part model with Probit in the first part and GLM (gamma distribution and log link) in the
second part. Because there is an explicit decision process regarding legality of alcohol
consumption among those under 21, we use the TPM to model the decision to engage in
underage drinking and the quantity consumed conditional upon deciding to engage in underage
drinking as separate processes. We followed the same logic when estimating the frequency
variables. Considering the underlying decision processes and the proportions of zero values, we
estimated a negative binomial regression24 for the number of alcohol use days among those aged

22

The age-21 discontinuity may be created by minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) as the studies
suggest. It may also be related to other shocks to cognitive development, risk preference, legal
responsibility and social environment.
23

The selection of distribution family under the GLM was made based on the modified Park test results.

24

The likelihood ratio test for overdispersion rejects the Poisson distribution in favor of the binomial
distribution.
18

21 or above and a zero-inflated negative binomial regression25 for the number of alcohol use
days among those aged 12-20.26 Zero-inflated negative binomial regressions were also estimated
for the number of marijuana use days and the number of binge drinking days in both age groups.
For ease of interpretation, we converted the coefficient of MMLs,t in each of the
estimations to the average marginal effect calculated at MMLs,t = 0 and the observed values of
other covariates.
5. RESULTS
5.1. Estimated Effect of MML Implementation on Marijuana Use
In Table 4 we first present the marginal effect of MML implementation on the four
marijuana use outcomes (Panel A). Among adults aged 21 or above, the implementation of an
MML increased the probability of using marijuana during the past month by 1.37-1.40
percentage points (Row 1 Column 3 & 4), which is robust to the inclusion of the state-specific
linear time trends. This percentage point change can be translated into a 16 percent relative
increase from a baseline predicted marijuana use probability of 8.60 percentage points.
The NSDUH data do not allow us to distinguish between medical marijuana patients and
the non-patient population. Nonetheless, according to the registry data (Anderson, Hansen and
Rees. 2013), the number of registered medical marijuana patients accounts for an average of 0.8
percent of the population across the five “MML states” on which the registry information is

25

The likelihood ratio tests for overdispersion reject the zero-inflated Poisson regression in favor of a
zero-inflated negative binomial regression. Furthermore, the Vuong tests for zero-inflation confirm our
choice of zero-inflated regressions instead of ordinary negative binomial regressions.
An alternative to a zero-inflated regression is a hurdle model (i.e., “TPM” for counts). A practical
challenge, however, is that cluster-adjusted standard errors from the combined marginal effects (i.e.,
combining the first- and second-part estimates) from the hurdle model (Belotti, et al., 2014). Nonetheless,
the point estimates for the combined effects we obtained from the hurdle models with first-part Probit and
second-part zero-truncated negative binomial (not shown) were very similar to the zero-inflated negative
binomial estimates from our main analyses. In another set of sensitivity analyses, we also treated the
count variables as continuous and estimated the combined marginal effects and their cluster-adjusted
standard errors using the STATA command “TPM” (Belotti, et al., 2014). The TPM estimates (not
shown) were slightly larger and more significant than the zero-inflated negative binomial estimates.
26

19

available27. Therefore, the 1.4 percentage point increase in the probability of marijuana use we
found among adults aged 21 or above is not likely to come exclusively from an increase in use
among registered patients. Though we cannot test this directly, it suggests that there may also be
a considerable increase in recreational marijuana use or self-medication by the non-patient
population associated with MML implementation.
Among adults aged 21 or above, we also found a 0.14-0.21 day or a 12-17 percent
increase in the number of marijuana use days (Row 2 Column 3 & 4) arising from MML
implementation. Among adolescents and young adults aged 12-20, in contrast, no change in the
probability or frequency of past-month marijuana use can be attributed to MML implementation
(Row 1 & 2 Column 1 & 2).
With regard to marijuana use initiation in the preceding year, MML implementation led
to 0.32-0.46 percentage point or a 5-6 percent increase in the probability of first-time marijuana
use among adolescents and young adults aged 12-20 (Row 3 Column 1 & 2). Yet, the lack of a
positive policy effect on the probability and frequency of past-month marijuana use among this
age group suggests that many of these individuals are engaging in experimental use with
relatively low health, behavioral, and social consequences. In other words, these findings are
consistent with a scenario in which adolescents and young adults who experiment with marijuana
use because of the potentially increased availability and social acceptance and reduced penalties
brought about by an MML are not transitioning to regular use, at least in the short term.
Among those aged 21 or above, we also found a 0.22 percentage point increase in
marijuana use initiation (Row 3 Column 3). However, this was largely offset by the inclusion of
the state-specific linear time trends (Row 3 Column 4). This insignificant increase in initiation
suggests that the significant increases in the probability and frequency of past-month use we
found earlier come largely from the adults who first tried marijuana long before its medical use
The registry information is not available for the two most recent “MML states”, namely New Jersey
and the District of Columbia, despite that both states mandate patient registry in their laws.
27

20

was permitted by law. After the introduction of an MML that helped reduce costs of marijuana
use (i.e., market prices as well as non-market health, legal and social consequences), those with
prior marijuana use experience would likely reinitiate or increase their marijuana use.
The effect arguably most salient to the public health implications of MMLs is the effect
on marijuana abuse/dependence among adults aged 21 or above, as this occurs even for other
legal pharmaceuticals such as prescription opioid medications. We found a 15-27 percent
increase in the probability of marijuana abuse/dependence (Row 4 Column 3 & 4), which is
higher than the relative increase in the probability and frequency of marijuana use in this age
group. This finding suggests that those who used marijuana in response to MML implementation
had a higher risk of progressing to abuse/dependence than those who used marijuana regardless
of the law.
5.2. Estimated Effect of MML Implementation on Alcohol Use
To the extent that alcohol is a complement or substitute to marijuana, the significant
effect of MML implementation on marijuana use may spread to alcohol use (Table 4 Panel B).
Our estimates indicate that, among adults aged 21 or above, MML implementation was not
associated with either the total number of drinks or the number of drinking days (Row 1 & 2
Column 3 & 4). The implementation of an MML was, however, positively associated with the
frequency of binge drinking, with an effect size of 0.10-0.14 binge drinking days or a relative
increase of 6-9 percent (Row 3 Column 3 & 4). The spillover increase in binge drinking implies
a complementarity between marijuana use and high-dose alcohol consumption among adults
aged 21 or above. Not only was this contemporaneous complementarity reflected in the
independent measures of marijuana use and binge drinking, it was further confirmed by the
measure of simultaneous use of the two substances: among adults aged 21 or above we found a
0.62-0.89 percentage point or a 15-22 percent increase in the probability of marijuana use while
drinking as a result of MML implementation (Row 4 Column 3 & 4).
21

However, we found no significant change in any measure of alcohol use among
adolescents and young adults aged 12-20, which suggests that the increased marijuana use
initiation we reported previously is unlikely to spread to underage drinking.
5.3. Immediate & Delayed Effect of MML Implementation on Alcohol Abuse/Dependence
& on Hard Drug Use
In addition to increased marijuana use and binge drinking, MML implementation may
have a spillover effect on alcohol abuse/dependence and the use of hard drugs such as cocaine
and heroin. Given that the progression from marijuana use and binge drinking to these
downstream outcomes may be a gradual transition (Wagner & Anthony, 2002b), we estimated
not only the contemporaneous policy effect but also the one-year and two-year lagged policy
effect. For both age groups, we found neither an immediate effect nor a delayed effect of MML
implementation on alcohol abuse/dependence, past-month cocaine use, cocaine use initiation,
past-month heroin use, and heroin use initiation (Table 5).
5.4. Policy Endogeneity of MML Adoption
There is a geographic concentration of MMLs: states that have adopted MMLs are all in
the West and Northeast. This geographic similarity raises concern that there may be some past
shocks to marijuana use in these regions leading to their adoption of MMLs and not accounted
for by the state fixed effects and the state-specific linear trends. In other words, MML adoption
could be endogenous to marijuana use. To check for this potential policy endogeneity,
specifications with a series of lagged and leading indicators for adopting an MML were
estimated for key marijuana use outcomes (Table 6). We found that only the contemporaneous
and lagged policy indicators had significant effects, while all the leads had small and statistically
insignificant effects. These estimates suggest that it is in fact the policy shocks from adopting an

22

MML that drive the changes in marijuana use, rather than some past disturbances in marijuana
use that drive the adoption of an MML.28
5.5. State-Aggregate Effect of MML Implementation
To further check the robustness of our individual-level estimates with regard to serial
correlation, we aggregated the data to the state level and estimated the effect of MML
implementation on state-level prevalence rates of our key individual-level findings.29 The
previously highlighted policy effects on past-month marijuana use, marijuana use initiation,
marijuana abuse/dependence, past-month binge drinking, and simultaneous use of marijuana and
alcohol remain significant in these state-level specifications (Table 9 Panel A & B). The policy
effects on the other downstream outcomes remain insignificant (Table 9 Panel C), with the only
exception being a one-year lagged policy effect on the state-level prevalence of alcohol
abuse/dependence among adults aged 21 or above (Panel C Row 1 Column 3 & 4).
5.6. State Heterogeneity of the Effect of MML Implementation
By examining the implementation of MMLs between 2004 and 2011 in seven states
collectively, our estimates capture the average policy effect across all seven “MML states”.
However, the policy effects for each of these states may not necessarily have the same magnitude
or even the same direction (Pacula, et al., 2013). From a statistical standpoint, a substantial
policy effect from one or two states could potentially account for the overall finding. To test for
heterogeneity of the estimated policy effect, we replaced the single indicator for MML
As another set of sensitivity analyses, we also included the “always MML states” in our control states,
which enables us to account for the past disturbances that “MML states” shared with “always MML
states”. Our main findings were robust to the inclusion of “always MML states” in the model
specification (Table 7 & 8).
28

29

In Column 1 and 3 (Table 9) we clustered the standard errors at the state level; while in Column 2 and
4, we removed the time-series information from the standard errors by averaging the pre-MML data and
the post-MML data (Donald and Lang, 2007). We followed a two-step procedure described in Bertrand,
Duflo, and Mullainathan (2001, pp. 267) to accommodate staggered adoption of the MMLs across states.
As a result, the data were collapsed into pre- and post-MML two periods across 7 “MML states”. The
standard errors were adjusted to take into account the smaller number of “MML states” (Donald and
Lang, 2007).
23

implementation with seven separate indicators for MML implementation in each of the seven
“MML states”. We found, in most cases, across-the-board significant policy effects in the same
direction, although states vary in the magnitude of the effect (Table 10). Pacula and colleagues
(2013) note that key components of MMLs, such as the ambiguity in “chronic pain”, the
allowance for dispensaries and/or home cultivation, and (the absence of) mandatory registry and
renewal may help explain the heterogeneity of the policy effect across these seven states.
However, we do not have sufficient policy variation during the study period to elucidate which
of these components may have accounted for the heterogeneity in the effect size of MML
implementation.
6. DISCUSSION
Three main pieces of evidence from our study inform the policy discussions of MMLs.
First, we found a significant effect of MML implementation on increasing marijuana use.
Estimates suggest that the populations responsive to MMLs were adolescents and young adults
aged 12-20 who experimented with marijuana for the first time and adults aged 21 or above who
had tried marijuana prior to the implementation of the law. This latter group had an increased
risk of progression to marijuana abuse/dependence.30 The effect of MML implementation on
marijuana abuse/dependence constitutes a potential public health concern similar to that of
prescription drug abuse/dependence (CDC, 2012): even if we assume that the increases in
marijuana use we observed come from those who use the drug for validated medical purposes,
there may still be possibility that marijuana abuse/dependence would increase as a result of
MML implementation.

30

A diagnosis of substance abuse/dependence, by definition, indicates that an individual is experiencing a
cluster of psychological, physical, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms associated with substance use. The
DSM-IV considers marijuana abuse and marijuana dependence to be valid psychiatric disorders, and
marijuana abuse/dependence as experienced in clinical population and general population appears very
similar to other substance abuse/dependence disorders (Budney, et al., 2007).
24

Second, among those aged 21 or above, we found a spillover effect of MML
implementation on the increasing frequency of binge drinking, possibly through increased use of
the two substances simultaneously. The complementarity between marijuana use and binge
drinking among adults of legal drinking age could magnify the expected harms of an MML. As
Pacula and Sevigny (2014) commented, “even if consumption (of marijuana) were assumed to
rise by 100 percent, the savings of liberalization policies would dwarf the known health costs
associated with using marijuana. However, all potential savings … could be entirely erased, and
tremendous losses incurred, if alcohol and marijuana turn out to be economic complements.” The
6-9 percent increase in the frequency of binge drinking and the 15-22 percent increase in the
probability of simultaneous marijuana and alcohol use31 that we estimated may result in
considerable economic and social costs from downstream health care expenditures and
productivity loss (Naimi, et al., 2003).
Third, neither underage drinking among those aged 12-20 nor hard drug use in both age
groups was affected by MML implementation. In this regard, the often-voiced concerns about
the potential gateway effect of marijuana is not supported by our findings. We caution that our
study is not intended to refute the gateway hypothesis. Rather it suggests that the gateway effect
is not likely to occur in the context of an MML: for those who respond to MML implementation
and use marijuana, their marijuana use is not likely to act as a gateway to more dangerous
substance use through the pharmacological properties of marijuana.32
Taken together, our study findings provide evidence for a significant effect of MML
implementation on increasing marijuana use, and a spillover effect among adults of legal
drinking age from increased marijuana use to increased binge drinking. The findings do not,
31

The interaction between marijuana and alcohol may magnify the risks posed by the two substances
individually (Liguori, Gatto, and Jarrett, 2002; Medina, et al., 2007).
32

Nonetheless marijuana may still be a gateway drug for other marijuana users through other pathways
For instance, those who use marijuana regardless of the laws or those who use marijuana in response to
decriminalization may progress to hard drug use because marijuana introduces them to a shared market or
subculture of hard drugs.
25

however, provide evidence to support other types of substance use spillovers (i.e., underage
drinking, cocaine use, and heroin use).

26

Table 1. Effective Time of State Medical Marijuana Laws
(1)

(2)

Approved

Effective

Vermont

2004/05

2004/07

Montana
Rhode Island

2004/11
2005/06
2007/03
2008/11
2010/01
2010/05

2004/11
2006/01
2007/07
2008/12
2010/10 (07)†
2010/07

1996/11
1998/11
1998/11
1998/11
1999/11
2000/06

1996/11
1998/11
1998/12
1999/03
1999/12
2000/12

2000/11
2000/11

2001/06
2001/10

2010-2014 (7 States)
Arizona

2010/11

2011/04

Delaware
Connecticut
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
Illinois

2011/05
2012/05
2012/11
2013/07
2013/08

2011/07
2012/05 (10)‡
2013/01
2013/07
2014/01

Maryland

2014/04§

2014/06

MML States
2004-2010 (7 States)

New Mexico
Michigan
New Jersey
District of Columbia
1996-2003 (8 States)
California
Washington
Oregon
Alaska
Maine
Hawaii
Colorado
Nevada

Note:
† The effective date of New Jersey MML is 2010/07 as specified in the statute, while the state governor
Chris Christie delays its implementation;
‡ Some sections of Connecticut MML came into effect from its passage (2012/05), while other sections
on 2012/10;
§ Maryland passed two laws in 2003 and in 2011 favorable to medical marijuana, albeit not legalizing it.

27

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of Dependence Variables in 2004 & 2011

Age 12-20
A. Marijuana Use Outcomes
%Pr(Past-Month Marijuana Use)
#Marijuana Use Days
%Pr(Marijuana Initiation)
%Pr(Marijuana Abuse/Dep.)

Year 2004
No MML States MML States
Mean S.D.
Mean S.D.

Year 2011
No MML States MML States
Mean S.D.
Mean S.D.

10.0
1.18
7.07
4.87

(30.0)
(4.88)
(25.6)
(21.5)

12.5
1.54
7.77
5.83

(33.1)
(5.58)
(26.8)
(23.4)

10.0
1.24
7.47
3.87

(30.0)
(5.05)
(26.3)
(19.3)

12.5
1.72
9.29
4.96

(34.6)
(5.92)
(29.0)
(21.7)

#Total Drinks‡
#Alcohol Use Days

9.32
1.59

(45.3)
(4.06)

9.66
1.62

(35.5)
(4.08)

6.41 (34.4)
1.16 (3.34)

6.43
1.24

(30.4)
(3.33)

#Binge Drinking Days
%Pr(Marijuana while Drinking)

0.86
3.59

(2.76)
(18.6)

0.85
5.62

(2.69)
(23.0)

0.60
3.89

(2.20)
(19.3)

0.61
5.49

(2.14)
(22.8)

9.35
0.96
2.12
0.08
0.23

(29.1)
(9.76)
(14.1)
(2.76)
(4.83)

9.86
1.14
2.32
0.12
0.33

(29.8)
(10.6)
(15.1)
(3.44)
(5.75)

6.05
0.51
1.14
0.06
0.25

(23.9)
(7.15)
(10.6)
(2.50)
(4.99)

7.44
0.60
1.78
0.05
0.36

(26.3)
(7.74)
(13.2)
(2.19)
(6.00)

B. Alcohol Use Outcomes

C. Other Downstream Outcomes
%Pr(Alcohol Abuse/Dep.)
%Pr(Past-Month Cocaine Use)
%Pr(Cocaine Initiation)
%Pr(Past-Month Heroin Use)
%Pr(Heroin Initiation)

Age 21+
A. Marijuana Use Outcomes
%Pr(Past-Month Marijuana Use)
#Marijuana Use Days
%Pr(Marijuana Initiation)
%Pr(Marijuana Abuse/Dep.)

Year 2004
No MML States MML States
Mean S.D.
Mean S.D.

Year 2011
No MML States MML States
Mean S.D.
Mean S.D.

8.07
1.08
0.68
2.23

(27.2)
(4.84)
(8.24)
(14.8)

11.1
1.46
0.54
2.66

(31.4)
(5.53)
(7.33)
(16.1)

8.35
1.29
0.82
2.00

(27.7)
(5.35)
(8.99)
(14.0)

14.2
2.10
0.91
2.72

(34.9)
(6.85)
(9.47)
(16.3)

19.7
4.73
1.61
3.70

(58.9)
(7.15)
(4.08)
(18.9)

20.4
5.50
1.64
4.67

(53.5)
(7.42)
(3.85)
(21.1)

18.6 (56.6)
4.70 (7.01)
1.41 (3.65)
3.74 (19.0)

19.8
5.56
1.61
6.42

(53.8)
(7.38)
(3.71)
(24.5)

11.1
1.33
0.87
0.11
0.11

(31.4)
(11.4)
(9.27)
(3.29)
(3.29)

12.3
1.58
0.98
0.10
0.08

(32.8)
(12.5)
(9.84)
(3.22)
(2.88)

9.22
0.63
0.50
0.10
0.13

11.5
1.31
0.72
0.12
0.10

(31.9)
(11.4)
(8.48)
(3.49)
(3.17)

B. Alcohol Use Outcomes
#Total Drinks‡
#Alcohol Use Days
#Binge Drinking Days
%Pr(Marijuana while Drinking)

C. Other Downstream Outcomes
%Pr(Alcohol Abuse/Dep.)
%Pr(Past-Month Cocaine Use)
%Pr(Cocaine Initiation)
%Pr(Past-Month Heroin Use)
%Pr(Heroin Initiation)

(28.9)
(7.91)
(7.06)
(3.15)
(3.58)

Note: ‡ One drink refers to a can or a bottle of beer, a glass of wine or a wine cooler, a shot of liquor, or a
mixed drink with liquor in it.

28

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics of Individual-Level & State-Level Covariates
Year 2004-2011 (N ≈ 403,000)
No MML States MML States
Mean S.D.
Mean S.D.

Age 12+
A. Individual-Level Covariates

27.1 (15.6)
#Age
48.2 (50.0)
%Male
Race/Ethnicity: Non-Hispanic White (ref.)
12.6 (33.2)
%Hispanic/Latino
12.8 (33.4)
%Non-Hispanic African Black
2.11 (14.4)
%Non-Hispanic Asian
3.51 (18.4)
%Other Origins
Self-Reported Health: Excellent (ref.)
40.1 (49.0)
%Very Good
23.8 (42.6)
%Good
7.30 (26.0)
%Fair/Poor
Cigarette Smoking: Non-Smoker (ref.)
11.5 (31.9)
%Non-Daily Smoker
14.1 (34.8)
%Daily Smoker
Urbanicity: Non-CBSA (ref.)
15.0 (35.7)
%Living in a Micropolitan
75.3 (43.1)
%Living in a Metropolitan
Family Income: >200% FPL (ref.)
22.3 (41.6)
%Living 100-200% FPL
18.1 (38.5)
%Living <100% FPL
Marital Status: Married (ref.)
49.9 (50.0)
%Never Married
2.47 (15.5)
%Separated/Divorces
9.01 (28.6)
%Widowed
Education Attainment: College Graduate (ref.)
29.1 (45.4)
%Some College
33.5 (47.2)
%High School Graduate
16.8 (37.4)
%Less than High School
College Enrollment: Not Enrolled (ref.)
5.37 (22.5)
%Part-Time Enrolled
19.9 (39.9)
%Full-Time Enrolled
Employment: Full-Time Employed (ref.)
18.5 (38.9)
%Part-Time Employed
6.69 (25.0)
%Unemployed
22.3 (41.6)
%Not in Labor Force

B. State-Level Covariates
%Unemployment Rate
$Average Personal Income (10K)
$Median Household Income (10K)
Beer Tax Rates
$Specific Excise Tax (per gallon)
%Ad Valorem Tax (on-premises)
%Ad Valorem Tax (off-premises)
29

27.0
48.0

(15.5)
(50.0)

12.8
13.6
2.53
4.79

(33.4)
(34.3)
(15.7)
(21.4)

41.1
23.9
7.10

(49.2)
(42.6)
(25.7)

12.4
13.2

(32.9)
(33.9)

15.0
75.3

(35.7)
(43.1)

20.8
18.3

(40.6)
(38.7)

54.8
2.38
8.24

(49.8)
(15.2)
(27.5)

29.2
31.8
14.9

(45.5)
(46.6)
(35.6)

6.90
20.3

(25.4)
(40.2)

19.8
7.31
21.6

(39.9)
(26.0)
(41.1)

5.05

(2.19)
(0.57)
(0.63)

7.41
3.90
5.27

(2.80)
(1.03)
(0.69)

0.26
1.01
1.01

(0.22)
(3.31)
(3.21)

0.19
1.98
0.89

(0.09)
(3.99)
(2.69)

6.23
3.71

Table 4. Estimated Marginal Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on Individual Marijuana & Alcohol Use
(1)
Age 12-20

(2)
Age 12-20

(3)
Age 21+

(4)
Age 21+

0.11 (0.31)
[10.1]

-0.62 (0.48)
[10.2]

1.40***(0.26)
[8.60]

1.37* (0.63)
[8.60]

-0.003 (0.01)
[1.22]

-0.04 (0.05)
[1.23]

0.21***(0.05)
[1.19]

0.14† (0.08)
[1.20]

%Pr(Marijuana Initiation)

0.46† (0.26)
[7.09]

0.32* (0.17)
[7.10]

0.22** (0.07)
[0.68]

0.11 (0.11)
[0.69]

%Pr(Marijuana Abuse/Dep.)

0.08 (0.27)
[4.45]

0.03 (0.44)
[4.45]

0.32† (0.18)
[2.17]

0.58* (0.25)
[2.15]

#Total Drinks‡

-0.35 (1.03)
[8.90]

0.09 (2.78)
[8.88]

0.16 (0.46)
[19.5]

0.57 (1.33)
[19.5]

#Alcohol Use Days

-0.02 (0.05)
[1.35]

0.04 (0.08)
[1.35]

0.03 (0.08)
[4.88]

0.08 (0.11)
[4.88]

0.01 (0.03)
[0.68]

0.08 (0.07)
[0.68]

0.10** (0.03)
[1.55]

0.14** (0.06)
[1.54]

-0.47 (0.29)
[3.96]

-0.15 (0.52)
[3.93]

0.62** (0.20)
[4.04]

0.89† (0.54)
[4.01]

No
≈ 183,600

Yes
≈ 183,600

No
≈ 219,400

Yes
≈ 219,400

A. Marijuana Use Outcomes
%Pr(Past-Month Marijuana Use)
#Marijuana Use Days

B. Alcohol Use Outcomes

#Binge Drinking Days
%Pr(Marijuana while Drinking)

State-Specific Linear Trend (ρs t)
#Observations

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities
/counts when setting MMLs,t to 0 and leaving the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ One drink refers to a can or a bottle of beer, a glass of wine or a wine cooler, a shot of liquor, or a
mixed drink with liquor in it.

30

Table 5. Estimated Immediate & Delayed Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on Individual Alcohol Abuse/Dependence, Cocaine Use & Heroin
Use
(1)
Age 12-20

(2)
Age 12-20

(3)
Age 12-20

(4)
Age 21+

0.08 (0.63)
[7.91]

-0.34 (0.32)
[7.93]

-0.31 (0.47)
[7.93]

0.73 (0.63)
[10.7]

-0.05 (0.22)
[0.75]

0.08 (0.14)
[0.74]

0.07 (0.09)
[0.74]

0.19 (0.15)
[1.08]

%Pr(Cocaine Initiation)

0.10 (0.22)
[1.66]

0.32 (0.31)
[1.65]

-0.01 (0.29)
[1.67]

0.02 (0.12)
[0.66]

%Pr(Past-Month Heroin Use)

0.006 (0.03)
[0.09]

-0.02 (0.03)
[0.09]

-0.02 (0.04)
[0.09]

%Pr(Heroin Initiation)

-0.06 (0.08)
[0.22]

-0.01 (0.09)
[0.21]

-0.04 (0.09)
[0.21]

%Pr(Alcohol Abuse/Dep.)
%Pr(Past-Month Cocaine Use)

Immediate/Delayed Effect
State-Specific Linear Trend (ρs t)‡
#Observations

Contemporaneous 1-Year Lagged
Yes
Yes
≈ 183,600
≈ 183,600

(5)
Age 21+
-0.53

(6)
Age 21+

(0.33)
[10.8]

-0.04

(0.26)
[10.8]

0.006 (0.13)
[1.10]

-0.09

(0.14)
[1.10]

(0.15)
[0.67]

0.07

(0.10)
[0.66]

0.03 (0.04)
[0.14]

0.02 (0.04)
[0.14]

0.02

(0.05)
[0.14]

-0.01 (0.05)
[0.14]

0.01 (0.04)
[0.14]

-0.03

(0.05)
[0.14]

-0.18

2-Year Lagged Contemporaneous 1-Year Lagged
Yes
Yes
Yes
≈ 219,400
≈ 183,600
≈ 219,400

2-Year Lagged
Yes
≈ 219,400

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities/counts when setting MMLs,t to 0 and leaving
the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ State-specific linear trend is included in models assessing %Pr(Alcohol Abuse/Dep), %Pr(Past-Month Cocaine Use), %Pr(Cocaine Initiation)
and %Pr(Heroin Initiation), and the estimates are consistent with those excluding state-specific linear trend; Note that state-specific linear trend is
not included in models assessing %Pr(Past-Month Heroin Use) because the convergence of maximum likelihood estimators fails in this case.

31

Table 6. Robustness Check for the Policy Endogeneity by Adding Leads & Lags
(1)
TMML-2‡
Age 21+: %Pr(Past-Month Marijuana Use)

Age 12-20: %Pr(Marijuana Initiation)

Age 21+: %Pr(Marijuana Abuse/Dep.)

-0.04
(0.29)
-0.03
(0.29)
-0.18
(0.29)
-0.01
(0.39)
0.02
(0.21)
0.02
(0.22)

(2)
TMML-1‡

(3)
‡

TMML

**

0.16
(0.34)
0.22
(0.39)
-0.14
(0.30)
0.34
(0.46)
0.04
(0.20)
0.03
(0.22)

0.74
(0.30)
0.89***
(0.28)
0.26
(0.25)
0.71*
(0.37)
0.21†
(0.13)
0.35*
(0.18)

(4)
TMML+1‡
†

0.65
(0.39)
0.67†
(0.37)
0.18
(0.51)
0.83†
(0.44)
0.26
(0.29)
0.42†
(0.26)

(5)
TMML+2‡
0.31
(0.68)
0.23
(0.83)
0.42
(0.60)
0.11†
(0.06)
0.22
(0.35)
0.31
(0.42)

ρs t
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities/counts when setting TMML-2~TMML+2 to 0 and
leaving the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ TMML indicates the first full year after the effective date of the MMLs; TMML-2 and TMML-1 (i.e., leads), and TMML+1 and TMML+2 (i.e., lags)
indicate 2-year before, 1-year before, 1-year after and 2-year after TMML; we also included 3-year leads and more, whose individual and joint
effects are virtually zero.

32

Table 7. Robustness Check for the Policy Endogeneity by Adding “Always MML States” to the Controls
(1)
Age 12-20

(2)
Age 12-20

(3)
Age 21+

(4)
Age 21+

0.14 (0.29)
[10.4]

-0.66 (0.49)
[10.5]

1.18***(0.27)
[9.00]

1.28* (0.61)
[8.99]

#Marijuana Use Days

0.01 (0.01)
[1.27]

-0.09 (0.12)
[1.28]

0.20***(0.05)
[1.26]

0.11 (0.08)
[1.26]

%Pr(Marijuana Initiation)

0.46† (0.25)
[7.21]

0.33* (0.18)
[7.22]

0.20** (0.07)
[0.69]

0.11 (0.11)
[0.70]

%Pr(Marijuana Abuse/Dep.)

0.06 (0.28)
[4.55]

-0.01 (0.45)
[4.55]

0.30† (0.20)
[2.22]

0.54* (0.27)
[2.21]

#Total Drinks‡

-0.21 (1.07)
[8.89]

0.12 (2.20)
[8.89]

0.16 (0.50)
[19.6]

0.70 (1.38)
[19.5]

#Alcohol Use Days

-0.01 (0.04)
[1.36]

0.01 (0.08)
[1.36]

0.02 (0.08)
[4.96]

0.06 (0.10)
[4.96]

0.02 (0.03)
[0.69]

0.07 (0.06)
[0.68]

0.10** (0.04)
[1.55]

0.13* (0.06)
[1.55]

-0.42 (0.28)
[4.06]

-0.15 (0.51)
[4.03]

0.54* (0.23)
[4.25]

0.76† (0.46)
[4.22]

No
≈ 208,800

Yes
≈ 208,800

No
≈ 249,700

Yes
≈ 249,700

A. Marijuana Use Outcomes
%Pr(Past-Month Marijuana Use)

B. Alcohol Use Outcomes

#Binge Drinking Days
%Pr(Marijuana while Drinking)

State-Specific Linear Trend (ρs t)
#Observations

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities/
counts when setting MMLs,t to 0 and leaving the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ One drink refers to a can or a bottle of beer, a glass of wine or a wine cooler, a shot of liquor, or a
mixed drink with liquor in it.

33

Table 8. Robustness Check for the Policy Endogeneity by Adding “Always MML States” to the Controls
(1)
Age 12-20

(2)
Age 12-20

(3)
Age 12-20

(4)
Age 21+

0.09 (0.63)
[7.98]

-0.34 (0.33)
[8.00]

-0.26 (0.46)
[8.00]

0.66 (0.64)
[10.9]

-0.44

(0.35)
[11.0]

-0.07

(0.24)
[10.9]

-0.04 (0.23)
[0.76]

0.08 (0.14)
[0.75]

0.08 (0.08)
[0.75]

0.20 (0.16)
[1.10]

-0.005 (0.13)
[1.13]

-0.09

(0.15)
[1.13]

%Pr(Cocaine Initiation)

0.14 (0.24)
[1.70]

0.32 (0.33)
[1.70]

-0.03 (0.29)
[1.72]

0.01 (0.13)
[0.67]

-0.19

(0.17)
[0.68]

0.07

(0.09)
[0.67]

%Pr(Past-Month Heroin Use)

0.006 (0.03)
[0.09]

-0.02 (0.03)
[0.09]

-0.02 (0.04)
[0.09]

0.02 (0.04)
[0.14]

0.02 (0.04)
[0.14]

0.02

(0.05)
[0.14]

%Pr(Heroin Initiation)

-0.07 (0.08)
[0.22]

-0.03 (0.08)
[0.22]

-0.02 (0.09)
[0.22]

0.001 (0.05)
[0.14]

0.01 (0.05)
[0.14]

-0.02

(0.05)
[0.14]

%Pr(Alcohol Abuse/Dep.)
%Pr(Past-Month Cocaine Use)

Immediate/Delayed Effect
State-Specific Linear Trend (ρs t)‡
#Observations

Contemporaneous 1-Year Lagged
Yes
Yes
≈ 208,800
≈ 208,800

(5)
Age 21+

2-Year Lagged Contemporaneous 1-Year Lagged
Yes
Yes
Yes
≈ 249,700
≈ 208,800
≈ 249,700

(6)
Age 21+

2-Year Lagged
Yes
≈ 249,700

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities/counts when setting MMLs,t to 0 and leaving
the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ State-specific linear trend is included in models assessing %Pr(Alcohol Abuse/Dep), %Pr(Past-Month Cocaine Use), %Pr(Cocaine Initiation)
and %Pr(Heroin Initiation), and the estimates are consistent with those excluding state-specific linear trend; Note that state-specific linear trend is
not included in models assessing %Pr(Past-Month Heroin Use) because the convergence of maximum likelihood estimators fails in this case.

34

Table 9. Robustness Check for the State-Aggregated Policy Effect on State-Level Prevalence Rates
(1)
Age 12-20
A. Marijuana Use Outcomes
% Past-Month Marijuana Use

(2)
Age 12-20

(3)
Age 21+

(4)
Age 21+

-0.06 (0.47)
[10.3]

0.26 (0.35)
[10.3]

1.32** (0.47)
[8.72]

1.69** (0.54)
[8.72]

% Marijuana Initiation

0.94* (0.44)
[7.23]

0.83** (0.31)
[7.23]

0.12 (0.12)
[0.70]

0.14* (0.08)
[0.70]

% Marijuana Abuse/Dep.

0.45 (0.52)
[4.45]

0.52 (0.36)
[4.45]

0.47* (0.25)
[2.17]

0.43** (0.15)
[2.17]

% Past-Month Alcohol Use

0.19 (1.00)
[25.3]

0.84 (0.72)
[25.3]

-0.77 (0.75)
[60.5]

-0.14 (0.47)
[60.5]

% Past-Month Binge Drinking

0.62 (0.75)
[16.9]

0.62 (0.65)
[16.9]

1.30** (0.51)
[32.5]

1.01** (0.34)
[32.5]

-0.25 (0.43)
[4.04]

0.02 (0.24)
[4.04]

0.83** (0.37)
[4.07]

1.16*** (0.21)
[4.07]

% Alcohol Abuse/Dep.
(1-year lagged effect)

-0.36 (0.40)
[8.41]

0.10 (0.29)
[8.41]

1.23* (0.58)
[10.9]

1.51* (0.62)
[10.9]

% Alcohol Abuse/Dep.
(2-year lagged effect)

-0.61 (0.43)
[8.42]

-0.66 (0.59)
[8.42]

0.41 (0.54)
[10.9]

0.71 (0.77)
[10.9]

% Cocaine Initiation
(1-year lagged effect)

0.07 (0.13)
[1.69]

-0.06 (0.24)
[1.69]

0.09 (0.30)
[0.62]

0.20 (0.14)
[0.62]

% Cocaine Initiation
(2-year lagged effect)

-0.06 (0.29)
[1.70]

-0.06 (0.34)
[1.70]

0.26 (0.23)
[0.61]

0.29 (0.40)
[0.61]

% Heroin Initiation
(1-year lagged effect)

-0.14 (0.15)
[0.20]

-0.18† (0.10)
[0.20]

0.06 (0.06)
[0.11]

0.07 (0.07)
[0.11]

% Heroin Initiation
(2-year lagged effect)

-0.17 (0.12)
[0.20]

-0.28 (0.23)
[0.20]

0.03 (0.05)
[0.11]

0.09 (0.13)
[0.11]

Serial-Correlation Adjustment

State-Cluster ‡ 2-Period Panels §

B. Alcohol Use Outcomes

% Marijuana while Drinking
C. Other Downstream Outcomes

State-Cluster ‡ 2-Period Panels §

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities/
counts when setting MMLs,t to 0 and leaving the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ As what we did in the individual-level analyses, we excluded the 8 states which had MMLs in place
prior to 2004 (i.e., “always MML states”), exclude Arizona and Delaware whose MMLs came into effect
during 2011, exclude Maryland which passed two laws in 2003 and in 2011 favorable to medical
35

marijuana, and exclude California (already excluded as one of the “always MML states”) and
Massachusetts which relaxed penalties for recreational marijuana use during the study period. The
exclusion left us with 39 states across 8 years in the state-aggregate analyses;
§ We further averaged the pre-MML data and the post-MML data (Donald and Lang, 2007) following a
two-step procedure described in Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2001, pp. 267). The second-step
equation is estimated based on pre- and post-MML two-period panels of 7 “MML states”. The standard
errors were adjusted to take into account the smaller number of “MML states” (Donald and Lang, 2007).

36

Table 10. Robustness Check for the State Heterogeneity of the Policy Effect

Age 21+: %Pr(Past-Month Marijuana Use)

Age 21+: #Marijuana Use Days

Age 12-20: %Pr(Marijuana Initiation)

Age 21+: %Pr(Marijuana Abuse/Dep.)

Age 21+: #Binge Drinking Days

Age 21+: %Pr(Marijuana while Drinking)

(1)
VTMML

(2)
MTMML

(3)
RIMML

(4)
NMMML

(5)
MIMML

(6)
NJMML

(7)
DCMML

(8)
MMLs,t

1.54***
(0.21)
-0.57
(0.30)
0.15***
(0.02)
0.10**
(0.03)
0.14
(0.14)
0.28
(0.25)
1.16***
(0.11)
0.31*
(0.16)
0.08
(0.13)
0.09
(0.04)
--‡

4.40***
(0.27)
5.07***
(0.32)
0.18***
(0.03)
0.06†
(0.04)
1.43***
(0.19)
0.55†
(0.30)
2.27***
(0.15)
2.64***
(0.17)
0.38***
(0.03)
0.45***
(0.04)
--‡

0.91***
(0.26)
0.31†
(0.20)
-0.05
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.03)
0.04
(0.18)
0.08
(0.25)
0.43***
(0.13)
1.02***
(0.15)
0.08**
(0.03)
0.28***
(0.04)
7.52*
(3.89)
5.02
(4.47)

0.49**
(0.17)
0.42†
(0.26)
0.08***
(0.02)
0.06*
(0.03)
1.15***
(0.17)
1.84***
(0.29)
0.28**
(0.09)
1.67***
(0.13)
0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.04)
0.44***
(0.11)
1.73
(2.81)

1.35***
(0.17)
2.40***
(0.40)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.05
(0.17)
0.18
(0.45)
0.01
(0.09)
0.19
(0.20)
0.11***
(0.0-2)
0.23***
(0.04)
0.42***
(0.12)
1.44***
(0.37)

1.27***
(0.24)
1.62***
(0.25)
0.19***
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
1.24***
(0.23)
0.23
(0.30)
0.0001
(0.14)
-0.76
(0.73)
-0.05
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.03)
1.83***
(0.17)
1.35***
(0.22)

1.98***
(0.49)
0.48*
(0.24)
0.05
(0.05)
0.12**
(0.05)
1.51***
(0.22)
1.42***
(0.40)
0.59**
(0.22)
0.32*
(0.16)
0.05†
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
1.54***
(0.22)
1.84***
(0.29)

1.40***
(0.26)
1.37*
(0.63)
0.21***
(0.05)
0.14†
(0.08)
0.46†
(0.26)
0.32*
(0.17)
0.32†
(0.18)
0.58*
(0.25)
0.10**
(0.03)
0.14**
(0.06)
0.62**
(0.20)
0.89†
(0.54)

--‡

--‡

ρs t §
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

Note: †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001;
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
Baseline predicted means in square brackets are calculated as the average of predicted probabilities/counts when setting VTMML~DCMML or MMLs,t
to 0 and leaving the other covariates as the observed values;
‡ %Pr(Marijuana while Drinking) is not included in NSDUH 2004 and 2005 surveys, while the MMLs in Vermont and Montana both came into
effective in 2004. Thus we cannot estimate the effect of VTMML or MTMML on %Pr(Marijuana while Drinking);
§ ρs t represents state-specific linear trend.
37

REFERENCES
American Psychiatric Association (Ed.). (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders: DSM-IV-TR®. American Psychiatric Publishing: Arlington, VA.
Anderson, D. M., Hansen, B., & Rees, D. I. (2012). Medical marijuana laws and teen marijuana
use. IZA Discussion Paper Series (No. 6592). Accessed 10/10/2013 from:
http://ftp.iza.org/dp6592.pdf
Anderson, D. M., Hansen, B., & Rees, D. I. (2013). Medical marijuana laws, traffic fatalities,
and alcohol consumption. Journal of Law and Economics, 56, 333–369.
Anderson, D. M., & Rees, D. I. (2014). The Role of Dispensaries: The devil is in the details.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(1), 235-240.
Anthony, J. C. (2012). Steppingstone and gateway ideas: A discussion of origins, research
challenges, and promising lines of research for the future. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 123,
S99-S104.
Asbridge, M., Hayden, J. A., & Cartwright, J. L. (2012). Acute cannabis consumption and motor
vehicle collision risk: systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMJ, 344.
Belotti, F., Deb, P., Manning, W. C., & Norton, E.C. (2014). TPM: Estimating two-part models.
The Stata Journal, forthcoming. Accessed 03/03/2014 from:
http://econ.hunter.cuny.edu/people/economics-faculty/pdeb/ihea-minicourse/tpm-estimatingtwo-part-models-working-paper/at_download/file
Ben Amar, M. (2006). Cannabinoids in medicine: A review of their therapeutic potential. Journal
of Ethnopharmacology, 105(1), 1-25.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates?. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-275.
Boys, A., Marsden, J., & Strang, J. (2001). Understanding reasons for drug use amongst young
people: a functional perspective. Health education research, 16(4), 457-469.
Budney, A. J., Roffman, R., Stephens, R. S., & Walker, D. (2007). Marijuana dependence and its
treatment. Addiction Science & Clinical Practice, 4(1), 4.
Cadoni, C., Pisanu, A., Solinas, M., Acquas, E., & Chiara, G. (2001). Behavioural sensitization
after repeated exposure to delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cross-sensitization with morphine.
Psychopharmacology, 158(3), 259-266.
Cadoni, C., Valentini, V., & Di Chiara, G. (2008). Behavioral sensitization to delta 9tetrahydrocannabinol and cross-sensitization with morphine: differential changes in accumbal
shell and core dopamine transmission. Journal of Neurochemistry, 106(4), 1586-1593.
Cadoni, C., Simola, N., Espa, E., Fenu, S., & Di Chiara, G. (2014). Strain dependence of
adolescent Cannabis influence on heroin reward and mesolimbic dopamine transmission in adult
Lewis and Fischer 344 rats. Addiction Biology. Forthcoming.
Campbell, V. A., & Gowran, A. (2007). Alzheimer's disease; taking the edge off with
cannabinoids?. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152(5), 655-662.

38

Carpenter, C., & Dobkin, C. (2009). The effect of alcohol consumption on mortality: regression
discontinuity evidence from the minimum drinking age. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1(1), 164.
Caulkins, J. P., Hawken, A., Kilmer, B., & Kleiman, M. A. (2012). Marijuana legalization: What
everyone needs to know. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality (CBHSQ). (2013). National Survey on Drug
Use and Health, 2004,2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 [data file and code book].
Available from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Data Archive Website:
https://www.datafiles.samhsa.gov http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/SAMHDA/
Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services (HHS) Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality
(CBHSQ); 2013.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2012). CDC grand rounds: prescription drug
overdoses-a US epidemic. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 61(1), 10.
Cerdá, M., Wall, M., Keyes, K. M., Galea, S., & Hasin, D. (2012). Medical marijuana laws in 50
states: Investigating the relationship between state legalization of medical marijuana and
marijuana use, abuse and dependence. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 120(1), 22-27.
Chaloupka, F. J., & Laixuthai, A. (1997). Do youths substitute alcohol and marijuana? Some
econometric evidence. Eastern Economic Journal, 23(3), 253-276.
Christianson, M. A. (2010). Great schism: social norms and marijuana prohibition. Harvard Law
& Policy Review, 4, 229.
Cohen, P. J., 2010. Medical marijuana 2010: it's time to fix the regulatory vacuum. The Journal
of Law, Medicine & Ethics 38 (3), 654-666.
Crost, B., & Guerrero, S. (2012). The effect of alcohol availability on marijuana use: evidence
from the minimum legal drinking age. Journal of Health Economics, 31(1), 112-121.
Crost, B., & Rees, D. I. (2013). The minimum legal drinking age and marijuana use: New
estimates from the NLSY97. Journal of Health Economics, 32(2), 474-476.
DeSimone, J., & Farrelly, M. C. (2003). Price and enforcement effects on cocaine and marijuana
demand. Economic Inquiry, 41(1), 98-115.
DiNardo, J., & Lemieux, T. (2001). Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: the unintended
consequences of government regulation. Journal of Health Economics, 20(6), 991-1010.
DiNieri, J. A., & Hurd, Y. L. (2012). Rat models of prenatal and adolescent cannabis exposure.
Methods in Molecular Biology, 829, 231-242.
Donald, S. G., & Lang, K. (2007). Inference with difference-in-differences and other panel data.
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2), 221-233.
Ellgren, M., Spano, S. M., & Hurd, Y. L. (2007). Adolescent cannabis exposure alters opiate
intake and opioid limbic neuronal populations in adult rats. Neuropsychopharmacology, 32(3),
607-615.
Fergusson, D. M., Boden, J. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2006). Cannabis use and other illicit drug
use: testing the cannabis gateway hypothesis. Addiction, 101(4), 556-569.
39

Gloss, D., & Vickrey, B. (2012). Cannabinoids for epilepsy. Cochrane Database Systematic
Reviews, 6.
Gostin, L. O. (2005). Medical marijuana, American federalism, and the Supreme Court. JAMA,
294(7), 842-844.
Hall, W., & Degenhardt, L. (2009). Adverse health effects of non-medical cannabis use. The
Lancet, 374(9698), 1383-1391.
Hall, W., & Pacula, R. L. (2003). Cannabis use and dependence: public health and public policy.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK.
Harper, S., Strumpf, E. C., & Kaufman, J. S. (2012). Do medical marijuana laws increase
marijuana use? Replication study and extension. Annals of Epidemiology, 22(3), 207-212.
Hathaway, A. D., Comeau, N. C., & Erickson, P. G. (2011). Cannabis normalization and stigma:
Contemporary practices of moral regulation. Criminology and Criminal Justice, 11(5), 451-469.
Heishman, S. J., Arasteh, K., & Stitzer, M. L. (1997). Comparative effects of alcohol and
marijuana on mood, memory, and performance. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior,
58(1), 93-101.
Hoffmann, D. E., & Weber, E. (2010). Medical marijuana and the law. New England Journal of
Medicine, 362(16), 1453-1457.
Johnson, T. P., Fendrich, M., & Mackesy-Amiti, M. E. (2010). Computer literacy and the
accuracy of substance use reporting in an ACASI survey. Social Science Computer Review,
28(4), 515-523.
Kandel, D. B. (1975). Stages in adolescent involvement in drug use. Science, 190(4217), 912–
914.
Kandel, D. B. (Ed.). (2002). Stages and pathways of drug involvement: Examining the gateway
hypothesis. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK.
Kandel, D. B. (2003). Does marijuana use cause the use of other drugs?. JAMA, 289(4), 482483.
King, A. C., de Wit, H., McNamara, P. J., & Cao, D. (2011). Rewarding, stimulant, and sedative
alcohol responses and relationship to future binge drinking. Archives of General Psychiatry,
68(4), 389-399.
Klein, L. C. (2001). Effects of adolescent nicotine exposure on opioid consumption and
neuroendocrine responses in adult male and female rats. Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 9(3), 251.
Krishnan, S., Cairns, R., & Howard, R. (2009). Cannabinoids for the treatment of dementia.
Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews, 2.
Ledent, C., Valverde, O., Cossu, G., Petitet, F., Aubert, J. F., Beslot, F., ... & Parmentier, M.
(1999). Unresponsiveness to cannabinoids and reduced addictive effects of opiates in CB1
receptor knockout mice. Science, 283(5400), 401-404.
Liguori, A., Gatto, C. P., & Jarrett, D. B. (2002). Separate and combined effects of marijuana
and alcohol on mood, equilibrium and simulated driving. Psychopharmacology, 163(3-4), 399405.
40

Lukas, S. E., & Orozco, S. (2001). Ethanol increases plasma Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
levels and subjective effects after marihuana smoking in human volunteers. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 64(2), 143-149.
Lynne-Landsman, S. D., Livingston, M. D., & Wagenaar, A. C. (2013). Effects of state medical
marijuana laws on adolescent marijuana use. American Journal of Public Health, 103(8), 15001506.
Lynskey, M. T., & Hall, W. (2000). The effects of adolescent cannabis use on educational
attainment: a review. Addiction, 95(11), 1621-1630.
Lynskey, M. T., Heath, A. C., Bucholz, K. K., Slutske, W. S., Madden, P. A., Nelson, E. C., ... &
Martin, N. G. (2003). Escalation of drug use in early-onset cannabis users vs. co-twin controls.
JAMA, 289(4), 427-433.
Maldonado, R., Valverde, O., & Berrendero, F. (2006). Involvement of the endocannabinoid
system in drug addiction. Trends in Neurosciences, 29(4), 225-232.
Manning, W. G., Blumberg, L., & Moulton, L. H. (1995). The demand for alcohol: the
differential response to price. Journal of Health Economics, 14(2), 123-148.
Medina, K. L., Schweinsburg, A. D., Cohen-Zion, M., Nagel, B. J., & Tapert, S. F. (2007).
Effects of alcohol and combined marijuana and alcohol use during adolescence on hippocampal
volume and asymmetry. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 29(1), 141-152.
Mikos, R. A. (2009). On the limits of supremacy: Medical marijuana and the states' overlooked
power to legalize federal crime. Vanderbilt Law Review, 62, 1419.
Moore, S. C. (2010). Substitution and complementarity in the face of alcohol-specific policy
interventions. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 45(5), 403-408.
Morral, A. R., McCaffrey, D. F., & Paddock, S. M. (2002). Reassessing the marijuana gateway
effect. Addiction, 97(12), 1493-1504.
Naimi, T. S., Brewer, R. D., Mokdad, A., Denny, C., Serdula, M. K., & Marks, J. S. (2003).
Binge drinking among US adults. JAMA, 289(1), 70-75.
Navarro, M., Carrera, M. R. A., Fratta, W., Valverde, O., Cossu, G., Fattore, L., ... & de Fonseca,
F. R. (2001). Functional interaction between opioid and cannabinoid receptors in drug selfadministration. The Journal of Neuroscience, 21(14), 5344-5350.
Nutt, D. J., King, L. A., & Phillips, L. D. (2010). Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision
analysis. The Lancet, 376(9752), 1558-1565.
Pacula, R. L. (1998). Does increasing the beer tax reduce marijuana consumption?. Journal of
Health Economics, 17(5), 557-585.
Pacula, R. L., Powell, D., Heaton, P., & Sevigny, E. L. (2013). Assessing the effects of medical
marijuana laws on marijuana and alcohol use: The devil is in the details. NBER Working Paper
No. w19302. The National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge, MA.
Pacula, R. L., & Sevigny, E. L. (2014). Marijuana Liberalization Policies: Why We Can't Learn
Much from Policy Still in Motion. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(1), 212-221.

41

Pape, H., Rossow, I., & Storvoll, E. E. (2009). Under double influence: Assessment of
simultaneous alcohol and cannabis use in general youth populations. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 101(1), 69-73.
Pertwee, R. G. (2012). Targeting the endocannabinoid system with cannabinoid receptor
agonists: pharmacological strategies and therapeutic possibilities. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1607), 3353-3363.
Riedel, G., & Davies, S. N. (2005). Cannabinoid function in learning, memory and plasticity. in
Cannabinoids. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 168 (168): 445–77.
Saffer, H., & Chaloupka, F. (1999). The demand for illicit drugs. Economic Inquiry, 37(3), 401411.
Sekhon, V., 2009. Highly uncertain times: an analysis of the executive branch's decision to not
investigate or prosecute individuals in compliance with state medical marijuana laws. Hastings
Constitutional Law Quarterly 37 (3), 553-564.
Singer, H. S. (2005). Tourette's syndrome: from behaviour to biology. The Lancet Neurology,
4(3), 149-159.
Solinas, M., Panlilio, L. V., & Goldberg, S. R. (2004). Exposure to delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) Increases Subsequent Heroin Taking but not Heroin's Reinforcing Efficacy: A SelfAdministration Study in Rats. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29(7).
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2012). Results from the 2011
National Survey on Drug Use and Health: summary of national findings. Rockville, MD: U.S.
Dept. of Health and Human Services (HHS) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA); 2012. Accessed 10/10/2013 from:
http://www.samhsa.gov/data/nsduh/2k11results/nsduhresults2011.htm
Wadsworth, E. J. K., Moss, S. C., Simpson, S. A., & Smith, A. P. (2006). Cannabis use,
cognitive performance and mood in a sample of workers. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 20(1),
14-23.
Wagner, F. A., & Anthony, J. C. (2002). Into the world of illegal drug use: exposure opportunity
and other mechanisms linking the use of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and cocaine. American
Journal of Epidemiology, 155(10), 918-925.
Wagner, F. A., & Anthony, J. C. (2002). From first drug use to drug dependence: developmental
periods of risk for dependence upon marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 479-488.
Wall, M. M., Poh, E., Cerdá, M., Keyes, K. M., Galea, S., & Hasin, D. S. (2011). Adolescent
marijuana use from 2002 to 2008: higher in states with medical marijuana laws, cause still
unclear. Annals of Epidemiology, 21(9), 714-716.
Wechsler, H., Dowdall, G. W., Davenport, A., & Rimm, E. B. (1995). A gender-specific measure
of binge drinking among college students. American Journal of Public Health, 85(7), 982-985.
Wooldridge, J.M. (2001). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press:
Cambridge, MA.

42

Yörük, B. K., & Yörük, C. E. (2011). The impact of minimum legal drinking age laws on alcohol
consumption, smoking, and marijuana use: evidence from a regression discontinuity design using
exact date of birth. Journal of Health Economics, 30(4), 740-752.
Yörük, B. K., & Yörük, C. E. (2013). The impact of minimum legal drinking age laws on alcohol
consumption, smoking, and marijuana use revisited. Journal of Health Economics, 32(2), 477479.

43

