                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE ROLE OF PROXIMITY IN FORECLOSURE EXTERNALITIES:
                        EVIDENCE FROM CONDOMINIUMS

                                         Lynn M. Fisher
                                      Lauren Lambie-Hanson
                                          Paul S. Willen

                                       Working Paper 20080
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20080


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2014




The authors thank Douglas Errico, Chris Foote, Kris Gerardi, Tim Lambie-Hanson, Anthony Pennington-
Cross, Jonathan Spader, BillWheaton, and audiences at the American Real Estate and Urban Economics
Association, the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston’s New England Study Group, and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte for helpful
comments and suggestions. Suzanne Lorant and Jamie Fogel provided excellent editorial assistance.
The views expressed here are solely those of the authors, not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Lauren Lambie-Hanson received a dissertation grant from the Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy, which helped support this research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Lynn M. Fisher, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Proximity in Foreclosure Externalities: Evidence from Condominiums
Lynn M. Fisher, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 20080
April 2014
JEL No. G12,R3

                                            ABSTRACT

We measure the effect of foreclosures on the sale prices of nearby properties using a dataset of
condominiums in Boston. A foreclosure in the same association and at the same address depresses
the sale price by 2.5 percent, but properties in the same association but located at a different address
have an effect that is tightly estimated at zero. Since properties in the same association are close
substitutes, we argue that the evidence points against the pecuniary externality of property coming
on the market and toward a physical externality as the source of measured foreclosure externalities.


Lynn M. Fisher                                      Paul S. Willen
University of North Carolina                        Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Chapel Hill, NC                                     600 Atlantic Avenue
lynn_fisher@unc.edu                                 Boston, MA 02210-2204
                                                    and NBER
Lauren Lambie-Hanson                                willen968@gmail.com
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
lslambiehanson@alum.mit.edu
   Starting with Immergluck and Smith (2006), researchers have documented
that properties that sell near foreclosures transact at a discount relative to oth-
erwise identical properties that have no foreclosures nearby. We extend this
literature by focusing on a sample of Boston condominiums that helps us to
identify the mechanism that generates these price effects. In particular, we aim
to distinguish between two popular theories, the first being that foreclosures
cause price declines through a “supply effect,” resulting from the fact that a
foreclosed property is a close substitute for nearby properties. An alterna-
tive and not mutually exclusive explanation is that an owner has no incentive
to invest in his property during the foreclosure process, and so the property
deteriorates, generating a physical externality. Our results have important
implications for policy. If foreclosures affect prices merely by increasing the
supply on the market, then the effect of foreclosures on nearby properties is
a pecuniary externality, implying that the market outcome is not necessarily
inefficient and that government intervention risks choosing winners and losers
rather than increasing overall welfare. In contrast, a physical externality al-
ways allows for welfare-improving policy interventions.
   In this paper we shed light on these different explanations of the effect of
foreclosures on neighboring properties using a dataset of condominium trans-
actions in Boston over the years 1987 to 2012. Condominiums provide a nat-
ural laboratory to study the effects of foreclosures on neighboring properties
because, especially with large associations, they provide a relatively large sam-
ple of highly substitutable homes. What makes our data particularly useful
is that we can identify membership in condominium associations. Specifically,
our data allow us to distinguish between three types of nearby condo fore-
closures: same-association, same-address (SASA); same-association, different-
address (SADA); and nearby (< 0.1 miles) different-association, different-
address (DADA) units. Our main finding is that SASA foreclosures have
an economically and statistically significant effect on the sale prices of nearby
properties with each foreclosure depressing prices by 2.5 percent, as shown
in Panel A of Table 1. But an almost more striking finding is that SADA
foreclosures in large associations have no effect at all: as Table 1 shows, the


                                        1
coefficient on SADA foreclosures is tightly estimated near zero.
    To demonstrate how our quantitative findings help us to understand why
foreclosures depress prices, consider our alternative hypotheses. If foreclo-
sures drive down prices because they add supply to the market—the pecuniary
externality—we would expect association to matter more than location within
the association. The reason is that condos in the same association are typi-
cally very close substitutes for one another, with similar and often identical
floorplans, finishes, and appliances, and they often share amenities like health
clubs and swimming pools. If the pecuniary externality were the driving force,
we would expect SASA and SADA foreclosure to have a similar effect. On the
other hand, if the effect on prices is a physical externality, we would expect
distance to matter more, with SASA foreclosures mattering more than SADA.
Indeed, this is what we find.
   Because we are studying condominiums, we must pay special attention to a
public goods problem that emerges when home ownership is at least partially
shared: the owner of a condo in mortgage foreclosure has little incentive to
make association payments. Failure to pay these fees leads to depleted re-
serves, deferred maintenance, or increased fees on remaining homeowners, and
any of these scenarios will make a building and association less desirable to
prospective buyers. Thus, in addition to the physical and pecuniary external-
ities, condo foreclosures create a public goods problem which could also put
downward pressure on prices within an association. Can we distinguish be-
tween this public goods externality and the other types? For large associations
(51+ units), which account for about two-thirds of sales with same-association
foreclosures, the answer is yes. Anything that affects an association as a whole
should affect all properties regardless of whether they are located at the same
address or a different address. In other words, if the effects we observe are
driven by the public goods problem, we should see equally large coefficients
on SASA and SADA foreclosures. On the other hand, if there is no pub-
lic goods problem, we should see SADA foreclosures generating no discount,
which is what we find. For medium-sized associations (13-50 units), the results
are more nuanced. The point estimate on SADA foreclosures is economically


                                       2
meaningful but not statistically different from zero. Thus public goods issue
could explain at least some of the discount in smaller associations.
   To interpret these results, we turn to a Massachusetts law passed in 1992 to
deal with the problem of unpaid dues. The law resulted from a wave of condo
foreclosures in the early 1990s that led to the failure of entire associations:
when a critical number of owners stopped paying dues, associations could no
longer finance a minimum level of services. To deal with this, the state allowed
associations to place a lien on properties to collect unpaid association fees.
Since the law gave the association lien priority over all existing liens including
the mortgage, it is known as the “super-lien” law. For two reasons, the super-
lien law disproportionately benefits large associations. First, an association
needs to have access to legal counsel to enforce the priority lien, and large,
professionally managed associations are much more likely to have such access
and to coordinate legal actions in a timely manner. But second, practically
speaking, a professional manager who gets reimbursed for any services he or
she provides has a strong incentive to maintain a high level of service, since
association income required to pay managers is assured. (Once notification of
the intent to enforce the priority lien has been made to first mortgage lenders,
these lenders tend to take over payment of association fees for delinquent
owners in order to preserve the priority of their mortgage.) With this in mind,
the results in Table 1 make sense. For large associations, the superlien law
inoculates the association from the public goods problem and only physical
externalities matter. For medium-sized associations, the superlien law is less
effective, and the measured effect on SASA properties is some combination of
the public goods problem and the physical externality.
    Our results provide a different perspective on the foreclosure external-
ity problem. Previous researchers identified the substitutability of properties
largely by distance. To interpret the finding that a property one-tenth of mile
away had a bigger effect on prices than a property one-quarter of a mile away
as evidence of a pecuniary externality, one has to assume that a property
one-tenth of a mile away is a closer substitute than a property one-quarter of
a mile away. There are two problems with this approach. First, a physical


                                        3
externality will also generate the same pricing pattern, as the physical exter-
nality deteriorates with distance from the foreclosed property. But the second
problem is that, for the typical buyer, such small differences in location play
only a small role in a valuation decision. A physically identical property a mile
or even further away might be a much closer substitute than a property on the
same street. In a sense, our dataset allows us to hold substitutability constant
within a condo association and vary distance in order to identify differences
previously clouded by the data.
   We argue above that the logical explanation for the effect of distance within
condo associations is a physical externality, but one natural question here is
how that physical externality works. How does poor maintenance of a unit
affect neighbors at the same address but not neighbors at a different address
when the buildings are all jointly administered? To gain some insight, in Sec-
tion 4 we turn to records from the City of Boston on constituent complaints to
City government agencies, as compiled in Lambie-Hanson (2013). We find that
many buildings with foreclosures have had complaints reported about property
conditions, and these complaints sometimes specifically reference problems like
pest infestation that originate in one unit but subsequently impact neighbors
in the same building.
    Our results are consistent with earlier work. Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak
(2011) use the same dataset that we do and, indeed, find evidence of fore-
closure externalities only for condominiums and not for single-family or small
multifamily properties. For their entire sample, Anenberg and Kung (2013)
find that foreclosures exert an effect on prices only after the properties become
bank owned and are listed for sale, a finding they argue is evidence against
a physical externality. But for their “high-density” subsample, which most
closely corresponds to our sample, they find strong effects prior to the foreclo-
sure auction sale, which they attribute, as we do, to a physical externality.
   Ours is not the first research to draw significant conclusions from the
Boston condominium market. Genesove and Mayer (1997) and Genesove and
Mayer (2001) used data from the same Boston condominium properties to ar-
gue for the role of loss aversion and leverage, respectively, in homeowners’ sale


                                       4
decisions. As mentioned above, Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) use the
same dataset we do, and although their regressions include all properties in
Massachusetts, their main findings relate to condominiums, a large share of
which are located in Boston.
   In the following sections, we describe our model of house price changes,
discuss our data and results, and consider the possible implications of our
findings.


1       Estimation Strategy
To measure the external effects of foreclosures, nearly all researchers to date
have used some version of the following spatial externality regression:

                             ln (Pit ) = βXit + γNFit + eit ,                            (1)

where Pit is the sale price of property i in period t, Xit is a vector of property
characteristics, NFit is the number of nearby foreclosures within a certain ge-
ographic radius of the property occurring in a particular time window around
the sale, and eit is a property×date-of-sale-specific error term.1 Prominent
examples of research along these lines include Immergluck and Smith (2006);
Schuetz, Been, and Ellen (2008); Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009); Camp-
bell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011); and Gerardi et al. (2012).2
    There are several challenges in estimating equation (1). The first problem
arises from the causal relationship between P and NF —negative equity causes
foreclosure—which leads to a negative value for γ even when there is no spatial
effect of foreclosures on prices. To see why, imagine that a demand shock hits
one neighborhood in a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), and the shock
leads to a fall in prices relative to other MSAs and a consequent relative
    1
     For a thorough discussion of the literature on strategies for modeling foreclosure
spillovers on house prices, see Gerardi et al. (2012) and Frame (2010).
   2
     Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Owens III (2010) is one of the few papers in the literature
on spatial externalities that uses a different approach, calculating a price function for all
properties regardless of whether a transaction occurs.



                                             5
increase in foreclosures and higher relative density of foreclosures. Higher
foreclosure density, in turn, implies that foreclosures are more likely in any
geographic radius in the neighborhood in question, meaning that in an MSA-
level regression we will find a correlation between price declines and nearby
foreclosures regardless of whether there actually is a causal relationship.
   To address the reverse causality problem we introduce a full set of time×census
tract dummies in equation (1).3 This means that γ in our models reflects a
comparison of two properties in the same tract that differ with respect to the
number of foreclosures that occur nearby.4 In other words, since we are not
comparing properties in different census tracts, our identification would only
be confounded if some shock generated different within-census-tract trends in
house prices and foreclosures.
   The second problem is the enormous heterogeneity of residential proper-
ties. Systematic differences between properties with foreclosures nearby and
properties without foreclosures nearby would bias our estimates of γ. For
example, if properties near a foreclosure are older, less well maintained, or
less likely to have high-end features like jacuzzi tubs, granite countertops, or
ocean views, we would tend to overestimate the negative effect of foreclosures
on prices. Hedonic regressions control for these characteristics but leave two
problems unsolved. The first is that the βs, the relationships between prices
and characteristics, may not be stable across time or locations. The second,
more serious, problem is that hedonic models can only control for observ-
able variation, and the set of observables in tax assessor’s data is limited and
plagued by measurement issues. Poor maintenance simply is not measured at
all, and even basic variables, like the number of bedrooms, are subject to the
judgement of the assessor.
   3
     We follow Bailey, Muth, and Nourse (1963) and code tract-year dummies as -1 in the
year of the first sale and +1 in the year of the second sale in the pair of arm’s-length
transactions. For simplicity, we refer to these as the “purchase” and “sale,” though the time
between two arm’s-length transactions may span multiple ownerships.
   4
     Our data allow us to use much finer geographic controls—down to the census block—
but Gerardi et al. (2012) show that the benefits of going below the tract level are minimal.
Table 5 shows sensitivity results that demonstrate that our findings do not differ materially
when we use block group instead of tract controls.



                                             6
   To address the heterogeneity problem, we use a repeat-sales approach,
looking at the price difference between two sales of a property. To understand
our specification, assume that we can decompose the error term eit into three
components:

              eit =         ei             +           el,t        +         ηit            (2)
                           |{z}                       |{z}                  |{z}
                       Time-invariant          Location l × time       Time varying value
                      unobservable value            effects                of house i
                          of house i


If we substitute equation (2) into equation (1) and take the difference between
the sale (s) and purchase (p) we get:

  ln (Pi,sale ) − ln (Pi,purchase ) = β(Xi,sale − Xi,purchase )+
                              γ(NFisale − NFi,purchase ) + el,sale − el,purchase + εi , (3)

where εi = ηi,sale − ηi,purchase is a property-ownership-specific error term.
   We stress three key points about equation (3). First, differencing removes
the time invariant unobservable heterogeneity ei . In other words, if houses
next to railroad tracks sell at a discount because of the noise, and borrowers
in those houses tend to default more, we will not attribute the price discount
to the foreclosures. Second, since the observable characteristics Xi,t do not
change much, Xi,sale − Xi,purchase is almost always zero, and the instability of
β across locations or time presents only a minor problem.
    Finally, equation (3) illustrates both the reverse causality problem and our
solution. A demand shock that reduces prices and causes foreclosures will
lead to a correlation between the error term εi and NFi,sale − NFi,purchase . By
introducing the purchase and sale year by location dummies, the error term
now only picks up within-location variation in price changes across properties.
    Gerardi et al. (2012) show that the presence of nearby distressed properties
is associated with lower sale prices, starting when the borrower becomes seri-
ously delinquent and ending a year after the sale of the lender-owned foreclosed
properties known as “real estate owned” (or REO) in the industry. Since we


                                                  7
do not have detailed delinquency information in our dataset, we approximate
such information by considering a foreclosure to be “active” during a window
of time that starts one year prior to the foreclosure auction (to accommodate
the period when the borrower is seriously delinquent) and ends two years after
the auction (to account for the time the property is marketed and sold by the
lender, as well as the time when it is initially held by a third-party owner after
exiting REO).
    This approximation fits well with what we know about the foreclosure
process in Boston. During 2007, the median time from the last foreclosure
petition to the foreclosure deed was 192 days, and in 2012 it was 310. In our
sample, over 80 percent of foreclosures become REO, and for REO resales, the
median time was 153 days in 2007 and 285 days in 2012. Below we test the
robustness of our results to the use of alternative windows of time.5
    With some notable exceptions, all researchers in this literature have lim-
ited their attention to single-family residential (SFR) properties. The logic
for focusing on SFRs is that these are the most common type of housing,
particularly outside large cities, and that both condominiums and multifam-
ily properties pose complications for modeling prices. Campbell, Giglio, and
Pathak (2011) make the most prominent break with this tradition by includ-
ing not only SFRs but also condominiums and small multifamily properties in
their main sample.6 As mentioned in our introduction, Campbell, Giglio, and
Pathak (2011) find that the condo sample is the only one in which foreclo-
sure externalities play an economically or statistically meaningful role. They
do not, however, explicitly model the effect of condominium foreclosures, for
   5
     Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) use the difference between the sale prices of prop-
erties that sell in the year after versus the year before the arm’s-length sale, but Gerardi
et al. (2012) argue that the CGP approach biases researchers against finding an effect of
foreclosures on prices.
   6
     Hartley (2011) distinguishes between the impacts of single-family and multifamily fore-
closures on single-family house prices as a means for disentangling the causal mechanisms
of foreclosure spillovers. He does not examine the effect of foreclosures on multifamily or
condo prices. In effect, his study takes the opposite approach to that of Campbell, Giglio,
and Pathak (2011). In this paper, we control for the structure type of both the foreclosed
properties and the property sold at arm’s-length, the price of which is on the left-hand side
and is our focus.



                                             8
example, on the price of nearby condominiums.7


2       Data
The principal source of data for the analysis in this paper is a dataset of public
records and assessor’s files compiled for properties in Boston by the Warren
Group, a local firm. The public records data contain, in principle, all sale
and mortgage deeds recorded since 1987 for every residential property, and
the assessor’s files contain a contemporary snapshot of the characteristics of
all properties. Researchers have used the Warren Group dataset extensively in
the past, most notably to study foreclosure externalities in Campbell, Giglio,
and Pathak (2011), although Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2008) and Fisher
and Lambie-Hanson (2012) use it to estimate foreclosure and sale hazards.
For the bulk of our analysis, we follow the procedures used by Campbell,
Giglio, and Pathak (2011) to clean the data.8 In total, the dataset includes
approximately 2 million sales of single-family, small multifamily (2–3 units),
and condo properties in Massachusetts between January 1987 and June 2012,
with about 215,000 of these occurring in Boston.
   Although the Warren Group data include transactions from 1987 to the
present, we limit our sample to condo properties that transacted between the
first quarter of 1989 and the second quarter of 2011 in order to accommodate
our foreclosure window, which, as explained in Section 1, extends one year
prior to the foreclosure sale and two years after. Our definition of repeat sales
includes only what we consider true arm’s-length sales. Foreclosure auctions
are excluded, as well as sales of REOs.9 In addition, we attempt to exclude
short sales, transactions in which the lender allows the borrower to sell for less
than the amount owed on the mortgage rather than complete a foreclosure. We
exclude likely short sales by removing transactions in which the sale price is
    7
     For details on this result, see Table A.19 of Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak’s online
appendix, available at http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/data/aug2011/20090375_app.pdf.
   8
     See http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/data/aug2011/20090375_app.pdf.
   9
     When a foreclosure occurs between two arm’s-length sales, we control for this using a
dummy in our regression models.


                                            9
less than 75 percent of the combined origination amounts of mortgages taken
out when the owner purchased the property.10 We also exclude intrafamily
transactions, sales in which the seller held the property for fewer than 7 days
and sales with prices below $10,000 or over $10 million.
   We successfully geocoded 96 percent of the property locations using the
ArcGIS 10 North American geocoding tool, achieving rooftop-level precision
for a large proportion of our sample. After geocoding, we measured the
distance between each property and its neighbors within 0.1 mile, using the
Vincenty ellipsoidal distance formula. Figure 1 displays the scale of the 0.1-
mile buffers, which typically amounts to a couple of city blocks in Boston.11
   As shown in Figure 2, foreclosures of condos have occurred in virtually
every neighborhood of Boston, often in neighborhoods with a mix of single-
family, multifamily, and condo properties. Citywide, about 3,400 foreclosures
of single-family, 2–3 family, and condo properties were completed between
2007 and 2011. About 42 percent of these were foreclosures on condos. In the
previous wave of foreclosures in Massachusetts in 1991–1994, approximately
5,400 foreclosures were completed, 52 percent of which involved condos. Condo
associations in Boston come in all sizes, ranging from a single converted duplex
to a set of large multifamily buildings, comprising hundreds of units.
    For the most part, researchers measuring foreclosure externalities have
looked at similarly limited geographic areas. Immergluck and Smith (2006)
examine data from Chicago; Schuetz, Been, and Ellen (2008) have data from
New York City; and Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) use the same dataset
we do, which covers Massachusetts. Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009) and
Gerardi et al. (2012) use datasets with fairly broad national coverage. The
disadvantage of our sample is that the results might not generalize to other
locations, but the advantage is that we can explicitly identify units located in
  10
     For more information on identifying likely short sales using this rule and for a comparison
of the recent volume of foreclosures and short sales in a community adjacent to Boston, see
Fisher, Lambie-Hanson, and Willen (2011). When we include short sales, we find somewhat
stronger evidence that same-association foreclosures drive estimates of foreclosure spillovers.
  11
     We estimate our main regression models using neighbors within 0.1 mile, but as a
robustness check, we also report results using neighbors 0.25 mile away.



                                              10
the same condo associations (and further, within the same or different build-
ings), which is something that no one has been able to do yet with a national
dataset.


2.1    Identifying condo associations
In Boston, units in the same condo association share the same first seven
digits of the assessor’s parcel number, making it possible to identify a unit’s
association in over 95 percent of our condo sample. Overall, our final sample
contains 34,094 arm’s-length repeat-sales condominium pairs, almost exactly
half of which are part of small associations with fewer than 13 units. Table
2 shows that there was a foreclosure within 0.1 mile of 41 percent of these
transactions, with 37 percent located near a foreclosure of another condo unit.
Foreclosures in the same association are not uncommon, particularly among
large associations. About 21 percent of sellers in the largest associations shared
an association with a property in foreclosure, while only about 2 percent of
sellers in small associations (12 or fewer units) had foreclosures in their asso-
ciation.
    Our data allow us to decompose the same-association foreclosures further
into those that occurred on units that were located at the same street address
and those that were located at different addresses. Not surprisingly, most of
the same-association foreclosures in small associations are located at the same
street address. The small number of observations in 4 to 12-unit associations
with foreclosures in the same association but at a different address (SADA)
are typically less than 40 feet away (.007 miles) from the foreclosures. In
contrast, SADA foreclosures in associations with more than 12 units are, on
average, over twice as far away. In the analysis that follows, we treat all same-
association foreclosures in associations with 12 or fewer units equally and do
not distinguish between same and different addresses. While this is in part
due to the lack SADA foreclosures, for all practical purposes, the instances of
SADA foreclosures in small associations are very nearby.
   Finally, we draw the reader’s attention to the last row in Table 2, which


                                       11
shows that condo foreclosures in neighboring, different associations are located
about equally far away from their neighbors, on average, among associations
of different sizes.
    We know of no other assessors in the state who follow Boston’s conven-
tion of linking parcel numbers and associations, making it impossible for us
to identify associations anywhere except in Boston. As Table 2 illustrates,
defining associations by address would lead to a substantial understatement of
the extent of same-association foreclosures, particularly in large associations.
In Boston, there were about half as many condominiums with foreclosures in
the same association but a different address as condos with foreclosures at the
same address.


2.2    Sample Characteristics by Association Size
Table 3 presents summary statistics for our sample of repeat sales of condo-
miniums in Boston. We continue to stratify the sample in order to describe
how condos vary by association size. Differences in median price and unit char-
acteristics across groups in the first panel of Table 3 are unremarkable, with
the possible exception of neighborhood density. The differing density across
association type could confound our results if the number of foreclosures rel-
ative to the size of the housing stock is the source of the externality. As a
robustness check, we control for density in our main regression model and the
results, reported below, are unaffected. While buildings in large associations
tend be newer, relatively few condo buildings have been built since 1990.
    While our repeat-sales transactions are all condominiums, we measure and
differentiate all nearby foreclosures by structure type: single-family, multifam-
ily, and condominium. Small multifamily properties, which are common in
Boston, are comprised of 2 to 3-unit rental buildings. Among transactions in
associations of different sizes, there is little difference in the average number
or composition of nearby foreclosures. Unsurprisingly, condos in larger associ-
ations have more foreclosures in the same association. We also estimate that
our sample of transactions is only comprised of a small fraction of townhouse


                                       12
structures, defined as associations with greater than 50 percent of units having
unique addresses.


3       Results
As introduced above, we regress each property’s growth in price on a series
of census tract × calendar year controls and on the change in the number of
nearby foreclosures. Table 4 displays our main results. Nearby foreclosures
are initially stratified only by property type (single-family, multifamily, and
condominium). In subsequent specifications, we differentiate condominium
foreclosures according to whether or not foreclosures are in the same associa-
tion as the subject property, and then by whether same association foreclosures
are within the same building as the subject transactions.
   In Column 1 of Table 4, we show that the negative effect of condo foreclo-
sures on the prices of nearby condo properties is statistically significant but
economically small at only 0.4 percent. Column 2 shows that same-association
foreclosures have a larger impact on sale prices than do nearby condo foreclo-
sures in other associations, and Column 3 indicates that these same-association
foreclosures are more detrimental the smaller the association, and the effect
is both statistically significant and economically meaningful in associations of
50 or fewer units. A same-association foreclosure lowers price by 8 percent in
2 to 3-unit associations, 6 percent in 4 to 12-unit associations, and 3 percent
in associations of 13 to 50 units.12 Condo foreclosures in different associations
have a statistically significant and negative impact on prices, but this effect is
economically trivial when compared to the same-association effects.
   We attempt to disentangle the mechanisms whereby foreclosures in the
same association influence condo prices in Columns 4 and 5 of Table 4. The
results in Column 4 indicate that foreclosures in the same association and at
the same address impose a discount of 2.5 percent, while same-association,
different-address foreclosures appear to have no effect. However, it is hard in
this specification to tease out the impact of distance from that of association
 12
      The percentage change in sales price is captured by 100(eγ − 1).


                                             13
size, since we know from Column 3 that small associations experience the
largest foreclosure spillover effects and from Table 2 that same-association
foreclosures are located nearer, on average, in small associations.
   Our main specification, found in Column 5, differentiates foreclosures at the
same versus different addresses within large associations and reveals that the
negative externality of a foreclosure, at least among larger associations, is truly
a product of proximity. In larger associations, having a foreclosure very near—
within the same building—imparts a negative impact on prices of between 1.5
and 3 percent, depending on the association size.13 While we cannot rule
out a fiscal effect resulting from foreclosures within small associations, we are
confident that among large associations, physical proximity to a foreclosure is
more important than its effect on the overall association. Foreclosures within
the same association but at different addresses produce impacts that are not
significantly different from zero. Likewise, condo foreclosures in neighboring
but different associations produce negligible impacts on prices.


3.1       Robustness
In specifying these models, we acknowledged a number of challenges. Tables 5
and 6 display a number of robustness check on our main result, found in Col-
umn 5 of Table 4. The first column of Table 5 repeats our main specification.
In Column 2, we control for neighborhood density (log number of neighbor-
ing properties located within 0.1 mile of repeat-sales transactions) and other
property characteristics that might influence price appreciation (specifically,
the number of bedrooms and baths, square feet of living space, lot size, and
age of the building). Our main results are unchanged, and none of the added
controls are significantly different from zero (the latter are not reported in the
table).
       In Column 3, we remove the dummy controlling for a foreclosure between
  13
    In Table A-1 of the appendix we show that the results for the largest associations are
identical when we restrict the sample to these associations, and when we restrict the sample
to medium-sized associations, the results remain large (a foreclosure spillover effect of over
2 percent).



                                             14
the two arm’s-length sales in the repeat-sales pair. Doing so substantially
increases the coefficient on foreclosures in 2 to 3-unit associations, but the
rest of the results are relatively unchanged. As shown in Table 3, however,
foreclosures were not much more prevalent in our sample of small-association
units than in large-association units.
   Next, we examine the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion of census
tract × calendar year controls. In Column 4 of Table 5, we show that omitting
the interaction of census tracts with calendar years (while retaining the main
year dummies) increases virtually all of the estimated effects of foreclosures,
in some cases more than doubling the coefficients. These results strongly
argue for the inclusion of geographic controls. Reinstating census tract × year
controls and recognizing that sample sizes may be small within some census
tract/year combinations, in Column 5 we limit the sample to those properties
for which at least 10 condo properties are observed to be purchased or sold
in the tract in the same year. In other words, we arbitrarily limit the sample
to have a minimum number of transactions by which to calculate a tract-level
annual price change. Imposing this restriction reduces our sample size by over
6,100 transactions, with the greatest reduction in sample size for condo sales
pairs selling a second time near the end of the sample period in 2011. This
restriction leaves our main results virtually unchanged with the exception of 2
to 3-unit associations and 13 to 50-unit associations. We can in part attribute
the smaller, less significant coefficients to the fact that about one-quarter of
the observations in the 2 to 3 and 13 to 50-unit associations are dropped when
the sample is restricted, as compared with just 13 percent and 15 percent of
4 to 12-unit and 51+ unit associations. Further, as noted, the observations
dropped come at the end of the sample (2008–2011), when foreclosures were
more common.
  Finally, Columns 6 and 7 of Table 5 demonstrate that our results are very
similar when we restrict the sample to observations with two or more sales in
their block group in the particular sale year and substitute block groups in
lieu of tracts for the neighborhood-year controls.
   In Column 2 of Table 6 we expand the distance defining “nearby” foreclosures


                                      15
from 0.1 mile to 0.25 mile. Consistent with our previous results that condo
foreclosures’ impacts are contained within condo associations, this expansion
generates virtually no changes to our main result. In the next two columns, we
restrict the time window before and after foreclosures during which we count
foreclosures as active. In our main specification, we count foreclosures as active
for the year prior to, and for the two years following, the foreclosure deed. In
Column 3 of Table 6, we maintain the window of one year before a foreclosure,
but reduce the period following it to only one year. The precision of some of
our estimates fall due a reduction in the number of foreclosures for which we ac-
count, but generally, the magnitude and significance of the coefficients remain
unchanged. The main impact of changing how we count foreclosures is the im-
pact of same-association but different-address foreclosures in associations with
13 to 50 units, which approaches the size of the corresponding SASA effect
and is statistically significant. In Column 4 we restrict our definition of active
foreclosures to encompass only 6 months before and after a foreclosure, and
we note that in both Columns 3 and 4 the coefficients are not very stable due
to reductions in power, especially for the smallest associations. As the time
window becomes narrower, the coefficients tend to become somewhat greater
in magnitude, signalling that the effects of neighboring foreclosure gradually
attenuate over time. However, we draw the reader’s attention to the SADA
coefficient for associations of 51 or more units, which is effectively zero across
these specifications.
   As a final robustness check, we expand our sample to include all possible
transactions by specifying a hedonic model similar to equation (1) with the
addition of census tract × year controls. Active foreclosures are defined as
they are in our main specification, based on a window of 1 year before and 2
years following a foreclosure auction. The first difference between the hedonic
results and our main repeat sales result is that in the hedonic model nearby
single-family foreclosures lower condo prices by a marginally significant 1.5
percent. Given that neither the repeat sales nor the hedonic model identifies
economically meaningful impacts of condo foreclosures in different associa-
tions on nearby condo prices, nor any multifamily foreclosure impacts, it is


                                       16
somewhat difficult to reconcile why nearby single-family foreclosures should
influence condo prices. We conjecture that the finding is a result of omit-
ted variables, whereby the hedonic specification fails to sufficiently capture
characteristics of condo buildings that abut single-family neighborhoods.


4     Discussion
In the introduction, we motivated the paper by arguing that we could use our
data to test different hypotheses about the nature of the discount that fore-
closures impose on sale prices of nearby properties. Our analysis yields yields
three stylized facts. First, same-address foreclosures have a much stronger
effect on prices than different-address foreclosures even when constrain our
attention to properties in the same association. Second, when we focus on
the large associations that account for almost two-thirds of same-association
foreclosures, we find that different-address (SADA) foreclosures have no ef-
fect on the price of condominiums, whereas same-address (SASA) foreclosures
have an economically and statistically significant effect. Third, for smaller
associations, the picture is more nuanced with SADA foreclosures having an
economically but not statistically significant effect. How do we make sense of
these findings. Our view is that there is strong evidence of a physical external-
ity of foreclosed properties. There is also evidence of a public good externality,
and we think there is little evidence of a pecuniary externality.
    In a sense, nearby properties should be the closest substitutes for a prop-
erty that sells. But choosing a radius of 0.1 mile is somewhat arbitrary, and
it means we must believe that properties within 0.1 mile are closer substitutes
than, say, properties between 0.1 mile and 0.25 mile. In contrast, it may be
reasonable to view a property in an association as a closer substitute than a
property in another association, even if the different-association property is
geographically closer. Condominiums in the same association typically share
similar characteristics—floor plans, finishes, appliances—that are unobserv-
able to the econometrician and raise questions about identification in house
price modeling. Thus, if the same-association effect documented in Table 4

                                       17
reflected the fact that same-association units were close substitutes, we would
expect the effect to be comparable when same-association properties are lo-
cated at different addresses. But the data show that this is not the case in large
associations, where same-association foreclosures can commonly be found at
either the same or different addresses (Column 5, Table 4). Same-association,
different-address foreclosures have substantially smaller impacts on neighbor-
ing condo prices than do same-address foreclosures. This study investigates
only neighboring foreclosures located within 0.1 and 0.25 mile, so we cannot
directly speak to the impact of a foreclosure on the sale price of a property
located farther away. However, given that foreclosures have negligible impacts
on properties outside their associations but located nearby, we think it is un-
likely that they would have substantial impacts on properties located farther
away.
   In the remainder of this section, we first discuss the character of the physical
externality. Second, we argue that a feature of Massachusetts law can explain
the pattern of effects across association sizes and suggests that the public good
externality is important for smaller associations.


4.1    Physical Externalities in Condo Associations
The nature of condominium ownership can both aggravate and mitigate the
physical externality problem resulting from a delinquent homeownership. The
communal ownership structure can limit the effect on maintenance and upkeep
of an individual delinquent homeowner. The owner of a single-family property
facing foreclosure may stop doing routine maintenance like landscaping or,
in a more extreme situation, abandon the property to squatters. But in a
condominium, a solvent association will make sure that landscaping is done,
that trash is collected and that the property is secure from squatters. On the
other hand, the fact that condo owners live in such close proximity to one
another means that poor maintenance is much more likely to affect neighbors.
For example, if the owner of a single-family unit turns off the heat, neighbors
will not notice, but in a condo building, they will typically face increased


                                        18
heating costs.
    While there is ample anecdotal evidence of the effects of the physical exter-
nalities of foreclosures in condo associations, we attempted to get some more
systematic evidence from constituent complaints about property conditions
to local government.14 We inspected the same constituent complaints data
used by Lambie-Hanson (2013) to learn about the types of complaints that
arise about condos in foreclosure. Examining a sample of 456 condo units
with a foreclosure start between June 2008 and December 2011, we found that
186 of the properties (41 percent) experienced at least one complaint about
the conditions of their buildings while the owners were in foreclosure or while
the properties were bank owned, with these properties logging a total of 400
complaints. While some of the complaints reflected neighborhood-level dis-
amenities like failure to clear snow after a storm or improper storage of trash,
many complaints related to the interior conditions of the properties. A number
of the issues raised stemmed from failure of the condo association to keep the
buildings in proper working order, including turning on heat in the winter or
fixing leaky roofs, which may signal problems with association financial sol-
vency. Further, some complaints referenced problems that arise when owners
or occupants of other units are negligent, including dumping of trash in com-
mon areas, ceilings collapsing due to plumbing failures in upstairs units, and
pest infestations. In fact, 47 complaints in the sample we examined (well over
10 percent of all property condition complaints), filed in 32 unique buildings,
specifically referenced mice, rats, roaches, and other pests as a problem inside
the property. According to the verbatim records of the complaints, often the
constituents argued that the pests were originating from other units in the
building. To the extent that a foreclosure leads to worse care of a condo unit
and that these problems may spill over into other units in the same building, it
may be particularly detrimental to share a building with a foreclosed property,
enough so that one’s sale price could be negatively impacted.
  14
     For anecdotal evidence, see “Failed Condos Take Toll on Fenway; Drug Dealers, Pros-
titutes Filling Vacant Units,” Boston Globe, December 6, 1992.




                                          19
4.2     Fees, Public Goods, and the Superlien Law
For smaller associations, as discussed already, we find that the effect of same-
association foreclosures is much larger, and we find that SADA foreclosures
have an economically meaningful although statistically insignificant effect. We
view this is as evidence that a public good externality exists. When individ-
ual borrowers stop paying their association fees, the remaining owners must
either pay more or accept reduced amenities, and the effects can sometimes
be catastrophic and render an entire association uninhabitable.15 It is impor-
tant to stress that the public good externality and the physical externality
are both economically and observationally distinct. The physical externality
results from poor maintenance of an individual unit and affects only properties
that are physically close, whereas the public good externality results from the
failure of the individual owner to contribute to common expenses and affects
the entire association, regardless of location within the association.
    Our confidence about the existence of this public good problem comes,
paradoxically, from its absence in large associations. The key here is that dur-
ing the housing downturn of the late 1980s, non-payment of association fees
became a statewide crisis.16 The result was that in 1992, Massachusetts passed
a so-called super-lien law.17 Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 183A, Sec-
tion 6 creates a priority lien for condo associations over a first mortgage for up
to six months of delinquent common expense assessments (or more colloqui-
ally, condo fees). In practice, the priority lien limit of six months of common
expenses has been circumvented by the use of “rolling” liens, whereby asso-
ciations file suit every six months that an owner remains delinquent in order
  15
     For examples in Massachusetts, see “Delinquencies of Condo and Co-op Owners Rising,”
The New York Times, February 3, 1991 and “Condos Face Fragile Future; Fiscal, Physical
End Of Hub Site Points To Larger Problem Demise Of Hub Condo Points To Common
Crisis” Boston Herald, December 31, 1991.
  16
     The condominium ownership structure only emerged in the U.S. in the 1960s and was
not widely adopted in Massachusetts until the 1970s (Lasner 2012). The house price decline
in the late 1980s represented the first time of widespread negative equity among condo
owners in Massachusetts.
  17
     Sample size issues prevent us from exploiting the change in the law to measure the
public goods problem.



                                           20
to secure a priority position for each additional six months’ worth of common
expenses.18 Reasonable attorney fees and other costs of collection may be re-
couped as part of the process to extinguish a priority lien. Late fees, penalties,
and interest on delinquent fees are not eligible costs.19
   Among large condo associations, attorneys claim that they rarely have to
undertake action to enforce priority liens beyond providing notice of delin-
quency to first mortgagees. It is common for lenders to step in, bring fees
current, and then continue to pay association fees during a period of mortgage
delinquency prior to foreclosure. Doing so allows a first mortgage lender to ex-
tinguish an association’s priority lien and preserve the priority of its mortgage.
This process also allows expensive lawsuits to be avoided, while providing that
associations may re-institute an action to enforce a priority lien if lenders fail
to maintain their promises.
  Industry experts report that smaller associations without formal manage-
ment practices, professional management or established legal representation
are less likely or less timely in taking advantage of the super-lien law. Failure
to follow the statute’s procedures or timelines can reduce the amount of money
that associations can recover. By definition in the statute, a priority lien exists
only to the extent that assessments for common expenses are made at least
annually based on an annually-adopted budget. Very small associations, in
particular, may not have a formal budget or regular assessments. Overall, we
are confident that since 1993 large condo associations in Massachusetts have
suffered few adverse effects from condo fee delinquency. Outcomes for smaller
associations are more likely to vary.
   Another possibility is that having information about co-owners may be of
greater importance for prospective buyers in small associations. Barzel and
Sass (1990) point out that a prospective buyer’s valuation will depend not
  18
     Subsequent to our sample period, a 2011 decision based on the appeal of a court case
challenging rolling liens has affirmed a lower court ruling that no more than six months of
common expenses may gain a priority status (see Drummer Boy Homes Association, Inc.
v. Britton, 2011 Mass. App. Div. 186).
  19
     These costs are part of the personal liability of the delinquent owner, however, and may
comprise a lien that does not receive priority over the first mortgage.



                                             21
only on the current value of a condo, but also on her expectations about
future maintenance of the building and the costliness of participating in its
governance. Coulson and Fisher (2014) show that free-riding issues are more
severe in small homeowner associations where more maintenance and man-
agement is self-performed. Therefore, the characteristics of neighbors in small
associations may matter more to a prospective buyer than in a large asso-
ciation. In addition, decision-making within small associations may operate
on the basis of owner consensus, and the prospect of a stalemate or personal
tension among owners may make it desirable to screen neighbors for compati-
bility.20 If buyer screening of other owners is important in small associations,
then delinquency and foreclosure—which generate uncertainty about future
co-owners—may increase buyer discounts due to the concomitant uncertainty
about future maintenance decisions and decision-making costs. This effect
may serve to exacerbate the current maintenance externality that we identify.
These same concerns are far less likely to be important in large associations,
where professional management and more neighbors insulate the association
from the turnover of only a few owners.


5      Conclusions
Early in the foreclosure crisis, some argued that government policy had little
role to play because foreclosures represented the disposition of private con-
tracts. But as foreclosures mounted, policymakers began to worry about fore-
closure externalities and to formulate strategies to protect those who were
not party to the failed mortgage contracts but were suffering nonetheless.
To justify intervention, policymakers appealed to research that showed that
foreclosures depressed the prices of neighboring properties. However, as we
discussed in the introduction, that research alone was not sufficient: if dis-
counts on neighboring properties represented a pecuniary externality, policies
  20
   Hansmann (1991) argues that this is one virtue of the cooperative style of multifamily
ownership as compared with condos; existing coop owners are able to screen prospective
buyers.



                                           22
to prevent foreclosures could simply transfer surplus from one member of so-
ciety to another but not to increase it.
    Our main findings are that the foreclosures in the same large condo associ-
ation but at a different address have no effect on prices, whereas foreclosures
at the same address have a strong effect. If pecuniary externalities were a
major issue, then these same-association, different-address foreclosures should
have a large effect on prices, as they are close substitutes. Thus, our analysis
of condominium foreclosures in Boston shows that the discounts generated by
nearby foreclosures are a physical externality, which can clearly justify active
policies aimed at preventing or mitigating foreclosures.




                                      23
Figure 1: Applying 1/10th and 1/4-mile buffers around arm’s-
length sales.




Source: Authors’ analysis of Warren Group data.
Note: This example shows 1/10th-mile and 1/4-mile buffers drawn around an arm’s-length sale (star).
Nearby foreclosures, streets, census tract boundaries, and building footprints are also displayed.




                                         24
                                   Figure 2: Locations of foreclosures in Boston.



        •                     1990-1995                                                  2007-2012:Q2
25




                                                                                                Foreclosures
                                                                                                    Condominium
                                                                                                    Single-family
                                                                                                    Small multifamily (2-3 units)
                                                                                                    Census Tracts
                     0    1.25   2.5           5 Miles                                              Parks
                                                                                                    Logan Airport

     Source: Authors’ analysis of Warren Group data.
     Note: Figure shows foreclosure deeds filed between January 2007 and June 2012 on single-family, two-family, three-family, and
     condominium properties in the city of Boston. Census tract boundaries are displayed as grey lines.
                         Table 1: Summary of findings.
                Same Association                     SASA − SADA           Different Association
          Same Address Different Address         Point                      Different Address
                                                             F   p-value
            (SASA)          (SADA)              Estimate                         (DADA)
A. Full Sample.
            −0.025∗∗            −0.002                                           −0.003∗∗
                                                −0.023     22.06 <0.0001
             (0.004)            (0.003)                                           (0.001)
B. Divided up by association size, in units.
            −0.087∗∗               —              —         —       —
2 to 3
             (0.028)
            −0.062∗∗               —              —         —       —            −0.003∗∗
4 to 12
             (0.013)                                                              (0.001)
            −0.032∗∗            −0.014
13 to 50                                        −0.018     1.01   0.3156
             (0.008)            (0.013)
            −0.015∗∗∗           −0.002
51+                                             −0.013     8.61   0.0039
             (0.004)            (0.003)




                                           26
                       Table 2: Foreclosures near condominiums sold in Boston, 1987–2011.
                                              Number of Repeat Sales                       Percent of Total
                                             by association size (units)              by association size (units)
                                        2 to 3 units     4-12 13-50       51+      2 to 3 4-12 13-50 51+ All
       All Condos                          5,731        11,362 8,285      8,716     100   100   100  100 100
       Condos with > 0                     2,384        4,824 3,197       3,446      42    42    39   40 41
       foreclosures within 0.1 mile
       Condos with > 0 condo                1,930       4,414    2,989    3,389      34      39      36      39     37
       foreclosures within 0.1 mile
27




       ...within same association            92          263      689 1,849          2       2       8       21     8
       ......and at same address             92          219      541 1,205          2       2       7       14     6
       ......and at different address        0            48      179   794          0       0       2       9      3
        mean distance (miles)               n.a.        0.007    0.015 0.031
       ...in different association         1,906        4,322    2,655 2,324         33      38      32      27     33
        mean distance (miles)              0.064        0.061    0.062 0.065
     Source: Authors’ calculations of Warren Group and City of Boston Assessing Department data. Note that the sum of
     same-association, same-address foreclosures and same-association, different-address foreclosures exceeds the number
     of same association foreclosures because some repeat sales have both within ≤ 0.1 mile. Only the second sale in each
     repeat-sales pair is included.
Table 3: Summary statistics for Boston repeat sales sample,
1989:Q1 to 2011:Q2.
                                                       Condos, by association size (units)
                                                   2 to 3       4 to 12   13 to 50     51+
 Number of repeat-sales pairs                      5,731        11,362     8,285       8,716
 Median
 Price (second sale)                              $420,718     $449,405 $342,591 $422,934
 Price (initial sale)                             $333,071     $324,612 $246,211 $306,470
 Properties ≤ 0.1 mile away                         406          583      425      438
 Full baths                                           1           1        1        1
 Half baths                                           0           0        0        0
 Living area in sq. ft.                            1,139         983      903      959
 Year Built (Percent)
 pre 1900                                            46          55          29         12
 1900–1939                                           46          36          44         27
 1940–1970                                            1           2          11         23
 1971–1990                                            2           4          12         30
 post 1990                                            5           3          5          8
 Mean Number of foreclosures ≤0.1 mile away, conditional on    >0
 All structure types                                  6           6           6          6
 Single-family                                        1           1           1          1
 Multifamily                                          2           2           1          2
 Condo                                                3           3           3          3
 Same-association                                     1           1           2          2
 Neighboring-association                              3           3           3          3
 Other characteristics
 Median condo units in association                    3            6         27         108
 Townhouses (percent)                                 3            4         5           2
 Foreclosure between arm’s-length sales (percent)     2            1         2           1
Sources: Authors’ calculations of Warren Group and City of Boston Assessing Department data.




                                         28
Table 4: Results from Boston repeat-sales analysis: Condo re-
sults by association size and type of neighboring foreclosures.
                                            1           2           3           4       5 (Main)
  Change in number of foreclosures within 0.1 mile...
  Single-family                       0.003      0.003            0.003       0.004       0.004
                                     (0.005)    (0.005)          (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
  Multifamily                         0.004      0.004            0.004       0.005       0.005
                                     (0.008)    (0.008)          (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.007)
  Condo                             -0.004∗∗∗
                                     (0.001)
  Different association                        -0.003∗∗∗        -0.003∗∗∗   -0.003∗∗∗   -0.003∗∗∗
                                                (0.001)          (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
  Same association                              -0.008∗∗
                                                (0.004)
  SA 2 to 3                                                     -0.086∗∗∗               -0.087∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.028)                 (0.028)
  SA 4 to 12                                                    -0.062∗∗∗               -0.062∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.013)                 (0.013)
  SA 13 to 50                                                   -0.026∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.006)
  SA 51+                                                          -0.005
                                                                 (0.003)
  SASA                                                                      -0.025∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.004)
  SADA                                                                        -0.002
                                                                             (0.003)
  SASA 13 to 50                                                                         -0.032∗∗∗
                                                                                         (0.008)
  SADA 13 to 50                                                                           -0.014
                                                                                         (0.013)
  SASA 51+                                                                              -0.015∗∗∗
                                                                                         (0.004)
  SADA 51+                                                                                -0.002
                                                                                         (0.003)
  Controls
  Census tract–year                         X           X          X            X           X
  Experienced foreclosure dummy             X           X          X            X           X
  Association size                          X           X          X            X           X
  Observations (repeat-sales pairs)                              34,094
  R-squared                               0.736       0.736      0.738        0.737       0.738
Source: Authors’ calculations of Warren Group and City of Boston Assessing Department data.
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ represent statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
Model 1 demonstrates that there is a small but statistically significant negative spillover from
each additional nearby condo foreclosure. Model 2 breaks these foreclosures down by those in the
same association versus those that are located nearby but in different associations, indicating that
same-association foreclosures drive the price spillovers. Model 3 shows that these same-association
foreclosures are most detrimental in smaller associations. Model 4 shows that same-association
foreclosures are harmful when located at the same address. Model 5 further supports this, showing
that, for large associations (where same-association, different-address foreclosures are most likely
to be found), same-address foreclosures have stronger impacts on prices than different-address fore-
closures in the same association.
     Table 5: Robustness: Alternative controls for neighborhood and property characteristics.
                                               1         2             3              4            5              6          7
                                                      Property   No Foreclosure    No Tract    Restricted        BG         BG
                                             Main     Controls      Control        Controls   Sample (10+)     Sample     Controls
        Change in number of foreclosures within 0.1 mile...
        Single-family                           0.004      0.003          0.003        -0.001       0.003         0.007       0.009
                                              (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)      (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.005)    (0.006)
        Multifamily                             0.005      0.005          0.004      -0.016∗∗∗      0.008         0.012       0.011
                                              (0.007)    (0.007)         (0.008)      (0.002)      (0.010)       (0.009)    (0.010)
        Different association                -0.003∗∗∗ -0.003∗∗∗        -0.003∗∗∗    -0.005∗∗∗    -0.003∗∗∗      -0.002∗∗ -0.003∗∗
                                              (0.001)    (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)
        SA 2 to 3                            -0.087∗∗∗ -0.087∗∗∗        -0.109∗∗∗    -0.157∗∗∗    -0.057∗∗∗     -0.079∗∗∗ -0.078∗∗∗
                                              (0.028)    (0.028)         (0.030)      (0.018)      (0.021)       (0.025)    (0.029)
        SA 4 to 12                           -0.062∗∗∗ -0.062∗∗∗        -0.066∗∗∗    -0.079∗∗∗    -0.061∗∗∗     -0.057∗∗∗ -0.051∗∗∗
                                              (0.013)    (0.013)         (0.013)      (0.006)      (0.014)       (0.013)    (0.014)
        SASA 13 to 50                        -0.032∗∗∗ -0.031∗∗∗        -0.031∗∗∗    -0.046∗∗∗     -0.020∗      -0.031∗∗∗ -0.031∗∗∗
30




                                              (0.008)    (0.008)         (0.009)      (0.003)      (0.010)       (0.009)    (0.009)
        SADA 13 to 50                          -0.014     -0.014          -0.014     -0.024∗∗∗      -0.004        -0.015     -0.016
                                              (0.013)    (0.014)         (0.014)      (0.004)      (0.017)       (0.014)    (0.015)
        SASA 51+                             -0.015∗∗∗ -0.015∗∗∗        -0.015∗∗∗    -0.021∗∗∗    -0.014∗∗∗     -0.016∗∗∗ -0.018∗∗∗
                                              (0.004)    (0.004)         (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.004)
        SADA 51+                               -0.002     -0.002          -0.002     -0.005∗∗∗      -0.003        -0.002     -0.003
                                              (0.003)    (0.003)         (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.005)
        Controls
        Census tract–year                         X          X              X                         X             X
        Block group–year                                                                                                        X
        Year                                                                              X
        Property characteristics                             X
        Experienced foreclosure dummy             X          X                            X           X             X           X
        Association size                          X          X              X             X           X             X           X
        Observations (repeat-sales pairs) 34,094          34,094         34,094        34,094      27,948         32,619    32,619
        R-squared                               0.738      0.739          0.737         0.657       0.713         0.737       0.768
      Source: Authors’ calculations of Warren Group and City of Boston Assessing Department data. Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ represent
      statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. Model 1 is our main model from Table 4. Model 2 adds
      neighborhood density and property controls (bedrooms, baths, square feet of living space, and property age). Model 3 shows the
      impact of removing the control for a foreclosure occurring between the two arm’s-length sales in the repeat-sales pair. Model
      4 shows the impact of removing census tract controls (though time controls are included). Model 5 restricts the sample to
      properties for which at least 10 condos are purchased/sold in the same year and tract that this property is purchased/sold.
      Models 6 and 7 restrict the sample to properties with at least 2 condos purchased/sold in the same year and block group, with
      Model 7 using block group–year controls instead of tract–year.
                Table 6: Robustness: 0.25-mile radius and alternative time windows.
                                                   1            2               3                    4                    5
                                                  Main      0.25 Mile     1 Year/1 Year      6 Months/6 Months         Hedonic
        Change in number of foreclosures within 0.1        mile...
        Single-family                       0.004              0.000            0.000                 0.002             -0.015∗
                                           (0.005)           (0.003)          (0.006)               (0.007)            (0.008)
        Multifamily                         0.005              0.000            0.000                 0.000              -0.004
                                           (0.007)           (0.002)          (0.008)               (0.012)            (0.005)
        Different association             -0.003∗∗∗          -0.001∗           -0.002∗               -0.003             -0.004∗
                                           (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)               (0.002)            (0.002)
        SA 2 to 3                         -0.087∗∗∗         -0.084∗∗∗         -0.063∗∗               -0.079            -0.057∗∗
                                           (0.028)           (0.028)          (0.027)               (0.050)            (0.028)
        SA 4 to 12                        -0.062∗∗∗         -0.063∗∗∗        -0.071∗∗∗             -0.073∗∗∗          -0.067∗∗∗
                                           (0.013)           (0.013)          (0.019)               (0.025)            (0.018)
        SASA 13 to 50                     -0.032∗∗∗         -0.033∗∗∗         -0.030∗∗             -0.048∗∗∗          -0.041∗∗∗
31




                                           (0.008)           (0.008)          (0.012)               (0.018)            (0.010)
        SADA 13 to 50                       -0.014            -0.013          -0.024*                -0.028              -0.016
                                           (0.013)           (0.014)          (0.012)               (0.024)            (0.015)
        SASA 51+                          -0.015∗∗∗         -0.015∗∗∗         -0.013∗∗              -0.015∗            -0.034*
                                           (0.004)           (0.004)          (0.006)               (0.008)            (0.014)
        SADA 51+                            -0.002            -0.002            -0.001               -0.001              -0.012
                                           (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.005)               (0.007)            (0.011)
        Controls
        Census tract–year                     X                  X              X                       X                  X
        Experienced foreclosure dummy         X                  X              X                       X                  X
        Association size                      X                  X              X                       X                  X
        Observations (repeat-sales pairs) 34,094              34,094          34,094                 34,094             68,330
        R-squared                           0.738              0.738          0.737                   0.736              0.869
     Source: Authors’ calculations of Warren Group and City of Boston Assessing Department data. Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗
     represent statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. Model 1 is our main model from Table 4.
     Model 2 expands the radius used in Model 1 from 0.1 mile to 0.25 mile. The following two models narrow the time
     window for “active” foreclosures from 2 years before the subject sale and 1 year after to 1 year before and after (Model
     3) and 6 months before and after (Model 4). Model 5 is a hedonic version of the main specification. In Models 1–4, the
     predictors displayed represent the change in the number of foreclosures between the two sales. In the hedonic model, 5,
     the predictors represent the level of foreclosures at the time of the single sale observation. In this model, the “experienced
     foreclosure” dummy is coded as one if there was a foreclosure sale in the three years prior to the arm’s-length sale included
     in the sample.
References
Anenberg, Eliot, and Edward Kung. 2013. “Estimates of the Size and Source
 of Price Declines Due to Nearby Foreclosures.” Working paper. Federal
 Reserve Board.

Bailey, Martin J, Richard F Muth, and Hugh O Nourse. 1963. “A Regression
  Method for Real Estate Price Index Construction.” Journal of the American
  Statistical Association 58(304): 933–942.

Barzel, Yoram, and Tim R. Sass. 1990. “The Allocation of Resources by
  Voting.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3): 745–771.

Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. 2011. “Forced Sales
  and House Prices.” American Economic Review 101(5): 2108–2131.

Coulson, N. Edward, and Lynn M. Fisher. 2014. “Houses, Apartments and
  Condos: The Governance of Multifamily Housing.” Working paper.

Fisher, Lynn M., Lauren Lambie-Hanson, and Paul S. Willen. 2011. “A Pro-
  file of the Mortgage Crisis in a Low- and Moderate-Income Community.”
  In Reinventing the American Mortgage System: Rethink, Recover, Rebuild.,
  eds. Marvin Smith and Susan M. Wachter, 137–1588. Philadelphia: Univer-
  sity of Pennsylvania Press.

Fisher, Lynn M., and Lauren S. Lambie-Hanson. 2012. “Are Investors the Bad
  Guys? Tenure and Neighborhood Stability in Chelsea, Massachusetts.” Real
  Estate Economics 40(2): 351–386.

Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. 2008. “Nega-
  tive Equity and Foreclosure: Theory and Evidence.” The Journal of Urban
  Economics 64(2): 234–245.

Frame, Scott. 2010. “Estimating the Effect of Mortgage Foreclosures on Nearby
  Property Values: A Critical Review of the Literature.” Economic Review
  9(3): 1–9.

Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer. 1997. “Equity and Time to Sale in
 the Real Estate Market.” American Economic Review 87(3): 255–269.

Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer. 2001. “Loss Aversion and Seller
 Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market.” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 116(4): 1233–1260.

                                     32
Gerardi, Kristopher, Eric Rosenblatt, Vincent Yao, and Paul Willen. 2012.
 “Foreclosure Externalities: Some New Evidence.” Working paper.

Hansmann, Henry. 1991. “Condominium and Cooperative Housing: Transac-
  tional Efficiency, Tax Subsidies, and Tenure Choice.” The Journal of Legal
  Studies 20(1): 25–71.

Harding, John P., Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent W. Yao. 2009. “The Contagion
  Effect of Foreclosed Properties.” Journal of Urban Economics 66(3): 164–
  178.

Hartley, Daniel. 2011. “The Effect of Foreclosures on Nearby Housing Prices:
  Supply or Disamenity?” Working Paper 10-11R. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Cleveland.

Immergluck, Dan, and Geoff Smith. 2006. “The External Costs of Foreclosure:
  The Impact of Single-Family Mortgage Foreclosures on Property Values.”
  Housing Policy Debate 17(1): 57–79.

Lambie-Hanson, Lauren. 2013. “When Does Delinquency Result in Neglect?
  Mortgage Distress and Property Maintenance.” Public Policy Discussion
  Paper 13-1. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Lasner, Matthew G. 2012. High Life: Condo Living in the Suburban Century.
  New Haven: Yale University Press.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Raymond Owens III. 2010.
  “Housing Externalities.” Journal of Political Economy 118(3).

Schuetz, Jenny, Vicki Been, and Ingrid Gould Ellen. 2008. “Neighborhood
  Effects of Concentrated Mortgage Foreclosures.” Journal of Housing Eco-
  nomics 17(4): 306–319.




                                    33
    Appendix
    Table A-1: Robustness: Results for large associations only.
                                               1              2                    3            4
                                               13 to 50 Units                       51+ Units
                                        All Observations Restricted        All Observations Restricted
   Change in number of foreclosures within 0.1 mile...
   Single-family                                 -0.018            -0.019           0.034           0.034
                                                (0.026)           (0.024)         (0.045)          (0.044)
   Multifamily                                   -0.006            -0.003           0.011           0.012
                                                (0.029)           (0.030)         (0.009)          (0.009)
   Different association                        -0.004∗∗          -0.003∗∗         -0.001           -0.001
                                                (0.002)           (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.002)
   SASA                                        -0.024∗∗∗         -0.023∗∗∗       -0.016∗∗∗        -0.016∗∗∗
                                                (0.008)           (0.008)         (0.003)          (0.003)
   SADA                                          -0.011            -0.010           0.001           0.001
                                                (0.015)           (0.015)         (0.004)          (0.004)
   Controls
   Census tract–year                               X                  X               X               X
   Experienced foreclosure dummy                   X                  X               X               X
   Observations (repeat-sales pairs)             8,285              7,790           8,716           8,504
   R-squared                                     0.806              0.791           0.771           0.765
Source: Authors’ calculations of Warren Group and City of Boston Assessing Department data.
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ represent statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. These
models restrict our main model in Table 4 to observations in larger associations. Models 1 and 2
use only observations in 13 to 50-unit associations, while 3 and 4 use observations in associations
with 51 or more units. Models 1 and 3 use the full subsamples of observations, and 2 and 4 restrict
these subsamples to those that had 2 or more purchases/sales in the same tract at the time of the
first/second sale in the repeat-sales pair.




                                                34
