                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   NATIONALISM AND ECONOMIC EXCHANGE:
              EVIDENCE FROM SHOCKS TO SINO-JAPANESE RELATIONS

                                        Raymond Fisman
                                         Yasushi Hamao
                                        Yongxiang Wang

                                       Working Paper 20089
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20089


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




We would also like to thank David Hirshleifer, two anonymous referees, seminar participants at the
2012 NBER Chinese Economy Working Group Conference, the 2012 Conference on Financial Economics
and Accounting, the 2012 California Corporate Finance Conference, the 2013 NBER Japan Working
Group Conference, University of Southern California, as well as Amy Amici, Shiro Armstrong, William
Christie, Christina Davis, Harry DeAngelo, Charles Horioka, Takeo Hoshi, Yasheng Huang, Takatoshi
Ito, Yi Jiang, Takao Kato, Masahiro Kawai, John Matsusaka, Hugh Patrick, David Weinstein, Bernard
Yeung, and Xiaoyun Yu for helpful comments and suggestions. Fisman would like to thank the Chazen
Institute of International Business at Columbia Business School for support; Hamao would like to
thank CIBER at Marshall School of Business, USC for support; and Wang would like to thank CIBER
at Marshall School of Business, USC and China Institute at USC for support. Rong Xu, Kazuo Yamada,
and Jane Zhao provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Raymond Fisman, Yasushi Hamao, and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Nationalism and Economic Exchange: Evidence from Shocks to Sino-Japanese Relations
Raymond Fisman, Yasushi Hamao, and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20089
May 2014
JEL No. F13,F51,G14,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the impact of nationalism and interstate frictions on international economic relations by
analyzing market reaction to adverse shocks to Sino-Japanese relations in 2005 and 2010. Japanese
companies with high China exposure suffer relative declines during each event window; a symmetric
effect is observed for Chinese companies with high Japanese exposure. The effect on Japanese companies
is more pronounced for those operating in industries dominated by Chinese state-owned enterprises,
while firms with high Chinese employment experience lower declines. These results emphasize the
role of countries’ economic and political institutions in mediating the impact of interstate frictions
on firm-level outcomes.


Raymond Fisman                                    Yongxiang Wang
School of Business                                Marshall School of Business
Columbia University                               University of Southern California
622 Uris Hall                                     Los Angeles, CA 90089
3022 Broadway                                     Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu

Yasushi Hamao
University of Southern California
Marshall School of Business
3670 Trousdale Parkway, Bridge Hall 308
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
hamao@usc.edu
Beginning with Becker’s (1957) seminal work on discrimination, researchers have

incorporated non-pecuniary preferences into models to explain the breakdown of economic

transactions across group boundaries. The economic effects of hostilities between countries

or other distinct groups are potentially large and global in scale. This is indicated by, for

example, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009), which finds that aspects of culture like

religion and historic conflict are correlated with cross-border flows of trade and investment.

However, most prior work has focused on cross-sectional variation in trust and cultural

distances between countries, raising concerns that omitted country-level factors could

account for the correlation. Partly as a result, the causal relationship between interstate

frictions and economic exchange remains a much-debated question (Hegre, Onea, and

Russett 2010).

        In this paper, we shed light on this relationship by examining the effects of the two

recent incidents that sparked nationalist sentiments – and interstate hostilities –between

China and Japan. By analyzing the stock market responses to these adverse shocks to

relations between the two countries, we can credibly identify the expected economic impact

of a shift in international relations on individual firms.1 Given our firm-level focus we may,

in contrast to most prior studies, trace out the microeconomic impact of increased animosity

between nations. Crucially, our firm-level approach also allows us to provide insights on


1
  The effect of such shocks to sentiment is ambiguous ex ante, as evidenced by media reports on the topic. For
example, while a Wall Street Journal article reported that Japanese auto makers’ sales in China plummeted in
the wake of anti-Japanese protests (The Wall Street Journal: “Japanese Car Sales Plunge amid China Rage,”
October 9, 2012, by Chester Dawson and Yoshio Takahashi); another Wall Street Journal story just a few
months later described the double-digit gains of major Japanese car makers in China as a result of “a boost
from a calendar shift as well as the waning impact of a territorial dispute between Beijing and Tokyo.” (The
Wall Street Journal: “Lunar Holiday Shift Lifts Japanese Car Sales in China,” February 04, 2013, by Rose
Yu).


                                                      1
the mechanism through which nationalist sentiments and interstate frictions impact firm

value: Is it the collective effect of individual investor and/or consumer animosity, or is it

largely the result of diplomatic frictions between opposing governments? Our firm-level

data, combined with our event study method, allow us to mitigate omitted variable

concerns, as we also investigate the channels through which interstate conflicts affect

abnormal event returns.

       The events we consider are as follows. First, on April 5, 2005, the Japanese

government reauthorized the use of a history textbook that, according to critics,

whitewashed Japanese war crimes of World War II (see, for example, Weiss 2008). Hints

of protest had taken place in earlier weeks, but the official announcement was followed by

mass anti-Japan rallies across China, possibly coordinated by the Chinese government. We

refer to this as the “Textbook Event” throughout the rest of this paper. The second episode

we consider occurred on September 7, 2010, when a Chinese trawler collided with two

Japanese coast guard vessels in disputed waters just off the Senkaku Islands, leading to the

detention of the Chinese trawler captain by Japanese authorities. The “Senkaku Event” was

followed by diplomatic posturing on both sides, and large-scale public protests in China as

well as Japan. In China, both events triggered nationwide demonstrations against Japan on

a scale that had not been seen since those at Tian’An Men Square in 1989.

       Investors responded sharply in the wake of the Textbook Event: In April of 2005,

the Nikkei 225 Index fell by about 6.1 percent while the Shanghai Composite declined by

nearly 5.3 percent. By comparison, the S&P 500 lost 1.4 percent of its value over the same

period. More interestingly, in our main analysis we find that the market reactions for



                                             2
Japanese companies were highly sensitive to China exposure; for each percentage point

increase in sales to China, cumulative abnormal returns (estimated using a standard Fama

and French (1993) three-factor model) during April 5 – 28, 2005 fell by an additional 0.08

percent. That is, firms more dependent on economic relations with China were more

adversely affected by an increase in Sino-Japan hostilities. We find a symmetric impact on

Chinese firms.

        Following the Senkaku collision, which was accompanied by more overt economic

threats from China, neither the Nikkei nor the Shanghai Composite declined overall. We

nonetheless find a large and significant impact of China exposure on event returns during

the Senkaku Event window of September 7 – October 29, 2010 for Japanese firms, and also

a negative effect of Japanese exports on Chinese firms’ cumulative abnormal event returns

(though the latter effect is not statistically significant).

         We provide evidence that helps to adjudicate amongst explanations for the impact

of China exposure on Japanese firms, using cross-sectional variation in company and

industry attributes. We find that the vulnerability of Japanese firms with high sales to China

is mediated by factors that, we argue, would make them susceptible to Chinese government

intervention in a company’s main line of business. Companies operating in industries

dominated by state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are more sensitive to Sino-Japanese tensions,

while those with high employment in China are relatively insulated from the effects of

these interstate hostilities.

        We argue that this is likely due to the fact that in SOE-dominated sectors, the

government has greater incentive to intervene to benefit its own companies: As the



                                                  3
Economist noted in 2011, the Chinese government “has been widely accused of twisting

rules in favour of its state-owned or, sometimes, private-sector favourites.” 2 The

government may also have a greater ability to intervene because of its direct role in the

supply chain. We document that this SOE-effect operates in part through the import choices

of Chinese firms: there is a decline in Japanese imports by Chinese SOEs (relative to U.S.

imports) following the Textbook Event (firm-level import statistics are unavailable

following the Senkaku Event).

        The insulating effect of high employment of Chinese workers may reflect beliefs

that the Chinese government would be averse to harming companies that generate local

jobs. The Chinese government has been particularly sensitive to this concern in its

economic liberalizations and has emphasized employment creation as an objective for

foreign investment specifically.3

         We provide suggestive evidence on the role of consumer response in the two

countries. For Japanese firms, we find no evidence that returns are affected by whether a

company is focused on consumer (B2C) or business (B2B) customers, where the B2C

versus B2B assignment is made using descriptions from the Japanese equivalent of 10-K

filings, as would be the case if companies feared a long-term consumer backlash.4




2
  “The Long Arm of the State,” The Economist, July 23, 2011 (http://www.economist.com/node/18832034)
3
  See, for example, the State Council’s 1995 “Provisions on Guiding Foreign Investment Direction,” and the
follow-up directives issued by the State Council in 2010, “Further Guidance from the State Council on
improving our work on utilizing foreign direct investment.”
4
  We assume that consumers rather than intermediate goods producers are more prone to have purchasing
decisions influenced by non-pecuniary concerns. This assumption is implicit in the literature that examines
the determinants and consequences of corporate social responsibility. See, for example, Besley and Ghatak
(2007) for one prominent example.


                                                     4
        We find that sensitivity of market reaction to China sales share is also affected by

the fraction of shares held by individual investors, and that the effect persists at least a

month past each event’s resolution. To the extent that individuals – as opposed to

institutional investors – are more prone to trade based on emotion or sentiment, these

findings suggest that the decline in China-focused firms was partly the result of selling by

individual investors divesting their portfolios of (distasteful) China-focused companies.5

        We find suggestive evidence that the decline in Chinese firms’ value is driven by a

contrasting set of factors – in neither episode are firms with high rates of Japanese exports

more adversely affected in industries vulnerable to government intervention (drugs,

agriculture, and foods). We find weak evidence that consumer-focused firms’ returns suffer

more than firms producing primarily for business customers (this difference is not

statistically significant), providing suggesting that expectation of a Japanese consumer

backlash could have played a greater role in explaining the decline of Japan-focused firms

in China.

        In our final section of analysis, we examine the longer-run consequences of the two

episodes for firm performance. We do not observe complete reversion in share prices, as

would be the case if the patterns we describe were only an indication of short-run investor

overreaction. Returns on assets decline for Japanese firms with high China exposure (and




5
 See, for example, Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991), De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990),
Baker and Wurgler (2006), and Stambaugh, Yu and Yuan (2012) on individual investors and the role of
sentiment; Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Teoh (2002), and
Hirshleifer (2001) on individual investors and overreaction; and Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992)
for a discussion of how small shocks can often lead to large shifts in behavior.


                                                     5
for Chinese firms with high Japan exposure), consistent with investors’ reactions correctly

anticipating future profitability.

        Overall, we conclude that companies’ fortunes are very sensitive to relations

between the two countries. We provide an array of evidence in support of the view that

Chinese government intervention is an important contributor to Japanese companies’

decline, along with tentative evidence that the decline in Chinese firms’ values is driven

more by consumer response. This does not imply that citizen sentiment is irrelevant for

Japanese firms, but rather that it may find expression more through its impact on

government policy than individual consumer choice. Overall, our results on the contrasting

determinants of firm-level responses to the two events                   highlight the importance of

considering the different channels through which nationalism and other interstate frictions

impact economic activity.6

        Our work contributes most directly to a recent literature relating hostilities among

countries to cross-border economic activity. Contributions include studies on the impact of

diplomatic frictions such as Gupta and Yu (2009), which examines whether bilateral

political relations can explain investment and trade flows between the United States and

other countries, the effects of military hostility (e.g., Glick and Taylor 2010; Martin,

Mayer, and Thoenig 2008), the impact of cultural aversion and mistrust on trade and

investment (Guiso et al. 2009; Michaels and Zhi, 2010), the effect of country-specific

sentiment on security prices (Hwang 2011), the role of cultural value in mergers (Ahern,


6
 It is of course possible to speculate on why we observe these differences – the Chinese government might be
seen as still playing a more dominant role in economic activity than in Japan – but given that we effectively
only have two data points, we leave such questions about underlying economic systems for future research.


                                                     6
Daminelli, and Fracassi 2012), the impact of patriotism on the home bias in asset allocation

(Morse and Shive 2010) and the role of ethnic differences in exacerbating trade frictions

(Aker, Klein, O’Connell, and Yang 2010). When compared to many of these studies, our

event study provides a credible causal estimate of the firm-level impact of interstate

frictions on valuations. Relatedly, since we employ firm-level data we are better able to

identify the channels underlying such an effect. Equally important, given the slow-moving

nature of interstate animosity, our setting provides a unique opportunity to assess the

impact of changes in interstate frictions on firm value.

       Our study also relates to work examining the impact of boycotts on firm value.

These include several event studies, which find mixed results (see, for example, Epstein

and Schnietz 2002 for the effect of consumer boycotts; Teoh, Welch, and Wazzan 1999 on

the impact of South African boycott announcements). Also related is a pair of recent studies

on the effect of consumer backlash on French wine purchases in the United States

following France’s protests against the Iraq War (Ashenfelter, Ciccarella, and Shatz 2007;

Chavis and Leslie 2009). These papers provide a much coarser inference on the effects of

consumer sentiment, which may account for the disagreement between them (e.g., calendar

effects in wine sales may account for the impact on sales attributed to consumer boycott in

one paper). By contrast, our detailed data on companies’ foreign exposure facilitates a

better identification of the impact of interstate frictions on firm value.

       Finally, several very recent papers in political science have examined the 2005

protests we consider here, and also other smaller-scale shocks to Sino-Japanese relations.

Davis and Meunier (2011) study the impact of increased Sino-Japanese (and U.S.-French)



                                                7
frictions on trade and investment flows, and in contrast to our findings here, report no

effect. This non-result may stem from the relatively coarse, low-frequency nature of trade

and FDI flows as measures of changed economic relations. Weiss (2008) also examines the

2005 protests, with a focus on political relations between the two countries, with less of a

quantitative focus relative to our study. Finally, in work concurrent with our own, Govella

and Newland (2011) also take an event study approach, looking at the effect of the 2005

protests on the value of Japanese companies. Our data allow for a more fine-grained

analysis of equity market responses, owing to more detailed data on companies’ foreign

exposure. We further provide results based on industry variation that are critical to

understanding the underlying mechanism – populist sentiment versus government

intervention – behind the negative market response.



1. Background and data

1.1 Sino-Japanese economic and political relations

       We provide a brief overview of the Textbook and Senkaku events, which took place

against a historical background of generally tense relations between China and Japan. For

the interested reader, in Appendix A, we provide a short description of the history of Sino-

Japanese relations and national sentiment in China and Japan in recent years.

       Before describing the two events, it is worth noting that the two nations’

relationship has for decades been an ambivalent one. There is a high degree of animosity;

most notably, the two countries fought two wars – one at the end of the nineteenth century

and a second in the first half of the twentieth century. Relations to this day are affected by


                                              8
the notorious Nanjing Massacre perpetrated by the Japanese military in 1937. At the same

time, the two countries are highly dependent on one another economically – China is

Japan’s largest trading partner and Japan is China’s second largest, after the United States.

        It was against the backdrop of this tense – yet ambivalent – relationship that anti-

Japanese demonstrations in China were set off in the spring of 2005. The primary cause of

the protests was Japanese government approval of “Atarashî Rekishi Kyôkasho,” or the

New History Textbook, written by the Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform,

which Chinese critics claimed whitewashed Japanese war crimes committed during World

War II.7

        Large-scale protests began on April 5 and lasted for several weeks, with the final

protest occurring on April 27. We use a window of April 5 – 28 for our analyses.8 Right-

wing nationalist demonstrations against China were also seen in Japan during this period,

but on a much smaller scale.

        The second event we consider, the 2010 Senkaku Boat Collision incident, occurred

on the morning of September 7, 2010 when a Chinese trawler collided with Japanese Coast

Guard patrol boats in disputed waters near the natural gas-rich Senkaku (Diaoyu in

Chinese) Islands.9 The collision and Japan’s subsequent detention of the captain triggered a

major diplomatic dispute between China and Japan, and inflamed nationalist sentiments in

both nations. When China’s repeated demands for the captain’s release were refused and


7
  Anti-Japanese sentiment had already been building as a result of the G4 proposal that Japan be granted a
permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.
8
  The impact of China exposure on Japanese firms is even larger if we extend the window back to the earliest
Security Council protests in March 2005.
9
  Japan controls the islands, but both China and Taiwan claim them.


                                                     9
his detention extended for a further ten days, the Chinese government cancelled all

ministerial-level meetings between the two countries. On September 24, Japan released the

captain, citing in part the effect on Sino-Japanese relations. The Senkaku Event again

brought about a series of demonstrations against Japan and Japanese products across China,

beginning in Beijing on September 8, then spreading to many other cities. Protests

continued through to the end of October, with the final demonstrations reported on October

28. We take September 7 – October 29 as our event window.

        In contrast to the sharp reaction from the Chinese, Japan’s government and media

were reserved in their handling of the Senkaku Event. Facing decisive protest from China,

the Japanese central government interceded to push the judicial branch to release the

captain without prosecution. Likewise, the Japanese media underplayed Japanese protests

against China. While protests took place, they were limited in number and scale – about 20

in total, with few generating crowds exceeding a thousand, from September 7 to October 29,

2010.



1.2 Data

        For Japanese listed firms, we calculate their Chinese exposure using business

segment data from annual filings with the Ministry of Finance (Yûka Shôken Hôkokusho),

which is the 10-K equivalent in Japan. There are three dimensions along which company

accounts are disaggregated; (1) by types of business or products, (2) by locations of sales

offices (including domestic regions), and (3) by overseas sales, if sales in foreign markets

exceed 10 percent of consolidated total sales. For each segment, firms are required to report



                                             10
sales (to other segments as well as to external customers), operating expenses, profit or loss

from operations, and assets. We utilize the overseas sales information to construct variables

that indicate each firm’s exposure to the Chinese economy. Firms differ in their

geographical classifications for sales: some use broad regional categories (e.g., Japan,

North America, Europe, Asia, and Other) whereas others provide some country-level

disaggregation. In some cases, broad categorizations are supplemented by country sales in

footnotes. We use both the explicit categorization of “China (or People’s Republic of

China)” and footnoted supplements to estimate the percentage of sales in China out of

firm’s total sales. We also compute the fraction of assets in China. These measures are used

to identify firms with high exposure to China.

          For the 2005 Textbook Event, we have 846 Japanese non-financial firms with

information on sales and assets in China, and for the 2010 Senkaku Event, we have 920

non-financial firms in our sample. Other publicly listed firms were excluded because of

non-disclosure of regional sales information, which could be either the result of a deliberate

decision to avoid disclosing detailed segment data, or because the company had negligible

foreign sales more broadly. Using this information, we construct our key dependent

variable Fraction_China_Sales, the ratio of sales in China to total sales. Some firms may

have Chinese plants that do not directly sell products in China. To capture this operating

exposure, we also calculate Fraction_China_Assets, the ratio of total assets in China to

total     assets   of   the   listed   firm.   For    Japanese   firms,   we   further   calculate

Fraction_Others_Sales as the ratio of sales in all foreign countries other than China to total

sales,.



                                                 11
         For the 1,058 Chinese listed firms in our sample, we calculate Japanese exposure

based on the ratio of exports to Japan to total sales, defined as Fraction_Japan_Exports,

using a match between the listed firms in our sample and transaction-level trade data from

China Customs, also employed by Ahn, Khandelwal, and Wei (2010). The trade data are

publicly available only through 2005; hence, we use 2004 data to construct our Japan

export measure for both events. We also calculate Fraction_Others_Exports as the ratio of

exports to all foreign countries other than Japan to total sales, for the sample of Chinese

firms.

         To investigate the channels through which adverse shocks to Sino-Japanese

relations affect stock returns, we generate proxies for government and consumer

vulnerability. First, we calculate a proxy for the extent of Chinese government intervention

based on the prevalence of state owned enterprises across industries. China’s economic

reforms have not been accompanied by the same degree of political liberalization

(Calomiris, Fisman, and Wang 2010). State companies continue to play a significant role in

achieving political ends (in addition to economic targets), as documented in a report by the

U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (2011) and also emphasized by

Bräutigam (2011) and Yu (2011), among many others. We proxy for potential for

government intervention using industry-level SOE intensity. Our reasoning is that the

sectors where SOEs dominate economic activity are those where the government is most

inclined and best positioned to intervene via, for example, direct competition, trade




                                            12
policies, and purchasing embargoes by SOEs against Japanese goods.10 We use the 2004

and 2008 Economic Census of China conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics of

China (NBSC), which include firm-level information on the sales and primary ownership of

the universe of firms operating in China.11 Using the 2-digit industry classifications of the

NBSC we generate the industry-level variable SOE_Intensity, the ratio of total sales by

state-controlled firms to total sales of all domestic Chinese firms in each industry. We

match the NBSC 2-digit industry classifications to their Japanese equivalent (Nikkei

Industry Code, Medium Level12) to match this measure to our sample of Japanese listed

firms.

         The number of employees for Japanese businesses in China is obtained from a

database maintained by Tokyo Keizai. Each year, the company surveys Japanese firms to

obtain information on their overseas joint ventures, foreign branches, and representative

offices. The information in their database includes location, number of employees, amount

invested, equity shares of partners (in case of joint ventures), and so forth. The data we use

are for employment in joint ventures, branches, and representative offices in China for

March 2005 and March 2010. These employment figures distinguish between expatriate

and Chinese workers. We define Fraction_China_Empl as the number of Chinese

employees in China for each Japanese firm as a fraction of total firm employment

worldwide, which comes from Yûka Shôken Hôkokusho.


10
   In a similar spirit, Bertrand, Kramarz, Schoar, and Thesmar (2008) also illustrate the impact of politics on
firms’ hiring decisions in France.
11
   Ideally we would use the 2009 data for the 2010 event study. Unfortunately, there was no industry census in
China in 2009.
12
   Nikkei Industry Code closely follows the Japan Standard Industry Classification.


                                                      13
       We also construct a proxy for Japanese government involvement in business with

China. Drugs_and_Food is an indicator variable for Chinese firms whose primary

operating industry is food, agricultural products, or medicine. The Japanese government

itself is less deeply involved in the business operations of Japanese firms than is the

Chinese government in Chinese business, and thus has fewer levers to impact foreign firms.

The selection of these three industries is a matter of subjective judgment, reflecting the

following considerations: first, farmers in Japan have been influential constituents and the

Japanese government has a history of protecting domestic agriculture (Honma 1993; OECD

2009); second, Chinese exporters have had numerous problems over the years with food

and drug safety, resulting in recalls and import bans in Japan and elsewhere (see, for

example, Qian 2011). Hence it would be relatively easy for the Japanese government to

find a premise for restricting or even banning Chinese imports in these industries.

       To examine the potential effects of consumer sentiment, we generate a company-

level proxy for consumer vulnerability (Consumer_Intensity) using business segment

descriptions to classify companies as primarily business-to-business (B2B) or business-to-

consumer (B2C).

       For Japanese firms, we use information from Yûka Shôken Hôkokusho to classify

firms as B2B or B2C based on the segment that has the highest fraction of sales. This

source provides business segment classifications that are similar to the most detailed level

of the Japan Standard Industry Classification, making it relatively straightforward to

identify a firm’s consumer orientation. For example, Omron in 2005 lists five segments:

“industrial automation,” “electronics components,” “social systems business,” “healthcare



                                             14
business,” and “others,” with “industrial automation” as the top-selling segment. It is thus

classified as B2B. Hitachi reports their best-selling segment as “power generation and

industrial systems” while their “digital media and consumer goods” segment has sales of

less than half of former. Thus Hitachi is also classified as B2B.

       Where companies do not report segments clearly enough to make an assignment of

B2B or B2C (135 firms), we consult company websites directly for more detailed

descriptions of company activities. In the vast majority of cases, the assignment was clear.

For example, Sony’s largest selling segment in 2005 is “electronics,” while other segments

are listed as “games,” “movies,” “financial,” and “others.” Inspection of their website

confirms that the majority of their products are for consumers, despite also manufacturing

video cameras for professional broadcasting and filming (which are included in

“electronics”). Thus Sony is classified as B2C. While this method admittedly has a

subjective component, it allows for a more fine-grained – and accurate – assignment than

other industry-level aggregates. (We also produced industry-level proxies for consumer-

intensity based on U.S. input-output tables that provide some indication of whether

industries produce primarily intermediate or end-use products. But this fails to distinguish,

for example, between home and business applications in the electronics industry.)

       Consumer_Intensity for Chinese firms is constructed using descriptions from the

Chinese equivalent of 10-K filings (Nianbao, or annual report). It is equal to 1 if the firm

mainly produces products that are sold to consumers directly. We construct our consumer-

intensity variable in much the same manner as with Japanese firms, which was

straightforward in the majority of cases (e.g., Shangdong Haihua, whose main products



                                              15
include “polyvinyl chloride, sodium nitrate, and nitrobenzene, etc.” is classified as B2B).

Some cases highlight the problematic nature of making industry-level classifications, which

reinforces the benefits of the firm-level approach we take here. For example, included in

the Utility category are both Guiguang Electricity and Datong Gas. Guiguang Electricity

mainly generates electricity for utility suppliers (B2B) while Datong Gas directly provides

gas to households (B2C).

       In the 79 cases that were indeterminate based on product categories, Original

Chinese company reports were examined to make a subjective determination. For example,

Jiangsu Yangguang reports its main business segments as “wool fabric, wool yarn, textile,

and apparel.” Wool fabric is sold to firms as intermediary goods, while apparel is usually

sold directly to consumers. A more detailed reading of its report indicated that its main line

of business was high-quality wool fabric for apparel manufacturing firms, and it was thus

coded as B2B.

       We       construct      firm-year      variables,     Fraction_Indiv_Japan         and

Fraction_Indiv_China, which are the ratios of individual ownership to total outstanding

shares. These variables serve as proxies for the vulnerability of share price to investor

sentiment (see Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler 1991; De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann

1990; Baker and Wurgler 2006; and Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan 2012 for examples). For

Japanese firms, information on individual versus institutional ownership is taken from Yûka

Shôken Hôkokusho, and for Chinese firms we obtain these data from GTA, a Shenzhen-

based data vendor in China, now partially available through the Wharton Research Data

Service.



                                             16
        We obtain standard firm-level financial variables, including total leverage, total

assets and Tobin’s Q as controls for Japanese firms, as well as stock price data from the

Nikkei database. Chinese stock prices and financial variables (total assets, total leverage,

and Tobin’s Q) are obtained from GTA. A standard Fama-French three factor model (Fama

and French 1993) is used to calculate the abnormal event returns for both samples.13 For

predicting normal returns, we use the window of [-150, -30] (in trading days), where 0 is

the event date, to estimate the parameters for the Fama-French three factor model.

        We calculate the cumulative abnormal returns (henceforth CARs) over the period of

April 5 – April 28 inclusive for the 2005 Textbook Event, and September 7 – October 29

for the 2010 Senkaku Event. For the 2005 Textbook Event, we also calculate the CARs

over the period of March 26 - April 28 and find similar results.

        Finally, we will also present analyses on the imports of Chinese firms in the wake

of the Textbook event. The data we collected for this purpose are distinct from those

utilized in the rest of our analyses, and involve firm-product level import data from Japan

and U.S. for all Chinese firms. The data are taken from China Customs (with firms’ names

anonymous), and are available for the years 2004 to 2006 (hence we are unable to examine

the Senkaku Event). The dataset provides information on the declared value of imports, its

8-digit Harmonized System (HS) industry classification, the date of importation, and the




13
  Fama-French (1993)-type effects are first documented in Japan by Chan, Hamao, and Lakonishok (1991),
and three factors for Japan are computed as Kubota and Takehara (2007). For China, the Fama-French three
factor model is examined by Wang and Xu (2005), and the factors for China are computed and provided by
RESSET, a Beijing-based data vendor. We also use a simple market model (MacKinlay 1997) to calculate the
abnormal event returns and obtain near-identical results.


                                                  17
country of origin.14 Additionally, the data include whether the importer is a state-owned

enterprise (SOE). We use these data to construct a measure of the intensity of imports from

Japan for SOEs versus private firms, benchmarked against imports from the United States

as a control. Specifically, we define State as an indicator variable denoting whether an

importer is an SOE, and at the HS-State-month level define JPN_Import_Rate as the ratio

of Japanese imports to the sum of Japanese and U.S. imports.



1.3 Summary Statistics

         Table 1, Panels A and B present the summary statistics for Japanese and Chinese

listed firms, respectively. As indicated in Panel A, the market value of our sample of

Japanese firms fell by 5.8 percent (Fama-French three factor model adjusted) on average

during the 2005 Textbook Event, with a standard deviation of 5.8 percent; the Wilcoxon

signed-rank test rejects the null hypothesis that the cumulative abnormal return is zero at

the 1 percent level. Chinese listed firms dropped by about 3.8 percent during the same

period, with a standard deviation of 12.2 percent; the Wilcoxon signed-rank test rejects the

null hypothesis at the 1 percent level. During the 2010 Senkaku Event, Japanese firms

experienced a cumulative abnormal return of -3.7 percent with a standard deviation of 11.2

percent (the Wilcoxon signed-rank test rejects the null hypothesis at the 1 percent level),

while Chinese firms increased by 1.5 percent with a standard deviation of 13.7 percent.15


14
   The HS classification is the standard system for international trade. 8-digit categories involve a very high
degree of disaggregation, for example, “Diesel powered trucks with a GVW exceeding twenty tons” and
“Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed (stripped), threshed or similarly processed, from cigar leaf.”
15
   The discrepancy with the market returns reported in the introduction stems from two differences. First, the
Japanese firms in our sample are only those that report country-specific sales data; second, we employ a


                                                      18
Among Japanese listed firms, about 18 percent of our sample firms mainly sell products to

consumers, while for Chinese listed firms, the figure is 38.8 percent.

        In Tables 2A and 2B, we present industry-level characteristics for Japanese and

Chinese firms respectively. Consumer-intensity measures reveal few surprises – in the

Japan sample, Petroleum has a consumer-intensity of zero and for Machinery it is 0.027,

while Foods and Drugs have consumer intensities of 0.75 and 0.57 respectively. We note

that the difference in consumer-intensity of Japanese versus Chinese firms is accounted for

in large part by a differential distribution across industries. For example, in China 4.8

percent of publicly traded firms are in the “Retail Trade” industry, while 1.4 percent of

Japanese companies are in this consumer-focused segment. By contrast, 8.3 percent of

Japanese firms are in “Wholesale Trade” – a B2B segment – as compared with 1.1 percent

in China. Some industries do differ in their consumer-intensity between the two samples.

Most striking is “Real Estate Development”, where nearly all (95.2 percent) Chinese firms

are consumer-focused as compared to 0 percent in the Japanese sample. This is a reflection

of the different roles of real estate firms in each country. In China they market apartments

and homes directly to consumers, while listed Japanese real estate firms are more focused

on commercial properties. Table 2A also shows an industry-by-industry breakdown of

SOE_Intensity for 2004 (these figures are very similar for 2008). Recall that while this is a

variable we use in our analysis of Japanese firms, the industry-level figures reflect SOE-

intensity for Chinese industries. Infrastructure industries like warehousing, sea and railroad

transportation are characterized by very high levels of government ownership.

market-adjustment in returns for the data reported in Table 1, while the figures in the introduction are based
on raw market index returns.


                                                     19
2. Empirical Framework and Results

       We combine an event study on the market returns of Chinese and Japanese firms

with a regression framework for examining whether returns are correlated with exposure to

Sino-Japanese trade. Specifically, we use the cumulative abnormal event returns of publicly

traded firms in Japan and China over the Textbook and Senkaku Event windows, then

correlate these returns with exposure to Sino-Japanese relations, as proxied by sales in (or

exports to) the partner country. Effectively, we employ those with zero partner-country

sales as a control group to benchmark the firm-level impact of companies with positive

sales. We present our results in a regression framework, where we control for firm size,

performance, industry, and other relevant attributes. Thus, for example, for Japanese firms

during the Textbook Event, we perform the following analysis, which looks at the

correlation between China sales exposure and returns over the event window of April 5 –

28, 2005:

               CAR_Textbooki = α + β1 Fraction_China_Salesi + β2 Controlsi + i       (1)

for firm i where CAR_Textbook is cumulative abnormal returns over the event window

[April 5, April 28], controls include the logarithm of total assets, Tobin’s Q, leverage in

2004, and industry dummy variables for Nikkei Industry Code (U.S. SIC 2-digit

equivalent).



2.1 Main results

       Table 3, column (1) presents the basic specification with log(TotalAssets) as the

only control. The coefficient on Fraction_China_Sales is negative and significant at the 1


                                            20
percent level. The coefficient of -7.49 implies that a one standard deviation increase in the

China sales ratio – about 0.1 in the sample – corresponds to a change in cumulative

abnormal returns during the incident of -0.749 percent. In columns (2) and (3) we observe

that the relationship between China exposure and returns during the Textbook Event is

insensitive to the addition of controls, including industry dummies. It is noteworthy, in

particular, that the coefficient on Fraction_Others_Sales is positive though not significant,

implying that vulnerability to China trade is not simply proxying for international exposure

more broadly. 16 Using assets as a measure of China exposure in column (4) implies

essentially the same level of impact (while the coefficient on our asset-based measure of

China exposure is marginally smaller, the asset-based measure has a higher standard

deviation).

         Columns (5) – (8) repeat the analysis from specification (1) using CAR_Senkaku

(cumulative abnormal returns during September 7 – October 29, 2010) as the outcome

variable, and covariates calculated using firm-level data from 2009. The coefficient on

Fraction_China_Sales is three times greater in this set of regressions, reflecting in part

several extreme values despite winsorizing. 17 Finally, we pool the two events using

Fraction_China_Sales and Fraction_China_Assets as measures of China exposure in

columns (9) and (10) respectively, allowing for the effect to vary across the two events

through an interaction term, and clustering standard errors at the firm-level. In this, as with

all other specifications that pool data from both years, we include Industry × Year fixed


16
   In unreported results, we also included the fraction of sales to the United States as a control; its coefficient
was not significant and it similarly had no effect on our estimates of the coefficients of interests
17
   Without winsorizing, the effect is twice as large.


                                                        21
effects. The results reflect the patterns observed in the earlier columns – a strong negative

effect of China exposure on returns, with a much larger effect from the 2010 Senkaku

Event.

         In Table 4, we present analogous results for the effect of the two events on Chinese

firms, using Fraction_Japan_Exports as our measure of exposure of Chinese companies to

the Japanese economy. It is worth noting that Chinese firms are much less exposed to the

Japanese economy than Japanese firms are to China’s – the 75th percentile of

Fraction_Japan_Exports is zero, as compared to 0.10 for Fraction_China_Sales. That said,

the correlation between export exposure to Japan and returns during the textbook incident –

as indicated by the results in Table 4 column (1) – is negative and significant at the 5

percent level. The coefficient, -8.745, is of a similar size as we obtained for our analysis of

Japanese firms. Adding controls increases the implied effect of Japan exposure on

abnormal returns (Columns (2) and (3)), implying a somewhat larger sensitivity for Chinese

firms (relative to Japanese ones) for a given percentage point increase in exposure to Sino-

Japanese trade. We note as well that exports to other countries are positively correlated

with returns, once again highlighting that our main findings are unlikely to be the result of

international exposure more broadly.

         The relationship between Fraction_Japan_Exports and returns is of a similar

magnitude for the 2010 Senkaku Event (Columns (4) – (6)). In column (7) we pool the two

events, allowing Japan exposure to vary by event through an interaction term, clustering

standard errors at the firm-level and including Industry × Year fixed effects. The results




                                              22
reflect the patterns reported in earlier columns, with a significant effect of

Fraction_Japan_Exports, and a similar impact for each event.

       In interpreting the results in Table 4, we note that the effect derives entirely from

the minority of firms with non-zero exports. In column (8) we limit the sample only to

observations     where     Fraction_Japan_Exports        >    0.    The     coefficient    on

Fraction_Japan_Exports is somewhat larger than in the full sample case and significant at

the 10 percent level. (In results not shown, we find that an indicator variable for non-zero

exports to Japan is actually positive, though the coefficient does not approach significance.)

       Our methodology ascribes the negative relationship between corporate exposure to

Japan/China and cumulative abnormal returns over the event windows to the effects of

Sino-Japanese frictions. We would not, therefore, expect a significant pre-event

relationship, nor would we expect any trend following each window. To examine

graphically the pre- and post-event patterns in the data, we present in Figures 1a and 1b the

coefficient on Fraction_China_Sales from Equation (1), utilizing event windows that begin

a week prior to the date we have set as the start of each event, and continuing to two

months following each event. That is, each point represents a regression coefficient where

the outcome variable is cumulative abnormal returns over the window [-7, date]; we include

a [0.05, 0.95] confidence interval around the coefficient estimates. We do observe a pre-

event negative return for the Textbook Event in Figure 1a, reflecting that tensions that were

already on the rise as a result of the announced proposal that Japan be given a permanent

seat at U.N. Security Council. There is no such pattern for the Senkaku Event. In both

cases, there is a steady decline in the Fraction_China_Sales coefficient over the event



                                             23
window. For the Textbook Event, the decline continues beyond the event period, while we

see no such pattern for the Senkaku Event.

       Turning to Chinese firms, we repeat the graphing exercise in Figures 1c and 1d,

showing the coefficients on Fraction_Japan_Exports in regressions on cumulative

abnormal returns. As in Figure 1a, we observe some evidence of pre-event declines prior to

the Textbook Event for Chinese firms. We also, in this instance, observe complete

reversion following the end of the event window. We observe neither pre-event decline nor

reversion for the 2010 Senkaku Event.

       Overall, the graphical representations of our findings over longer windows suggest

that we would generate larger estimates of the effect of China-Japan exposure on returns if

we extended our event window to incorporate the U.N. Security Council announcement that

was also the source of frictions between the two countries. As a separate validation

exercise, to alleviate concerns that vulnerability to Sino-Japanese relations is simply

proxying for a broader sensitivity to market-wide shocks we provide a placebo test to

formally reject the possibility that the effect we observe in the data is purely due to a China

(Japan) effect for Japanese (Chinese) firms. That is, we assess the possibility that whenever

there is a negative economic shock to China, Japanese firms suffer (and vice versa),

whether or not the shock impacts sentiment between the two countries. We find no

evidence of a link between exposure to Sino-Japanese relations and returns on September

11, 2001 or returns during the earthquakes that struck Niigata, Japan in 2007 and Sichuan,

China in 2008.




                                              24
2.2 Channels of impact

         We now turn to probe the channels that account for the sharp negative reaction to

deteriorations in Sino-Japanese relations. The two main mechanisms through which

interstate frictions may affect firm value are government intervention and consumer

backlash. To the extent that government intervention is of primary concern, we may

distinguish between differing governmental motives, in particular the protection of local

jobs versus vulnerability to hold-up. While our data do not allow us to provide dispositive

proof on the underlying mechanisms, the results in this section provide suggestive evidence

on the different channels through which firms were adversely affected in the two countries.

         We focus first on Japanese firms in Table 5. We include interactions of

Fraction_China_Sales with Consumer_Intensity, a firm-level indicator variable denoting

whether the company’s main business segment focuses mainly on consumers, and

SOE_Intensity, an industry-level measure of the presence of government-owned firms in

China. We see this latter measure as an indication of the extent to which the Chinese

government may be motivated – and able – to impact the profits of Japanese companies

selling in China via competition, product embargoes, and trade policies. Finally, we include

Fraction_China_Empl to capture the potential effects of a firm employing a high rate of

Chinese workers. We present all results for both events pooled together, and as before

include Industry × Year fixed effects as well as Fraction_China_Sales × Year2010 as a

control.18



18
  Results disaggregated by year are available from the authors. All coefficients are directionally the same as
those reported here.


                                                      25
       In columns (1) and (2), we include the interaction terms SOE_Intensity and

Consumer_Intensity separately. The coefficient on Fraction_China_Sales × SOE_Intensity

is negative and significant at the 1 percent level. To provide a sense of its magnitude,

consider two industries where a reasonably high fraction of Japanese companies have non-

zero sales in China, but very different levels of SOE-intensity: Drugs (SOE_Intensity =

0.06) and Construction (SOE_Intensity = 0.26). The estimates imply that a one standard

deviation increase in Fraction_China_Sales reduces returns by about 0.66 percent for Drug

companies (0.1 × 0.06 × 109.8), versus 2.85 percent for Construction (0.1 × 0.26 × 109.8).

The coefficient on Fraction_China_Sales × Consumer_Intensity is positive, though it is

very small in magnitude, and quite precisely estimated as close to zero – we can reject at a

95 percent confidence level that the coefficient is less than 12.3 (i.e., 2.87 + 7.75 × 1.96). In

column (3), we include Fraction_China_Empl as a covariate. Its coefficient is positive and

significant at the 10 percent level (we obtain similar results if we further control for

Fraction_China_Assets). In the final column we include all interaction terms

simultaneously. Note that the sample size decreases by half owing to the limited availability

of Chinese employee information. As a result, the SOE_Intensity interaction term is no

longer significant (p-value = 0.12); Fraction_China_Empl is also no longer significant at

conventional levels (p-value = 0.12).

       We next examine one channel through which Japanese firms – particularly those

with the Chinese state as a customer – may have been adversely affected following the

Textbook Event.




                                               26
        We use the following specification to examine whether, following the 2005

Textbook Event, Chinese SOEs decreased their imports of Japanese relative to U.S. goods,

relative to private firms:



JPN_Import_Ratehsm = α + β1 Afterm + β2 States + β3 Afterm × States

                              + β4 Monthm × States + Hh + Mm + εhsm                (2)



The data employed in these analyses are entirely distinct from those employed elsewhere in

the paper, as noted in the Data section. All analyses are done at the HS8-ownership type-

month level, where JPN_Import_Rate is fraction of imports by firms in 8-digit HS industry

h of ownership type s in month m that are from Japan (relative to imports from Japan and

the United States combined); State is an indicator variable for state ownership; and After

indicates that month m comes after the Textbook event (i.e., May, 2005 or later). All

specifications include 8-digit HS and month fixed effects, as well as firm-type time trends

to account for differential import rates of SOE versus private firms over time (our point

estimates are much larger if we do not include these terms). These results are reported in

Table 6. The coefficient on Afterm×States in column (1) is negative, though not statistically

significant at conventional levels (p-value = 0.126). Its magnitude of -0.007 is relatively

modest, implying a 0.7 percentage point decline in imports from Japan relative to the

United States (as compared to the sample mean of 0.65 for JPN_Import_Rate overall). In

Column (2) we limit the sample just to those industries with “thick” trade such that in each

month-industry in our sample, there is non-zero importation for both private and SOE



                                             27
importers from either Japan or the United States. The point estimate increases slightly, and

is significant at the 10 percent level. In Columns (3) and (4) we repeat our analyses

including State-by-HS fixed effects to allow for a differential level of imports by industry

for state versus private firms. The magnitudes of our coefficients estimates are virtually

unchanged, though they are estimated with slightly greater precision.

         We now turn to examine the channels through which Chinese firms may have been

adversely affected by the two events, using specifications that parallel those presented in in

Table 5. (Chinese firms engage in virtually no offshoring to Japan, so we do not consider

the effects of labor- versus capital-intensity of production.19) The broad patterns, shown in

Table 7, contrast with those we observe for Japanese companies, with negative and

statistically significant coefficients on Fraction_Japan_Exports in all specifications. The

interaction term Fraction_Japan_Exports × Drugs_and_Food does not approach

significance, and its sign is positive. The lack of any measurable effect may result from the

modest involvement, relatively speaking, of the Japanese government in commerce;

alternatively, it may simply be because of the coarseness of our proxy for vulnerability to
                                 20
government intervention.              In column (2) the sign on Fraction_Japan_Exports ×

Consumer_Intensity is negative, though not statistically significant (p-value = 0.20); we

observe similar patterns when both interaction terms are included in column (3).

         To summarize the results thus far, both Japanese and Chinese firms with substantial

Sino-Japanese economic ties suffer relative declines in value as a result of negative shocks

19
   In practice, we find that interactions of Fraction_Japan_Exports with the logarithm of labor and assets are
very small in magnitude and significance.
20
   We also used a proxy for government intervention based on tariff and non-tariff trade barriers from
UNCTAD’s TRAIN database, which similarly yielded no significant results.


                                                      28
to relations between the two countries. This effect is more pronounced for Japanese firms

operating in industries where the Chinese economy is dominated by state-owned

enterprises; further, the effect is less pronounced for labor-intensive firms. By contrast, the

effect for Chinese companies is more pronounced for consumer-oriented firms (though this

result is not statistically significant).

        Overall, our evidence indicates that Chinese government intervention was likely an

important mechanism through which Japanese companies were affected; we provide

weaker, suggestive evidence that consumer response played a larger role for Chinese

companies. These patterns highlight the importance of considering differing channels

through which cultural and political frictions impact economic activity, based on the

economic institutions in affected countries.21



2.3 The role of investor sentiment

        We have assumed thus far that investors’ responses reflect beliefs about firms’

future profitability. But our main findings could also be the result of investor sentiment in

the form of either overreaction (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam 1998; Daniel,

Hirshleifer, and Teoh 2002; Hirshleifer 2001) or shifts in preferences over asset allocation

(Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch 1992). We follow the behavioral finance literature

(Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler 1991; De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann 1990; Baker

and Wurgler 2006; Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan 2012) in using the prevalence of individual

21
  One further concern is that our findings may reflect anticipation of embargos in industries engaged in
military-related production. However, we discovered – in hindsight unsurprising – that no Japanese firms with
sales in China are in this category to begin with, and similarly no Chinese exporter to Japan is engaged in
military-related production.


                                                     29
investors to proxy for the role of sentiment under the premise that they are more prone to

sentiment-based trading than institutional investors.22 We thus augment Equation (1) with

the term Fraction_Indiv_Japan × Fraction_China_Sales to capture whether sensitivity of

returns to China exposure is higher for firms with a greater portion of individual rather than

institutional investors. The results, in column (1) of Table 8, indicate that increasing

ownership through individuals by one percentage point increases the coefficient on

Fraction_China_Sales by 1.62. As one may observe in our summary statistics, the mean of

Fraction_Indiv_Japan is only about 0.01 for Japanese firms – and indeed the 90th percentile

is only 0.2 – so in general ownership is dominated by institutions. We therefore also

consider whether our results are robust to considering splits of the sample based on whether

a firm has an appreciable portion of individual investors that could plausibly move asset

prices. We consider thresholds of 1, 5, 10, and 20 percent in columns (2) – (5) which

replace Fraction_Indiv_Japan with indicator variables denoting that a firm has individual

ownership greater than p percent, I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan ≥ p). The coefficient is very

stable at around -35, indicating a much higher sensitivity of returns to China exposure for

firms with a high proportion of individual investors. This effect is independent of the

patterns related to government intervention and consumer preferences that we document in

Table 5 - when Fraction_Indiv_Japan × Fraction_China_Sales is included as a control in

those specifications, our earlier results are virtually unchanged.


22
  Sentiment is in general defined as the difference between the beliefs of sentiment-driven traders and correct
objective beliefs conditional on available information (e.g., De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann,
1990). Individual investors are typically viewed as natural candidates for sentiment-driven investors. Kumar
and Lee (2006) analyze 1.85 million individual-investor transactions and interpret systematic factors in the
investors’ trades as being consistent with the influence of sentiment.


                                                      30
       We report analogous results for Chinese firms in Appendix Table 1. In contrast to

Japanese    firms,    individual   share   ownership     is   ubiquitous    in   China,    so

Fraction_Indiv_China has a mean of 0.80. We do not find any evidence of greater

sensitivity of returns to Japanese exposure for firms with high individual ownership. These

findings echo our earlier results emphasizing the role of individuals in mediating the effects

of Sino-Japanese tensions in the case of Japan – in our earlier results we documented

tentative evidence on the role of consumers, while our findings on sentiment emphasize the

role of individual investors.

       As already noted, the sentiment of individual investors could reflect an increased

aversion to holding stocks engaged in Chinese commerce, or an overreaction to news of

frictions with China. In the next section, we take up the concerns of whether our results

more generally reflect investor overreaction to the fraying of Sino-Japanese relations.



3. Longer-run analysis

3.1 Price reversion

       If investors overreact in the short run, we would expect that stock prices would

gradually revert for affected firms following our event windows. The graphs in Figure 1

indicate that, overall, this is unlikely to be the case. In this section, we examine this

possibility more formally.

       We perform two tests to investigate possible overreaction. First, we calculate

cumulative abnormal returns over the window of [end date, end date + 60] where end date

is the last date we included in our CARs calculations above. The overreaction hypothesis


                                             31
would predict that the Fraction_China_Sales (and Fraction_Japan_Exports) should

positively affect these post-event CARs. We do not observe any such pattern in the data (all

results for extended windows available on request). Second, we extend our event window

to incorporate an extra 30 or 60 trading days after the day we identified as the end date. The

overreaction     hypothesis     would     predict    that   the   Fraction_China_Sales   (and

Fraction_Japan_Exports) would have no effect on these extended CARs; however, we find

that the negative effect still holds.

        We     also   augment     these   analyses    to    include   Fraction_Indiv_Japan   ×

Fraction_China_Sales (or Fraction_Indiv_China × Fraction_Japan_Exports). This helps

to adjudicate between sentiment-based explanations that involve individual investor

overreaction versus those involving an increased aversion to ownership of companies with

ties to China (or Japan). We find that extending our event window by 30 days generates

very similar results to those reported in Table 7; if we extend the event window by 60 days,

the interaction term Fraction_Indiv_Japan × Fraction_China_Sales falls by about half and

is no longer significant, which is suggestive of the investor sentiment effect. This may

result in part from foreign or institutional investors – that are less prone to sentiment –

purchasing undervalued equities. The fact that we do not, more generally, observe a

complete reversion (note that the effects of sentiment are almost by definition temporary)

over longer windows indicates that there is a long-run real effect on firm value.

       Overall, we thus find at most limited evidence of a role for overreaction in

explaining the negative impact of Sino-Japanese relations on returns.




                                                32
3.2 Long-term effect on profits

     We examine the long-term effect of the 2005 shocks on Japanese and Chinese firms’

profits by constructing a panel for 2002 – 2008 (i.e., three years before and after the 2005

shock). We consider specifications of the form:



      ROAiy+1 = α + β1 Fraction_China_Salesiy

                 + β2 Fraction_China_Salesiy × I(year ≥ 2005)

                 + β3 Controlsiy + δi + ηy + iy                                      (3)



where ROA is defined as (net income)/(total assets), I(year ≥ 2005) is an indicator variable

that is equal to 1 for years after 2005, and δi and ηy are firm and year fixed effect. That is,

we investigate whether there is an increase in the correlation between accounting profits

and China exposure in the years following the Textbook Event. In the first pair of columns

in Table 9A, we show the results for Japanese firms. Returns on assets decline significantly

following the Textbook Event, a result that persists when we allow for the interaction term

log(Assets) × I(year ≥ 2005), to account for the possibility that the size-profit relationship is

changing over time. In Table 9B, we present the results for Chinese firms, including

Fraction_Japan_Exports and its interactions. We similarly observe lower profitability for

Japan-exposed firms in the years following the Textbook Event, though the effects are not

statistically significant (p-value = 0.20 in both specifications in Table 9B). We should note

that this test provides complementary evidence to our event study; such a test cannot




                                               33
cleanly identify the effect of interstate frictions on firm value given the many shocks that

took place during this period, which may also affect firms’ profits.

        Overall, the results in this section indicate that investors’ beliefs that the profits of

firms exposed to China-Japan commerce would be adversely affected by increased inter-

state frictions.



4. Conclusion

        In this paper we study the impact of interstate frictions on economic exchange, by

examining the impact of two major negative shocks to Sino-Japanese relations. As far as

we know, this is the first paper to perform an in-depth econometric analysis of the effects of

a discrete increase in Sino-Japanese frictions on economic relations, and also the first to

attempt to examine the channels through which firms are affected.

        We observe a large and adverse market response to negative shocks to Sino-

Japanese relations. This implies that economic exchange can be affected in discrete and

sudden ways by increased animosity between countries. We also present evidence that a

primary mechanism underlying this adverse reaction was likely government intervention in

the case of Japanese firms vulnerable to trade with China. We present more tentative

evidence that consumer response was a mediating factor for Chinese firms that export to

Japan. (We find complementary results on the role of individual investors in affecting firm

value in Japan.) This result is consistent with the very different institutions governing the

two countries – despite decades of economic liberalization, China’s government remains

deeply involved in the economy. This highlights the importance of considering the nature


                                               34
of economic institutions in understanding how economic actors will be affected by shifting

relations between countries.

        In concluding, we note that our paper plausibly provides a lower bound estimate of

the impact of interstate frictions on firm value, since we only look at publicly traded firms.

Unlisted firms, which are the majority in both countries, would likely be affected by the

events we consider here. So while we cannot incorporate such an analysis due to data

limitations, the impact on unlisted firms is important for a full accounting of the macro

implications of interstate frictions.

        While we focus in this paper on China and Japan, our approach may clearly be

generalized to a broader set of country pairs to develop more deeply our understanding of

how cross-country relations affect economic relationships. This would also give us a much

broader set of institutional circumstances to study how economic, political, and social

institutions mediate the effects of cultural animosity. We leave this for future work.




                                              35
References
Ahern, Kenneth, Daniele Daminelli, and Cesare Fracassi, 2012, “Lost in Translation? The
Effect of Cultural Values on Mergers around the World,” Journal of Financial Economics
(forthcoming).

Ahn, JaeBin, Amit Kumar Khandelwal, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011, “The Role of
Intermediaries in Facilitating Trade,” Journal of International Economics 84 (1): 73 – 85.

Aker, Jenny C., Michael W. Klein, Stephen A. O’Connell, and Munzhe Yang, 2010, “Are
Borders Barriers? The Impact of International and Internal Ethnic Borders on Agricultural
Markets in West Africa.” Working Paper, Center for Global Development.

Ashenfelter, Orly, Stephen Ciccarella, and Howard J. Shatz, 2007, “French Wine and the
U.S. Boycott of 2003: Does Politics Really Affect Commerce?” Journal of Wine
Economics 2 (1): 55 – 74.

Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, “Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of
Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance 61 (4): 1645 – 1680.

Becker, Gary S., 1957, The Economics of Discrimination, 1st ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bertrand, Marianne, Francis Kramarz, Antoinette Schoar, and David Thesmar, 2008,
“Politically Connected CEOs and Corporate Outcomes: Evidence from France,” Working
Paper, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak, 2007, “Retailing Public Goods: The Economics of
Corporate Social Responsibility,” Journal of Public Economics 91 (9): 1645 – 1663.

Bikhchandani Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, 1992, “A Theory of Fads, Fashion,
Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy
100 (5): 992 – 1026.

Bräutigam, Deborah, 2011, “Aid ‘With Chinese Characteristics’: Chinese Foreign Aid and
Development Finance Meet the OECD-DAC Aid Regime,” Journal of International
Development 23 (5): 752 – 764.

Calomiris, Charles, Raymond Fisman, and Yongxiang Wang, 2010, “Profiting from
Government Stakes in a Command Economy: Evidence from Chinese Asset Sales,”
Journal of Financial Economics 96 (3): 399 – 412.



                                           36
Chan, Louis K.C., Yasushi Hamao, and Josef Lakonishok, “Fundamentals and Stock
Returns in Japan,” Journal of Finance 46 (5): 1739 – 1764.

Chavis, Larry, and Phillip Leslie, 2009, “Consumer Boycotts: The Impact of the Iraq War
on French Wine Sales in the U.S.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 7 (1): 37 – 67.

Daniel Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, “Investor
Psychology and Security Market Under- and Over- Reactions”, Journal of Finance 53 (6):
1839-85.

Daniel Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2002, “Investor Psychology in
Capital Markets: Evidence and Policy Implications,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49
(1): 139-209.

Davis, Christina L., and Sophie Meunier, 2011, “Business as Usual? Economic Responses
to Political Tensions,” American Journal of Political Science 55 (3): 628 – 646.

De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann,
1990, “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets” Journal of Political Economy 98 (4): 703–
738.

Epstein, Marc J., and Laren E. Schnietz, “Measuring the Cost of Environmental and Labor
Protests to Globalization: An Event Study of the Failed 1999 Seattle WTO Talks,” The
International Trade Journal 16 (2): 129 – 160.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1): 3 – 56.

Glick, Reuven, and Alan Taylor, 2010, “Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the
Economic Impact of War,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (1): 102 – 127.

Govella, Kristi, and Sara Newland, 2011, “Hot Economics, Cold Politics? Re-examining
Economic Linkage and Political Tensions in Sino-Japanese Relations,” Working Paper,
University of California, Berkeley.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2009, “Cultural Biases in Economic
Exchange?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3): 1095 – 1131.

Gupta, Nardini, and Xiaoyun Yu, 2009, “Does Money Follow the Flag?” Working Paper,
Kelley School of Business, Indiana University.




                                          37
Hegre, Håvard, John Onea, and Bruce M. Russett, 2010, “Trade Does Promote Peace: New
Simultaneous Estimates of the Reciprocal Effects of Trade and Conflict,” Journal of Peace
Research 47(6): 763 – 774

Hirshleifer, David, 2001, “Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance 56
(4): 1533 – 1598.

Honma, Masayoshi, 1993, “Japan’s Agriculture Policy and Protection Growth,” in Ito,
Takatoshi, and Anne O. Krueger (eds.), Trade and Protectionism, NBER-EASE 2:95–114,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun, 2011, “Country-Specific Sentiment and Security Prices,” Journal
of Financial Economics 100 (2): 382 – 401.

Kubota, Keiichi, and Hitochi Takehara, 2007, “Fama-French fakutâ moderu no yûkôsei no
saikentô” [A Reexamination of the Effectiveness of the Fama-French Model] (In Japanese)
Gendai Fainansu 22: 3-23

Kudô, Yasushi, 2005, “Shohoteki na murikai no hôchi ga sôgofushin wo zôka saseteiru
[Doing Nothing about Basic Misunderstandings Exacerbates Mutual Distrust],” (in
Japanese).Ekonomisuto November 22: 32 – 35

Kumar, Alok, and Charles M.C. Lee, 2006, “Retail Investor Sentiment and Return
Comovements,” Journal of Finance 61 (5): 2451–2486.

Lee, Charles M.C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, “Investor Sentiment and
the Closed-End Fund Puzzle,” Journal of Finance 46 (1): 75–109.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1997, “Event Studies in Economics and Finance,” Journal of
Economic Literature 35 (1): 13 – 39.

Martin,Philippe, Thierry Mayer, and Mathias Thoenig, 2008, “Make Trade Not War?”
Review of Economic Studies 75 (3): 865 – 900.

Michaels, Guy, and Xiaojia Zhi, 2010, “Freedom Fries,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 2 (3): 256 – 281.

Morse, Adair, and Sophie Shive, 2010, “Patriotism in Your Portfolio?” Journal of
Financial Markets 14 (2): 411-440.

OECD, 2009, Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in Japan.

Qian, Yi, 2011, “Counterfeiters: Foes or Friends,” Working Paper, Kellogg School of
Management, Northwestern University.


                                           38
Stambaugh Robert, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2012, “The Short of It: Investor Sentiment
and Anomalies,” Journal of Financial Economics 104 (2): 288-302.

Teoh, Siew Hong, Ivo Welch, and C. Paul Wazzan, 1999, “The Effect of Socially Activist
Investment Policies on the Financial Markets: Evidence from the South African Boycott,”
Journal of Business 72 (1): 35 – 89.

U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2011, An Analysis of State-
Owned Enterprises and State Capitalism in China.

Wang, Fenghua, and Yexiao Xu, 2005, “What Determines Chinese Stock Returns,”
Financial Analysts Journal 60 (6): 65 – 77.

Weiss, Jessica Chen, 2008, “Powerful Patriots: Nationalism, Diplomacy, and Strategic
Logic of Anti-Foreign Protest in China,” Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, San
Diego.

Yu, Cherry Jie, 2011, “Firms with Chinese Characteristics: The Role of Companies in
Chinese Foreign Policy,” Working Paper, London School of Economics and Political
Science.




                                           39
                                  Figure 1a: Coefficient on Fraction_China_Sales for Japanese firms in CARs regressions around
                                                          Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005)



                             5


                             0
                                                                                                                                                              Date

                             -5
Coefficient on China Sales




                -10


                -15


                -20


                -25


                -30


   Notes: The solid line shows the coefficients on Fraction_China_Sales from the equation CAR_Textbooki = α + β1 Fraction_China_Salesi + β2 Controlsi + i, utilizing
   event windows that begin a week prior to the date we have set as the start of each event, and continuing for two months following each event. That is, each point
   represents a regression coefficient where the outcome variable is cumulative abnormal returns over the window [-7, date]. Broken lines show [0.05, 0.95] confidence
   intervals around the coefficient estimates.




                                                                          40
                                    Figure 1b: Coefficient on Fraction_China_Sales for Japanese firms in CARs regressions around
                                                       Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010)


                              15

                              10
 Coefficient on China Sales




                               5

                               0
                                                                                                                                                     Date
                                     9/13/2010
                                     9/15/2010
                                     9/17/2010
                                     9/22/2010
                                     9/27/2010
                                     9/29/2010
                                     10/1/2010
                                     10/5/2010
                                     10/7/2010




                                     11/1/2010
                                     11/4/2010
                                     11/8/2010




                                     12/1/2010
                                     12/3/2010
                                     12/7/2010
                                     12/9/2010
                                    10/12/2010
                                    10/14/2010
                                    10/18/2010
                                    10/20/2010
                                    10/22/2010
                                    10/26/2010
                                    10/28/2010




                                    11/10/2010
                                    11/12/2010
                                    11/16/2010
                                    11/18/2010
                                    11/22/2010
                                    11/25/2010
                                    11/29/2010




                                    12/13/2010
                                    12/15/2010
                                    12/17/2010
                                    12/21/2010
                                    12/24/2010
                                    12/28/2010
                                    12/30/2010
                                      9/1/2010
                                      9/3/2010
                                      9/7/2010
                                      9/9/2010




                               -5

                              -10

                              -15

                              -20

                              -25

                              -30

                              -35




Notes: The solid line shows the coefficients on Fraction_China_Sales from the equation CAR_Senkakui = α + β1 Fraction_China_Salesi + β2 Controlsi + i, utilizing
event windows that begin a week prior to the date we have set as the start of each event, and continuing for two months following each event. That is, each point
represents a regression coefficient where the outcome variable is cumulative abnormal returns over the window [-7, date]. Broken lines show [0.05, 0.95] confidence
intervals around the coefficient estimates.




                                                                             41
                                       Figure 1c: Coefficient on Fraction_Japan_Exports for Chinese firms in CARs regressions around
                                                               Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005)


                                 20

                                 15

                                 10
  Coefficient on Japan Exports




                                  5
                                                                                                                                                  Date
                                  0

                                  -5

                                 -10

                                 -15

                                 -20

                                 -25

                                 -30



Notes: The solid line shows the coefficients on Fraction_Japan_Exports from the equation CAR_Textbooki = α + β1 Fraction_Japan_Exportsi + β2 Controlsi + i, utilizing
event windows that begin a week prior to the date we have set as the start of each event, and continuing for two months following each event. That is, each point represents
a regression coefficient where the outcome variable is cumulative abnormal returns over the window [-7, date]. Broken lines show [0.05, 0.95] confidence intervals around
the coefficient estimates.


                                                                               42
                                         Figure 1d: Coefficient on Fraction_Japan_Exports for Chinese firms in CARs regressions around
                                                             Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010)




                                30
 Coefficient on Japan Exports




                                20


                                10
                                                                                                                                                                           Date
                                 0



                                                                         10/12/2010
                                                                                      10/14/2010
                                                                                      10/18/2010
                                                                                      10/20/2010
                                                                                                   10/22/2010
                                                                                                   10/26/2010
                                                                                                   10/28/2010




                                                                                                                11/10/2010
                                                                                                                             11/12/2010
                                                                                                                             11/16/2010
                                                                                                                             11/18/2010
                                                                                                                                          11/22/2010
                                                                                                                                          11/25/2010
                                                                                                                                          11/29/2010




                                                                                                                                                                   12/13/2010
                                                                                                                                                                   12/15/2010
                                                                                                                                                                   12/17/2010
                                                                                                                                                                                12/21/2010
                                                                                                                                                                                12/24/2010
                                                                                                                                                                                12/28/2010
                                      9/1/2010
                                      9/3/2010
                                      9/7/2010
                                      9/9/2010
                                                 9/13/2010
                                                 9/15/2010
                                                 9/17/2010
                                                             9/22/2010
                                                             9/27/2010
                                                             9/29/2010
                                                             10/1/2010
                                                                          10/5/2010
                                                                          10/7/2010




                                                                                                    11/1/2010
                                                                                                                 11/4/2010
                                                                                                                 11/8/2010




                                                                                                                                           12/1/2010
                                                                                                                                                       12/3/2010
                                                                                                                                                       12/7/2010
                                                                                                                                                       12/9/2010
                                -10


                                -20


                                -30


                                -40


                                -50




Notes: The solid line shows the coefficients on Fraction_Japan_Exports from the equation CAR_Senkakui = α + β1 Fraction_Japan_Exportsi + β2 Controlsi + i, utilizing
event windows that begin a week prior to the date we have set as the start of each event, and continuing for two months following each event. That is, each point represents
a regression coefficient where the outcome variable is cumulative abnormal returns over the window [-7, date]. Broken lines show [0.05, 0.95] confidence intervals around
the coefficient estimates.

                                                                                              43
                                 Table 1: Summary statistics

                                    Panel A: Japanese firms
Variable                                   Mean        Median            SD          Obs
Event Year: 2005 - Japanese listed firms
TotalAssets (Million Japanese ¥)           361,570        60,615        1,288,634     838
           (Million U.S. $                   3,435           576             12,243 )
TotalSales (Million Japanese ¥)            464,116        72,621          1,666,269   846
           (Million U.S. $                   4,409           690           15,831   )
Fraction_China_Sales                           0.064         0.024            0.096   846
Fraction_China_Assets                          0.055         0.020            0.090   838
Fraction_Others_Sales                          0.153         0.121            0.142   846
Fraction_China_Empl                            0.155         0.081            0.193   489
Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                               0.940         0.873            0.411   807
Leverage                                       0.472         0.469            0.207   834
CAR_Textbook (%)                              -5.816        -6.356            5.813   810
Fraction_Indiv_Japan                           0.010         0.000            0.050   846
Fraction_China_Empl                            0.155         0.081            0.193   489
Consumer_Intensity                             0.188         0.000            0.391   846
Event Year: 2010 - Japanese listed firms
TotalAssets (Million Japanese ¥)            382,867           60,872    1,466,688   896
           (Million U.S. $                    4,685              745       17,946 )
TotalSales (Million Japanese ¥)             400,108           58,493    1,424,914   920
           (Million U.S. $                    4,896              716       17,435 )
Fraction_China_Sales                           0.081            0.048        0.105  920
Fraction_China_Assets                          0.074            0.040        0.135  896
Fraction_Others_Sales                          0.145            0.106        0.147  920
Fraction_China_Empl                            0.165            0.107        0.184  566
Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                               0.700            0.647        0.324  886
Leverage                                       0.459            0.452        0.239  894
CAR_Senkaku (%)                               -3.689           -3.622       11.169  905
Fraction_Indiv_Japan                           0.012            0.000        0.051  895
Fraction_China_Empl                            0.165            0.107        0.184  566
Consumer_Intensity                             0.179            0.000        0.384  920




                                                  44
                                                 Panel B: Chinese firms
 Variable                                              Mean                   Median                      SD               Obs
 Event Year: 2005 - Chinese listed firms
 Total Assets (Million RMB ¥)                                 5,080                    1,430                   32,800     1058
            (Million U.S. $                                     762                      214                    4,919     )
 Fraction_Japan_Exports                                       0.003                    0.000                    0.033     1058
 Fraction_Others_Exports                                     0.0268                    0.000                    0.099     1058
 Drugs_and_Food                                               0.134                    0.000                    0.341     1058
 Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                             0.942                    0.882                    0.238     1037
 Leverage                                                     0.540                    0.503                    0.606     1058
 CAR_Textbook (%)                                            -3.833                   -3.941                   12.188     1058
 Fraction_Indiv_China                                         0.925                    0.987                    0.139     1058
 Consumer_Intensity                                           0.388                    0.000                    0.488     1058
 Event Year: 2010 - Chinese listed firms
 Total Assets (Million RMB ¥)                                14,000                    2,490                 104,000      1025
            (Million U.S. $                                   1,692                      301                  12,566      )
 Fraction_Japan_Exports                                       0.003                    0.000                   0.033      1025
 Fraction_Others_Exports                                      0.027                    0.000                   0.100      1025
 Drugs_and_Food                                               0.134                    0.000                   0.340      1024
 Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                             1.327                    1.207                   0.572      1024
 Leverage                                                     0.815                    0.546                   4.752      1024
 CAR_Senkaku (%)                                              1.485                   -0.098                  13.710      1024
 Fraction_Indiv_China                                         0.683                    0.705                   0.213      1025
 Consumer_Intensity                                            0.392                   0.000                    0.488 1024


Notes: Total Assets is total assets of the listed firm; Total Sales is total sales; Fraction_China_Sales is the ratio of sales in
China to total sales for the sample of Japanese firms; Fraction_China_Assets is the ratio of total assets in China to total assets
for the sample of Japanese firms; Fraction_Others_Sales is the ratio of sales in all the foreign countries other than China to
total sales, for Japanese firms in our sample; Fraction_China_Empl is the ratio of Chinese employees in China to total
employees of Japanese firms; Fraction_Japan_Exports is the ratio of total exports to Japan to total sales for the sample of
Chinese firms; Fraction_Others_Exports is the ratio of exports to all foreign countries other than Japan to total sales, for the
sample of Chinese firms; Drugs_and_Food is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 for Chinese firms in Foods, Drugs, or
Agriculture; Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets; Log(1+Tobin’s Q) is the log value of one plus Tobin’s Q;
CAR_Textbook is the cumulative abnormal return during the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005); CAR_Senkaku
is the cumulative abnormal return during the Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010); Fraction_Indiv is the
ratio of individual ownership to total outstanding shares; Consumer_Intensity is a dummy variable denoting firms mainly
producing consumer-oriented products. In all cases, abnormal return is estimated using a standard Fama-French three-factor
model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. All cumulative abnormal returns are Winsorized at 1%.
Exchange rates are as of March 1. 2005 and October 1, 2010.




                                                                 45
                              Table 2A: SOE-concentration and consumer-intensity
                                                                                       China
   Nikkei                                                                               NBS                                       Percentage
  Industry                                                      SOE_Intensity         Industry       Consumer_Intensity           (Japanese
    Code                 Nikkei Industry Name                  (Chinese Firms)          Code          (Japanese Firms)              Firms)
      1         Foods                                                0.0537             1400                 0.7508                   2.04
      3         Textile Products                                     0.0488             1700                 0.1250                   2.38
      5         Pulp & Paper                                         0.0731             2200                 0.0000                   0.62
      7         Chemicals                                            0.1106             2600                 0.0802                   9.17
      9         Drugs                                                0.0602             2700                 0.5686                   1.47
     11         Petroleum                                            0.1534             2500                 0.0000                   0.57
     13         Rubber Products                                      0.0557             2900                 0.1213                   1.87
     15         Stone, Clay & Glass Products                         0.0895             3100                 0.0500                   2.27
     17         Iron & Steel                                         0.1413             3200                 0.0000                   1.42
     19         Nonferrous Metal & Metal Products                    0.1200             3300                 0.0398                   4.25
     21         Machinery                                            0.0815             3500                 0.0265                  12.80
     23         Electric & Electronic Equipment                      0.0813             3900                 0.1432                  21.35
     25         Shipbuilding & Repairing                             0.0918             3700                 0.0000                   0.23
     27         Motor Vehicles& AutoParts                            0.0918             3700                 0.1653                   7.19
     29         Transportation Equipment                             0.0918             3700                 0.0625                   0.85
     31         Precision Equipment                                  0.0466             4100                 0.1806                   4.08
     33         Other Manufacturing                                  0.1365             2300                 0.4980                   4.42
     37         Mining                                               0.2638             1100                 0.0000                   0.34
     41         Construction                                         0.2616               E                  0.0729                   1.59
     43         Wholesale Trade                                      0.2038             6300                 0.1567                   8.27
     45         Retail Trade                                         0.1115             6500                 1.0000                   1.43
     52         Credit & Leasing                                     0.2434               L                  0.2833                   0.60
     53         Real Estate                                          0.0982             7200                 0.0000                   0.12
     55         Railroad Transportation                              0.3218             5300                 0.5000                   0.06
     57         Trucking                                             0.2041             5200                 0.3429                   0.68
     59         Sea Transportation                                   0.4619             5400                 0.0000                   0.91
     63         Warehousing & Harbor Transportation                  0.5097             5800                 0.0000                   0.96
     65         Communication Services                               0.1260               G                  1.0000                   0.24
     71         Services                                             0.3871             8900                 0.5122                   5.72

Notes: For each industry in the Nikkei Industrial Code (at the 2-digit level), we find the corresponding Chinese industry code adopted by
National Bureau of Statistics in China. SOE_Intensity is the average value of the ratio of total sales by state-owned firms to total sales in each
industry in China in 2004. Sales data by ownership in each industry come from China Economic Census 2004, which covers all firms in
China. Consumer_Intensity is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the firm mainly produces consumer-oriented products, and we use its
average value in 2004. Figures for 2008 (unreported) are similar.




                                                                       46
                        Table 2B: Consumer-intensity: Chinese listed firms

     CSRC                                                                                             Percentage
    Industry                                                                Consumer_Intensity         (Chinese
      Code                         Industry Name                             (Chinese Firms)            Firms)
       A0        Agriculture                                                     0.2830                  2.54
       B0        Mining                                                          0.0571                  1.68
       C0        Foods and drinks                                                0.8333                  4.03
       C1        Textile, Apparel and Fur                                        0.6170                  4.51
       C2        Lumber and furniture                                            0.5000                  0.19
       C3        Paper and printing                                              0.2609                  1.10
       C4        Oil, Chemicals and Plastics                                     0.1084                  9.75
       C5        Electronics                                                     0.1786                  2.69
       C6        Metal and non-metal                                             0.0983                  8.31
       C7        Machinery, apparatus and devices                                0.1636                 13.20
       C8        Medical products and biologicals                                0.7547                  7.63
       C9        Other Manufacturing                                             0.1111                  0.86
       D0        Gas, water and electricity production and supply                0.3636                  5.28
       E0        Construction                                                    0.0816                  2.35
       F0        Transportation                                                  0.3235                  1.63
       F1        Transportation: complementary                                   0.4667                  2.88
       F2        Warehousing                                                     0.0000                  0.10
       G8        Information technology                                          0.2846                  5.90
       H0        Wholesale Trade                                                 0.3636                  1.06
       H1        Retail Trade                                                    0.7400                  4.80
       H2        Business agencies                                               0.3000                  1.92
       I0        Banks                                                           1.0000                  0.48
       I2        Securities and futures                                          1.0000                  0.67
       I3        Trust                                                           1.0000                  0.10
       J0        Real Estate Developing                                          0.9520                  6.00
       K0        Public facilities                                               0.5385                  1.25
       K3        Catering industry                                               0.8333                  1.73
       K9        Other services                                                  1.0000                  0.10
       L0        Publishing                                                      0.5000                  0.29
       L1        Broadcasting and Television                                     0.7500                  0.38
       L2        Information service                                             0.0000                  0.19
       L9        Other culture-related industries                                0.0000                  0.10
       M         Miscellaneous/Unclassified                                      0.2366                  6.29

Notes: This table reports the average of Consumer_Intensity for each Chinese Industry (used by the SEC in China) in 2004.
Consumer_Intensity is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the firm is mainly producing consumer-oriented products, and
we use its average value in 2004. Figures for 2008 (unreported) are similar.




                                                          47
                  Table 3: Regressions of abnormal event returns on China Sales Ratio/China Assets Ratio: Japanese firms
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)             (10)
                                          CAR_           CAR_           CAR_            CAR_            CAR_          CAR_            CAR_           CAR_           CAR_            CAR_
               Dependent variable:       Textbook       Textbook       Textbook        Textbook        Senkaku       Senkaku         Senkaku        Senkaku         Pooled          Pooled

 Fraction_China_Sales                    -7.487***     -8.063***       -7.379***                    -18.191***      -18.136***     -21.645***                      -6.698***
                                          (1.899)        (1.961)         (2.257)                      (4.354)         (4.501)        (4.847)                         (2.305)
 Fraction_China_Assets                                                                -6.544***                                                    -24.459***                       -4.908*
                                                                                        (2.435)                                                      (4.912)                        (2.508)
 Fraction_Others_Sales                                    0.694           1.815                                        -0.718          -0.432                         0.496
                                                         (1.497)         (1.680)                                      (2.835)         (2.993)                       (1.814)
 Log(TotalAssets)                        -0.687***     -0.638***       -0.616***                        0.296           0.367           0.282        -0.125           -0.129        -0.159
                                          (0.138)        (0.139)         (0.133)                       (0.278)        (0.300)         (0.293)        (0.170)         (0.169)       (0.162)
 Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                      -1.922***       -1.832***                                     -4.082**        -3.630**      -2.549***       -2.621***      -2.419***
                                                         (0.676)         (0.682)                                      (1.783)         (1.734)       (0.801)          (0.810)       (0.794)
 Leverage                                               -2.575**        -2.619**                                       -0.702          -0.270        -1.401           -1.543        -1.303
                                                         (1.184)         (1.153)                                      (2.102)         (2.040)       (1.339)          (1.343)       (1.307)
 Fraction_China_Sales × Y2010                                                                                                                                     -15.689***
                                                                                                                                                                     (5.069)
 Fraction_China_Assets × Y2010                                                                                                                                                    -20.688***
                                                                                                                                                                                    (5.171)
 Constant                                -5.347***        2.337      4.538***          4.409***      -2.225***        -5.424*        -2.767           -2.396         0.674           0.741
                                          (0.244)        (1.605)      (1.583)           (1.579)       (0.486)         (3.231)       (3.290)          (3.246)        (1.947)         (1.922)
 Sample                                                  2005 Textbook Event                                           2010 Senkaku Event                           Pooled          Pooled
 Industry Fixed Effects                                              Included          Included                                   Included         Included
 Industry × Year Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                     Included        Included
 Number of Observations                     810            804            800             800            905           882            878             878            1,678           1,678
 R-squared                                 0.012          0.044          0.085           0.079          0.027         0.027          0.048           0.058           0.062           0.070

Notes: CAR_Textbook is the cumulative abnormal return of the Japanese listed firms during the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005); CAR_Senkaku is the cumulative
abnormal return of the Japanese listed firms during the Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010); and CAR_Pooled is equal to CAR_Textbook if year = 2005, and
CAR_Senkaku if year = 2010. Fraction_China_Sales is the ratio of sales in China to total sales for the sample of Japanese firms; Fraction_China_Assets is the ratio of total assets in China
to total assets; Fraction_Others_Sales is the ratio of sales in all the foreign countries other than China to total sales, for Japanese firms in the sample; Log(TotalAssets) is the log of total
assets of the firm; Log(1+Tobin’s Q) is the log value of one plus Tobin’s Q; Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets; Fixed effects are at the Nikkei Industry Code level (2-
digit SIC equivalent). In all cases, abnormal return is estimated using a standard Fama-French three-factor model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level in pooled regressions. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                                                                  48
                                   Table 4 : Regressions of abnormal event returns on export to Japan: Chinese firms
                                                     (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
                                                   CAR_               CAR_              CAR_               CAR_            CAR_              CAR_               CAR_               CAR_
                      Dependent variable:         Textbook           Textbook          Textbook           Senkaku         Senkaku           Senkaku             Pooled             Pooled


 Fraction_Japan_Exports                           -8.745**          -17.079**         -42.747**           -11.454*         -13.279           -13.980           -32.155*           -48.937*
                                                   (3.791)            (7.784)          (20.582)           (6.805)          (8.779)           (8.734)           (17.445)           (28.881)
 Fraction_Others_Exports                                            13.331***         13.571***                             0.361             0.354            6.858**             1.447
                                                                      (4.884)           (4.784)                            (3.965)           (3.969)            (3.043)           (5.407)
 Log(TotalAssets)                                                    2.410***          2.878***                             0.291             -0.067           1.170***            -0.341
                                                                      (0.416)           (0.498)                            (0.314)           (0.430)            (0.320)           (1.315)
 Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                                                       3.997*                                                -1.051             0.932             -2.332
                                                                                        (2.323)                                              (1.261)            (1.084)           (3.223)
 Leverage                                                                               -1.770                                                -0.039            -0.104             -0.312
                                                                                        (1.236)                                              (0.100)            (0.095)           (0.302)
 Fraction_Japan_Exports × Y2010                                                                                                                                 18.604             32.996
                                                                                                                                                               (17.468)           (27.539)
 Constant                                         -3.804***         -55.164***        -67.812***         1.524***           -4.789            4.414           -27.365***           10.598
                                                   (0.377)            (8.837)          (11.741)           (0.431)          (6.842)          (10.483)            (7.620)           (31.229)
 Sample                                                       2005 Textbook Event                                    2010 Senkaku Event                         Pooled             Pooled
 Fixed Effects                                       Year             Year        Industry & Year           Year            Year        Industry & Year              Industry × Year
 Number of Observations                              1,058            1,058            1,036                1,024           1,023            1,023               2,059            254
 R-squared                                          -0.000            0.133            0.141               -0.000           0.162            0.162               0.095           0.034

Notes: CAR_Textbook is the cumulative abnormal return of the Chinese listed firm during the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005); CAR_Senkaku is the cumulative abnormal
return of the Chinese listed firms during the Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010); and CAR_Pooled is equal to CAR_Textbook if year = 2005, and CAR_Senkaku if
year = 2010. Fraction_Japan_Exports is the ratio of total exports to Japan to total sales for the sample of Chinese firms; Fraction_Others_Exports is the ratio of exports to all foreign
countries other than Japan to total sales, for the sample of Chinese firms; Log(TotalAssets) is the log of total assets of the firm; Log(1+Tobin’s Q) is the log value of one plus Tobin’s Q;
Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. In column (8), we restrict our sample to firms that have non-zero export to Japan. In all cases, abnormal return is estimated using a
standard Fama-French three-factor model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level
in pooled regressions. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                                                                   49
      Table 5: Identifying the mechanisms (Japanese firms): Government intervention or
                                    consumer sentiment?
                                                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)                        (4)
                                                                           Dependent Variable: CAR_Pooled

Fraction_China_Sales                                  7.742               -6.862***               -5.165*                  2.833
                                                     (5.462)               (2.355)                (3.099)                 (6.258)
Fraction_China_Sales × SOE_Intensity              -109.841***                                                            -62.369
                                                    (37.692)                                                             (40.788)
SOE_Intensity                                        -3.953                                                                1.952
                                                    (14.287)                                                             (12.583)
Fraction_China_Sales ×
Consumer_Intensity                                                          2.873                                           2.153
                                                                           (7.747)                                        (9.000)
Consumer_Intensity                                                          0.313                                          -0.926
                                                                           (0.907)                                        (1.111)
Fraction_China_Empl                                                                             5.594*                      2.690
                                                                                                (3.018)                   (1.726)
Fraction_Others_Sales                                 0.990                  0.444              2.915*                      0.337
                                                     (1.858)               (1.835)              (1.763)                   (2.201)
Log(TotalAssets)                                      -0.132                -0.150               -0.304                    0.225
                                                     (0.169)               (0.174)              (2.106)                   (0.221)
Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                    -2.560***             -2.629***              0.195                  -3.296***
                                                     (0.803)               (0.813)              (0.217)                   (1.017)
Leverage                                              -1.596                -1.546            -3.425***                    -1.702
                                                     (1.346)               (1.340)              (1.025)                   (1.743)
Fraction_China_Sales × Y2010                       -19.922***            -15.726***            -12.140*                 -14.310**
                                                     (5.020)               (5.061)              (6.215)                   (6.074)
Constant                                              1.002                  0.856               -3.178                    -3.710
                                                     (2.499)               (2.011)              (2.432)                   (2.912)
Fixed Effects                                                                      Industry × Year
Number of Observations                                 1,670                 1,678               1,030                     1,025
R-squared                                              0.066                 0.061               0.048                     0.049

Notes: Dependent variable in all columns is CAR_Pooled, for the sample of Japanese listed firms, which is equal to
CAR_Textbook for year = 2005, and CAR_Senkaku for year = 2010, and CAR_Textbook is the cumulative abnormal return during
the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005), and CAR_Senkaku is the cumulative abnormal return during the Senkaku
Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010); Fraction_China_Sales is the ratio of sales in China to total sales for the sample
of Japanese firms; SOE_Intensity is average value of the ratio of total sales by state-owned firms to total sales in each industry in
China; Consumer_Intensity is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the firm is mainly producing consumer-oriented products;
Fraction_China_Empl is the ratio of Chinese employees in China to total employees of Japanese firms; Fraction_Others_Sales is
the ratio of sales in all the foreign countries other than China to total sales, for Japanese firms; Log(TotalAssets) is the log of total
assets of the firm; Log(1+Tobin’s Q) is the log value of one plus Tobin’s Q; Fraction_China_Sales is the ratio of sales in China to
total sales for each Japanese firm in the sample; Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Fixed effects are at the
Nikkei Industry Code level (2-digit SIC equivalent). In all cases, abnormal return is estimated using a standard Fama-French
three-factor model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                50
Table 6: The Long-term Effect on Imports by Chinese State firms versus Private Firms

                                        (1)                    (2)                 (3)                                   (4)
                                                      Dependent variable: JPN_Import_Rate

 State                           -0.051***                  -0.058***                      0.000                      0.000
                                   (0.004)                    (0.006)                     (0.000)                    (0.000)
 State × After                      -0.007                    -0.009*                     -0.007*                    -0.009*
                                   (0.004)                    (0.005)                     (0.004)                    (0.005)
 Constant                         0.675***                   0.692***                    0.651***                   0.664***
                                   (0.004)                    (0.005)                     (0.003)                    (0.004)
 Fixed effects                  HS and Month               HS and Month                 HS × Month                 HS × Month
                                                            Thick-trade                                            Thick-trade
 Sample                               Full                   Products                        Full                   Products
 Observations                       310,041                   117,000                      310,041                   117,000
 Adjusted R-squared                  0.500                     0.606                        0.574                     0.688


Notes: The dataset we use here is a monthly firm-HS level import by all Chinese firms from Japan and the U.S. for the period of
2004 – 2006. JPN_Import_Rate is the ratio of Japanese imports to the sum of Japanese and U.S. imports at the HS-State-month
level. State is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the importer is a state-owned firm; After is a dummy variable that is equal to
1 if the import date is after March 2005 (i.e., the history textbook event). In columns (2) and (4), we limit the sample just to those
industries with “thick” trade such that in each month-industry in the sample, there is non-zero importation for both private and
SOE importers from either Japan or the U.S. In all regressions, we control for firm-type time trends. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the HS 8-digit level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.




                                                                 51
      Table 7: Identifying the mechanisms (Chinese firms): Government Intervention or
                                    consumer sentiment?
                                                                          (1)                     (2)                          (3)
                                                                                   Dependent Variable: CAR_Pooled
Fraction_Japan_Exports                                                -33.968*                    -26.080*                 -27.765*
                                                                        (17.548)                  (15.774)                 (15.840)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Drugs_and_Food                                 55.122                                              68.130
                                                                        (63.993)                                           (65.666)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Consumer_Intensity                                                        -31.015                 -33.846
                                                                                                  (23.995)                 (23.946)
Consumer_Intensity                                                                                 -0.218                   -0.222
                                                                                                   (0.740)                  (0.738)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Y2010                                          19.693                     38.727                   41.910
                                                                        (17.436)                  (28.083)                 (27.896)
Fraction_Other_Exports                                                  6.750**                   6.348**                   6.142*
                                                                        (3.073)                    (3.121)                  (3.169)
Log(TotalAssets)                                                     1.151***                     1.168***                1.149***
                                                                        (0.320)                    (0.321)                  (0.321)
Log(1+Tobin's Q)                                                         0.776                      0.955                    0.806
                                                                        (1.095)                    (1.085)                  (1.095)
Leverage                                                                -0.093                     -0.106                   -0.096
                                                                        (0.096)                    (0.095)                  (0.096)
Constant                                                            -27.389***                  -27.263***               -27.294***
                                                                        (7.626)                    (7.631)                  (7.636)
Fixed Effects                                                                              Industry × Year
Number of Observations                                                   2,059                      2,059                    2,059
R-squared                                                                0.177                      0.176                    0.177

Notes: Dependent variable in all columns is CAR_Pooled, for the sample of Japanese listed firms, which is equal to
CAR_Textbook for year = 2005, and CAR_Senkaku for year = 2010, and CAR_Textbook is the cumulative abnormal return
during the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005), and CAR_Senkaku is the cumulative abnormal return during the
Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010); Fraction_Japan_Exports is the ratio of total exports to Japan to total
sales of each Chinese firm; Drugs_and_Food is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 for Chinese firms in Foods, Drugs, or
Agriculture; Drugs_and_Food is a dummy denoting whether the Chinese firm is in the following industries: Foods, Drugs, and
Agriculture; Consumer_Intensity is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the firm mainly produces consumer-oriented
products; Fraction_Others_Exports is the ratio of exports to all foreign countries other than Japan to total sales, for the sample
of Chinese firms; Log(TotalAssets) is the log of total assets of the firm; Log(1+Tobin’s Q) is the log value of one plus Tobin’s
Q; Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Fixed effects are at the 2-digit SIC level. In all cases, abnormal return is
estimated using a standard Fama-French three-factor model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                   52
                                          Table 8: Investor sentiment and stock returns: Japanese firms
                                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)            (4)          (5)
                                                                                    Dependent Variable: CAR_Pooled

Fraction_China_Sales                                             -4.531*          -4.667*            -4.619*          -4.725*      -5.224**
                                                                 (2.437)          (2.451)            (2.446)          (2.427)       (2.385)
Fraction_China_Sales × Fraction_Indiv_Japan                   -162.443***
                                                                (32.709)
Fraction_indiv                                                    8.379
                                                                 (9.894)
Fraction_Other_Sales                                              0.594             0.815              0.709            0.454       0.442
                                                                 (1.782)           (1.802)           (1.812)          (1.788)      (1.788)
Log(TotalAssets)                                                  -0.153            -0.213            -0.185           -0.144       -0.121
                                                                 (0.178)           (0.173)           (0.177)          (0.177)      (0.176)
Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                               -2.329***          -2.138***         -2.243***        -2.379***    -2.479***
                                                                 (0.830)           (0.817)           (0.820)          (0.830)      (0.829)
Leverage                                                          -1.642            -1.600            -1.567           -1.585       -1.577
                                                                 (1.315)           (1.310)           (1.311)          (1.314)      (1.325)
Fraction_China_Sales × Y2010                                   -11.521**          -11.291**         -11.407**        -11.450**    -11.564**
                                                                 (4.956)           (4.860)           (4.849)          (4.838)      (4.881)
Fraction_China_Sales × I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 1)                               -35.265***
                                                                                   (8.160)
I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 1)                                                         0.243
                                                                                   (1.715)
Fraction_China_Sales × I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 5)                                                 -36.094***
                                                                                                     (8.150)
I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 5)                                                                           1.046
                                                                                                     (1.806)
Fraction_China_Sales × I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan 10)                                                                    -36.805***
                                                                                                                       (8.307)
I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 10)                                                                                            2.138
                                                                                                                       (2.027)
Fraction_China_Sales × I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 20)                                                                               -35.090***



                                                                        53
                                     Table 8: Investor sentiment and stock returns: Japanese firms (continued)

I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > 20)                                                                                                                                                 2.722
                                                                                                                                                                            (2.321)
Constant                                                                          0.464                      1.004                  0.731                0.401               0.222
                                                                                 (2.021)                    (1.984)                (2.011)              (2.011)             (2.007)
Fixed Effects                                                                                                           Industry × Year
Number of Observations                                                           1,678                       1,678                  1,678                1,678               1,678
Adjusted R-squared                                                               0.077                       0.079                  0.078                0.077               0.074

Notes: Dependent variable in all columns is CAR_Pooled, for the sample of Japanese listed firms, which is equal to CAR_Textbook for year = 2005, and CAR_Senkaku for year
= 2010, and CAR_Textbook is the cumulative abnormal return during the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005), and CAR_Senkaku is the cumulative abnormal return
during the Senkaku Event (September 7, 2010 to October 29, 2010); Fraction_China_Sales is the ratio of sales in China to total sales for each Japanese firm;
Fraction_Indiv_Japan is the ratio of individual ownership to all outstanding shares; I(Fraction_Indiv_Japan > p) is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if individual
ownership is larger than p%; Fraction_Others_Sales is the ratio of sales in all the foreign countries other than China to total sales, for Japanese firms in the sample; Leverage is
the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Fixed effects are at the Nikkei Industry Code level (2-digit SIC equivalent). In all cases, abnormal return is estimated using a standard
Fama-French three-factor model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                           54
 Table 9A: The Long-term Effect on Profits: Japanese Firms
                                                           (1)               (2)
                            Dependent variable:          ROA(t+1)          ROA(t+1)

I(year ≥ 2005) × Fraction_China_Sales                    -0.048***      -0.041**
                                                          (0.018)        (0.018)
Log(TotalAssets)                                         -0.039***     -0.042***
                                                          (0.009)        (0.009)
I(year ≥ 2005)                                           0.021***        -0.019
                                                          (0.003)        (0.014)
Fraction_China_Sales                                       0.017          0.016
                                                          (0.036)        (0.036)
I(year ≥ 2005) × Log(TotalAssets)                                       0.003***
                                                                         (0.001)
Constant                                                  0.446***      0.476***
                                                           (0.102)       (0.100)
Time Period                                                     2002 ─ 2008
                                                           Firm &        Firm &
Fixed Effects                                               Year          Year
Number of Observations                                      5,584         5,584
Adjusted R-squared                                          0.489         0.490

Notes: Dependent variable is ROA in year t+1. Fraction_China_Sales is the ratio of
sales in China to total sales of the Japanese firms; Log(TotalAssets) is the log of total
assets of the firm; I(year ≥ 2005) is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for years
after 2005. In all regressions, we also control for firm leverage. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the firm level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                           55
     Table 9B: The Long-term Effect on profits: Chinese Firms
                                                              (1)                   (2)
                           Dependent variable:              ROA(t+1)              ROA(t+1)

I(year ≥ 2005) × Fraction_Japan_Exports                       -0.132           -0.131
                                                             (0.103)          (0.104)
I(year ≥ 2005)                                               0.013**           0.000
                                                             (0.006)          (0.000)
Fraction_Japan_Exports                                         0.000            0.000
                                                             (0.000)          (0.000)
Log(Assets)                                                 -0.037***       -0.029***
                                                             (0.006)          (0.007)
I(year ≥ 2005) × Log(TotalAssets)                                           -0.008***
                                                                              (0.003)
Constant                                                     0.835***        0.663***
                                                              (0.133)         (0.149)
Time Period                                                        2002 ─ 2008
Fixed Effects                                              Firm & Year     Firm & Year
Number of Observations                                         5,331            5,331
Adjusted R-squared                                             0.313            0.315

Notes: Dependent variables is ROA in year t+1; Fraction_Japan_Exports is the ratio of total
exports to Japan to total sales of the Chinese firms; I(year ≥ 2005) is an indicator variable that
is equal to 1 for years after 2005; Log(TotalAssets) is the log of total assets of the firm. In all
regressions, we control for firm leverage. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level,
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.




                                                  56
Appendix A: Sino-Japanese economic and political relations

       China and Japan have had a unique relationship spanning over a thousand years. Japan

imported Chinese characters along with other advanced skills as early as 60 A.D., and indeed

China was often the source of new technologies and ideas for Japan. The Japanese have

experienced eras of deep Chinese influence – when Chinese culture became a model for the

Japanese – alternating with more independent periods. In the late nineteenth century, however,

after the Edo era of inward-looking Japanese culture that reduced foreign influence in general,

the country turned to study advanced technologies and political structures from Western nations,

further untethering it from Chinese influence.

       Concurrent with this shift away from China, a rapidly industrializing and militarized

Japan confronted China in two Sino-Japan Wars (1894 – 1895 and 1937 – 1945), including the

infamous Nanjing Massacre of 1937. This was part of a longer chapter of Western colonization

in Chinese history that followed the Qing dynasty, tellingly referred to as the “100 years of

humiliation.” Following World War II, Japan became an American ally, going under the security

umbrella of the United States. Relations between China and Japan were cut off until after

Nixon’s 1972 trip to China, which was followed seven months later by a visit from Japanese

Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka, who began the process of re-establishing diplomatic relations.

       During the 1970s and 1980s, China remained relatively unimportant as a trade partner for

Japan, sharing less than 4 percent of Japan’s trade volume (import + export); by comparison the

U.S. accounted for 20 percent of Japanese trade. In the 1990s, China’s share of Japanese trade

grew rapidly as economic reforms took hold; It surpassed the U.S. as Japan’s largest trade

partner in 2006 and by 2009 accounted for 25 percent of Japanese trade volume, compared to 14



                                                 57
percent for the U.S.23 For China, Japan is its second-largest trade partner ($298 billion in 2009)

after the U.S. ($385 billion).24 Economic ties have also been strengthened through investment

channels. According to the 2009 – 2010 edition of “Chûgoku Shinshutsu Kigyô Ichiran: Jôjô

Kaisha Hen (Almanac of Companies Doing Business in China: Listed Firms Volume),” over

1,800 Japanese listed firms (out of about 3,000) have over 6,300 Chinese subsidiaries.25

        On the other hand, the long history of close relations has often been characterized by

hostilities. Each December, Japan’s Cabinet Office conducts an opinion survey that includes the

question, “Do you feel China is friendly or unfriendly?” The results indicate that in the 1970s

and early 1980s, Japanese sentiment toward China was largely favorable: about 75 percent of

respondents answered “friendly”. This period is often described as an era of “Ping-Pong

Diplomacy” or “Panda Diplomacy” – China was regarded by Japanese as a benign presence. A

worsening of Japanese sentiment toward China occurred only in 1989, the year of the Tian’An

Men Square event, followed by a further deterioration in 2004 – 2005 and 2010, coincident with

the two cases we describe in further detail below: In 2005, only 32 percent of respondents

described China as friendly, and by 2010, the figure had dropped to 20 percent.

        A 2005 survey on attitudes in both countries, conducted by Genron (a Japanese Not-for-

Profit Organization), the China Daily, and Beijing University provides an indication of the

depths of these unfriendly sentiments. Among Chinese respondents, the most common

association with “Japan” was “Nanjing Massacre” and 60 percent of respondents listed

Militarism as the dominant political ideology of Japan (Kudô 2005). Yet the survey also


23
   Japanese Customs data, http://www.customs.go.jp/toukei/suii/html/time.htm
24
   The U.S. – China Business Council data, http://www.uschina.org/statistics/tradetable.html
25
   The same almanac for unlisted Japanese firms (2007 – 2008 Edition) shows 4,700 Japanese unlisted firms have
over 8,400 Chinese subsidiaries.


                                                       58
highlighted the strength of economic ties between the two countries – after “Nanjing Massacre,”

the second most common association with “Japan” amongst surveyed Chinese was “Electronics”

and the second most common characteristic used to describe Japanese character was “diligence”

(ranked just behind “cruel and likes to go to war”).




                                                59
  Appendix Table 1: Investor sentiment and stock returns: Chinese
                               firms

                                                                 (1)                       (2)
                                                               Dependent variable: CAR_Pooled

Fraction_Japan_Exports                                         17.231                    48.642
                                                              (217.029)                 (242.387)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Drugs_and_Food                                                  63.193
                                                                                        (68.985)
Drugs_and_Food                                                                           4.408**
                                                                                         (1.854)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Consumer_Intensity                                              -35.893
                                                                                        (28.812)
Consumer_Intensity                                                                       -0.189
                                                                                         (0.739)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Fraction_Indiv_China                  -50.369                   -77.079
                                                              (226.746)                 (246.043)
Fraction_Indiv_China                                            1.259                     1.313
                                                               (1.923)                   (1.927)
Fraction_Others_Exports                                        0.069**                   0.061*
                                                               (0.031)                   (0.033)
Log(Total Assets)                                             1.247***                  1.227***
                                                               (0.340)                   (0.341)
Log(1+Tobin’s Q)                                                1.018                     0.890
                                                               (1.094)                   (1.104)
Leverage                                                       -0.108                    -0.099
                                                               (0.096)                   (0.096)
Y2010                                                           0.000                     0.000
                                                               (0.000)                   (0.000)
Fraction_Japan_Exports × Y2010                                  5.674                    23.008
                                                              (59.254)                  (56.593)
Constant                                                     -30.130***                -30.132***
                                                               (8.707)                   (8.700)
Fixed Effects
Number of Observations                                          2,059                     2,059
Adjusted R-squared                                              0.175                     0.176

Notes: Dependent variable in all columns is CAR_Pooled, for the sample of Chinese listed firms, which is
equal to CAR_Textbook for year = 2005, and CAR_Senkaku for year = 2010, and CAR_Textbook is the
cumulative abnormal return during the Textbook Event (April 5, 2005 to April 28, 2005), and
CAR_Senkaku is the cumulative abnormal return during the Senkaku Event (Sept 7, 2010 to Oct
29, 2010); Fraction_Japan_Exports is the ratio of total exports to Japan to total sales of each
Chinese firm; Fraction_Others_Exports is the ratio of exports to all foreign countries other than
Japan to total sales, for the sample of Chinese firms; Drugs_and_Food is a dummy denoting
whether the Chinese firm is in the following industries: Foods, Drugs, and Agriculture;
Fraction_Indiv_China is the ratio of individual ownership to total outstanding shares;
Consumer_Intensity is a dummy variable denoting firms mainly producing consumer-oriented
products; Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Fixed effects are at the 2-digit
SIC level. In all cases, abnormal return is estimated using a standard Fama-French three-factor
model using [-150, -30] trading days as the estimation window. Robust standard errors, clustered
at the firm level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

                                                  60
