NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ELECTORAL RULES AND THE QUALITY OF POLITICIANS:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN AFGHANISTAN
Andrew Beath
Fotini Christia
Georgy Egorov
Ruben Enikolopov
Working Paper 20082
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20082
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We thank Ernesto Dal Bó, Hülya Eraslan, Horacio Larreguy, Tommaso Nannicini, Mattias Polborn,
Mohamed Saleh, and participants of the NBER Summer Institute Political Economy Public Finance
meeting, Priorat Workshop on Bargaining and Politics, Political Economy in the Chicago Area conference
and Elections and Electoral Institutions conference in Toulouse for helpful comments. The authors
would like to acknowledge the generous cooperation and assistance provided by H. E. Wais Barmak,
Tariq Ismati, and Abdul Rahman Ayubi of the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation of the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan; Ehsan Zia; staff of AfghanAid, C.H.A., InterCooperation,
IRC, NPO/RRRAA, Oxfam UK, and People-in-Need; and Philippe Dongier, Susanne Holste, Qazi
Azmat Isa, Zishan Karim, Norman Piccioni, and Mio Takada of the World Bank. We thank Anna Belonog
and Denis Shishkin for excellent research assistance and Hamidullah Gharibzada, Shahim Kabuli,
and Maiwand Siddiqi for excellent oversight of data collection. Data collection was supported by the
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
through the National Solidarity Programme. Additional financial and logistical support for the study
was provided by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations and the World Bank.
Fotini Christia acknowledges support from ARO MURI award No. W911NF-12-1-0509. Ruben Enikolopov
acknowledges financial support from the Center for the Study of Diversity and Social Interactions
at NES and financial support through Deutsche Bank Membership during his stay at IAS. Andrew
Beath was a consultant for the World Bank during the data collection process and was a staff member
of the World Bank thereafter. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
are entirely those of the authors and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to
its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors, the countries they
represent, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility for any consequence
of their use.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrew Beath, Fotini Christia, Georgy Egorov, and Ruben Enikolopov. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Electoral Rules and the Quality of Politicians: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment
in Afghanistan
Andrew Beath, Fotini Christia, Georgy Egorov, and Ruben Enikolopov
NBER Working Paper No. 20082
May 2014
JEL No. D72,D78
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of electoral rules on the quality of elected officials using a unique field experiment
which induced randomized variation in the method of council elections in 250 villages in Afghanistan.
In particular, we compare at-large elections, with a single multi-member district, to district elections,
with multiple single member districts. We propose a theoretical model where the difference in the
quality of elected officials between the two electoral systems occurs because elected legislators have
to bargain over policy, which induces citizens in district elections to vote strategically for candidates
with more polarized policy positions even at the expense of candidates' competence. Consistent with
the predictions of the model, we find that elected officials in at-large elections are more educated than
those in district elections and that this effect is stronger in more heterogeneous villages. We also find
evidence that elected officials in district elections have more biased preferences.
Andrew Beath
World Bank
One Global Place, 26th Floor
5th Ave. corner 25th St.,
Bonifacio Global City
Taguig City 1634
Philippines
abeath@worldbank.org
Fotini Christia
Department of Political Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
fotini.christia@gmail.com

Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Ruben Enikolopov
Barcelona IPEG
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona GSE, New Economic School
Edif. Mercè Rodoreda 23.105 (IPEG)
C/ Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona, Spain
ruben.enikolopov@upf.edu

1

Introduction

Electoral systems constitute a fundamental aspect of constitutional arrangements. To date, numerous studies have assessed the eﬀect of electoral systems on electoral and policy outcomes (see, e.g.,
Cox, 1997; Norris, 2004; Persson and Tabellini, 2000, 2005). Particular attention has been focused
on how electoral systems alter political incentives and representation. However, the diﬃculty of
identifying exogenous sources of variation in electoral systems has limited the ability of studies to
make causal inferences. This paper contributes to the literature by exploiting a field experiment to
causally identify the eﬀect of electoral systems, specifically focusing on the understudied question
of how diﬀerences in systems aﬀect the quality of elected oﬃcials.1 .
The paper combines a theoretical model with a field experiment that induced randomized variation in electoral rules for local council elections across 250 villages in Afghanistan. Specifically,
councils were elected using one of two alternative systems with large diﬀerences in district magnitude. Per the “district election” system, the village is divided into several single-member districts
and candidates are elected from each district separately, with villagers only voting for those candidates who live within their assigned district. Per the “at-large election” system, the whole village
constitutes one multi-member district, so that council members are elected based on the number
of votes garnered across the whole village, with villagers having no restrictions for whom they can
vote. Under both electoral rules, all villagers are automatically considered candidates.
The theoretical model considers a linear village with a uniform distribution of villagers. The
location of a villager’s home corresponds to his/her ideal point for the location of a public good
(e.g., a drinking well). In line with the experiment, we consider a citizen-candidate model with no
entry costs for the candidates. Voters elect a two-member council in which oﬃcials bargain over
a joint policy decision. In at-large elections, each citizen has two votes and can vote for any two
candidates.2 In district elections, the village is split geographically into two districts, and each
citizen can vote for a candidate residing in the same district. The number of competent citizens
is assumed to be small and voters thereby trade-oﬀ candidates’ policy preferences with candidates’
1

See theoretical work by Myerson (1993) for a notable exception. The importance of political selection, though
emphasized as equally important as political accountability as early as the Federalist papers (Madison, 1788), has
been largely “neglected” (see Besley, 2005, p. 44).
2
This is in line with Cox (1984), who was the first to study double member districts formally. The diﬀerence is
that in Cox (1984), voters vote sincerely and candidates choose positions strategically; here, voters are strategic, but
candidates’ positions are fixed (and tied to their locations).

2

quality. The model predicts that, in district elections, voters prefer candidates with more extreme
preferences over competent candidates, as they expect them to achieve a better outcome in the
bargaining game against candidates elected from other districts. In at-large elections, voters are
less bound by strategic bias considerations and are thus more willing to elect competent candidates.
The diﬀerence between the two electoral systems becomes more pronounced in villages with more
heterogeneous policy preferences.
The predictions of the theoretical model prove to be consistent with the empirical evidence
provided by the field experiment. In particular, we find that at-large elections result in the election
of council members with higher levels of education.3 The eﬀect is strong in heterogeneous villages
(as measured by the divergence of villagers’ ex-ante policy preferences, the geographic size of
villages, and ethnic composition) and is absent in homogenous villages. We also find evidence that
district elections result in the election of council members with more extreme policy preferences, as
proxied by the location of their houses. We show that the results are not consistent with a number
of alternative explanations. In particular, they are not driven by restrictions on the number of
qualified candidates that can be elected from the same district or by diﬀerences in incumbency
advantage.
This paper contributes to an extensive literature analyzing the eﬀects of electoral systems in
general and district magnitude in particular. Previous studies have observed that the number of
candidates increases with district magnitude (Duverger, 1956; Cox, 1997; Norris, 2004) and that
proportional representation, which is characterized by high district magnitude, is more favorable
to minorities (Lijphart, 2004), although this eﬀect depends on the geographic concentration of
minorities (Moser, 2008), their social status (Moser and Scheiner, 2012), as well as the size of the
minority (Trebbi, Aghion, and Alesina, 2007). Studies generally argue that single-member district
systems result in better representation of geographically-concentrated interests, with high-threshold
proportional representation systems favoring geographically-dispersed interests (Ferree, Powell, and
Scheiner, 2013).4
3
Existing literature suggests that education is an appropriate measure for the quality of politicians, as highly
educated public oﬃcials are less likely to use power opportunistically (Besley, Pande, and Rao, 2005), are more likely
to promote higher economic growth (Besley, Montalvo, and Reynal-Querol, 2010), and provide higher quality of public
goods (Martinez-Bravo, 2013).
4
Persson and Tabellini (1999, 2000) and Persson, Tabellini, and Trebbi (2003) argue that proportional systems with
high district magnitude lead to higher levels of political rent extraction. Such systems also favor bigger governments
and higher levels of redistribution (Iversen and Soskice, 2006; Persson and Tabellini, 2004). Other works that look

3

While there is an extensive theoretical literature that examines the determinants of the quality
of politicians (McKelvey and Reizman, 1992; Banks and Sundaram, 1998; Aragones and Palfrey,
2004; Caselli and Morelli, 2004; Mattozzi and Merlo, 2007; Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin, 2010;
Egorov and Sonin 2011), only Myerson (1993) considers the eﬀect of electoral system, arguing
that small district magnitude together with strategic voting increases the barriers to entry in the
electoral system, which in turn has a negative eﬀect on the quality of politicians.5 The empirical
literature on the determinants of the quality of public oﬃcials finds that it is positively aﬀected
by increasing intra-party competition (Besley, Folke, Persson, and Rickne, 2013; Folke, Persson,
and Rickne, 2014) as well as inter-party competition (Banerjee and Pande, 2007), and by higher
wages (Ferraz and Finan, 2011; Dal Bó, Finan, and Rossi, 2013; Gagliarducci and Nannicini, 2013),
whereas higher budgets attract polticians of lower quality (Brollo, Nannicini, Perotti, and Tabellini,
2013). However, except for the finding that democracies are more likely to select highly educated
leaders (Besley and Reynal-Querol, 2011), there is no evidence on the eﬀect of political institutions
on the quality of politicians.
In contrast with previous works, this paper combines an original theoretical model with a largesample field experiment. The model makes a theoretical contribution by showing that electoral
rules can aﬀect the quality of elected oﬃcials even in the absence of entry barriers, party politics,
or specific assumptions about the sizes and preferences of the minority groups. The paper also
provides an empirical contribution by providing what is, to the best of our knowledge, the first
experimental evidence on the causal eﬀects of electoral rules.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the experimental design; Section
3 describes the theoretical model; Section 4 formulates empirical predictions from the model; Section
5 describes the data; Section 6 details the empirical results; Section 7 discusses the empirical and
theoretical findings; and Section 8 concludes. The paper contains three web appendices: Appendix
A contains extensions of the baseline model and explores robustness of predictions; Appendix B
contains all the proofs; and Appendix C contains additional empirical results.
at the eﬀect of electoral rules on the composition of government spending include Lizzeri and Persico (2001) and
Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti and Rostagno (2002).
5
See also Adams (1996), who considers the eﬀect of a constitutional change in Illinois in 1980 on business friendliness of state legislators.

4

2

Experimental Design

We examine the eﬀect of electoral rules on the quality of elected oﬃcials using a field experiment, which randomized variation in the method of council elections in 250 villages in Afghanistan.
This intervention was part of an impact evaluation of the National Solidarity Program (NSP) that
randomized assignment of not only electoral rules, but also project selection procedures (Beath,
Christia and Enikolopov, 2013b), as well as the program itself (Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov,
2012, 2013a). This section provides further details on NSP (subsection 2.1), describes the variation in electoral rules induced across the 250 villages (subsection 2.3), details the sample and
randomization procedures (subsection 2.4), and discusses the timing of the intervention and the
data collection process (subsection 2.5).

2.1

Setting

Elections of village development councils are mandated by the National Solidarity Program (NSP),
which was devised in 2002 by the Government of Afghanistan to deliver services and infrastructure
to the country’s rural population and build representative institutions for village governance. NSP
has been implemented in over 32,000 villages in all of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces and has disbursed
over $1.1 billion, making it the largest development program in Afghanistan. The program is
structured around two interventions: (i) the creation of an elected Community Development Council
(CDC); and (ii) the disbursement of block grants to councils for implementation of village projects.
The program is executed by the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, facilitated by
contracted NGOs, and funded by bilateral and multilateral donors.
NSP mandates the creation of gender-balanced village development councils through a secretballot, universal suﬀrage election.6 Once councils are formed, NSP disburses block grants valued
at $200 per household, up to a village maximum of $60,000, to fund local development projects,7
with villages required to contribute at least 10 percent of project costs, which they largely do in
the form of labor. Projects are selected by the council in consultation with the village community.
Projects are ordinarily focused on either the construction or rehabilitation of infrastructure, such
6
Note that this is the first time that the population is participating in a local election. Prior to that, villages in
Afghanistan had only customary local governance structures (Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov, 2013c)
7
The average block grant in the villages included in the sample was approximately $31,000.

5

as drinking water facilities, irrigation canals, roads and bridges, or electrical generators; or the
provision of human capital development, such as training and literacy courses. Overall, the main
task of elected council members is to guide the choice of development projects and then to oversee
project implementation.
NSP aspires to provide repeat block grants to participating villages, although villages receive
no firm guarantees of when — or if — they will receive these. The process for conducting follow-up
elections for the council is also uncertain. Per NSP rules, villages are supposed to hold re-elections
for council positions every four years, but since the follow-up elections are not facilitated, it is
unclear whether these actually occur.8 Given this, and the general uncertainty that accompanies
planned future development activity in Afghanistan, villagers perceive NSP as a one-shot event,
which does not provide strong re-election incentives to council members.
The average population in our sample of villages is roughly one thousand people (see Table 1).
There is notable variation in the geographic size of villages, with quite a few villages spanning several
kilometers. The average distance between the house of a randomly selected survey respondent and
the center of the village is about 400 meters, with a standard deviation of more than one kilometer.
About 25 percent of villages are ethnically mixed, with the rest being exclusively Pashtun, Tajik,
or Hazara (as well as one Turkmen village). The average education level in the sampled villages is
very low, with more than seventy percent of adult male villagers having no formal education and
only four percent having finished high school. An average household consists of about ten people,
of which about five are children under the age of fifteen. These villages are also notably poor: only
forty-five percent of respondents indicate that they never or rarely have problems supplying food
for their families.

2.2

Local Governance in Afghanistan

Afghanistan’s central government has historically lacked the strength and resources to exercise
local control or provide public goods in many parts of the country. As a result, local communities
have had their own structures of governance and accountability (Barfield, 1984). The foundation
of governance in rural Afghanistan is the local jirga or shura, a participatory council that has
traditionally managed local public goods and adjudicated disputes (Nojumi, Mazurana and Stites,
8

No such elections had occurred by early 2012, when the data collection for this evaluation was completed.

6

2004). Shura or jirga members tend to be the elders of the village (Rahmani, 2006), although
membership is ordinarily not fixed. Shuras or jirgas generally convene when there is an issue
to resolve and reach their decisions based on consensus (Boesen, 2004). In addition to councils,
villages ordinarily have a headman (termed a malik, arbab, or qariyadar ) — usually a large landowner
— who serves as liaison between the village and the central government (Kakar, 2005). Traditional
leadership in rural Afghanistan consists almost exclusively of males, as the principle of purdah —
which stipulates that women should generally be hidden from public observation — precludes female
involvement in communal gatherings and thus from local governance.
A key contrast between elected development councils and customary governance institutions is
the mode of selection and respective accountability structure. While elected development councils
involve a secret ballot, universal suﬀrage election, the position of headman is ordinarily inherited or
otherwise derived on account of land holdings or other forms of economic authority. Although there
is no formal assignment of local governance functions to elected development councils, their authority in selecting, implementing, and managing NSP-funded projects provides them with control over
what is, for many villages, an unprecedented volume of resources. Thus, although the creation of
an elected development council does not directly usurp the major administrative tasks undertaken
by the headman or other customary village institutions, the elected development council exists in
parallel with customary governance structures as an institution vested with substantial authority.

2.3

Electoral Rules

Secret-ballot elections of the council were open to all adult residents and were conducted according
to one of two sets of electoral rules that diﬀer primarily in terms of district magnitude. Under both
sets of rules, every village resident, whether male or female, who is aged eighteen years or older and
who has lived in the village for at least one year is eligible to vote or be elected to the council. NSP
rules require that at least 60 percent of eligible voters must cast votes in the election for it to be
valid. Villagers interested in being elected to the council are prohibited from campaigning in any
way for the position. The council has to contain an equal number of male and female members,
with the total size being roughly proportional to the number of families residing in the village. All
villages in the sample, regardless of the set of electoral rules, were segmented into geographically
contiguous districts containing between 5 and 25 families, with each district having its own polling
7

station. A village map with districts and enclosed dwellings was displayed in a public area in the
village. Further details of the two sets of electoral rules are provided below.9
District Election: Voters were restricted to casting a ballot for a single candidate, who had to
reside in the same district. In each district, one male and one female with the largest number of
votes were elected to the council as representatives of their district. Thus, this method represents
a single-member, simple plurality election with multiple districts (Cox, 1997), similar to the firstpast-the-post system.
At-large Election: Under this method, voters could cast their ballot for anyone residing in the
village regardless of district. The men and women receiving the most votes across the village were
elected as council members. Voters could cast ballots for a maximum of three diﬀerent people,
who were not ranked.10 The at-large election method represents a multi-member election under
a plurality rule with a single district and multiple non-transferable votes. Thus, the two main
diﬀerences from district elections are: (i) higher district magnitude (multiple elected members
instead of one) and (iii) number of votes cast (three instead of one).
In all villages, council elections were organized and administered by “social organizers” employed
by the contracted NGOs facilitating NSP in the district. Monitoring results from a randomly
selected set of 65 villages that held district elections and 66 villages that held at-large elections,
including data from the monitors’ 784 polling station reports and interviews administered to 1,675
male voters, indicate that election procedures were professionally executed by the contracted NGOs
and that, in general, villagers exhibited a good understanding of the diﬀerent electoral rules.11
Monitoring results thus confirm high levels of compliance with the assigned treatment status.

2.4

Sample and Randomization

The randomization of electoral rules occurred in 250 villages that formed the treatment group for
the randomized impact evaluation of NSP and thus were assigned to receive NSP. The villages are
evenly split across ten districts in northern, northeastern, eastern, central, and western Afghanistan
9

A detailed guide on the procedures is available at: http://www.nsp-ie.org/sti.html
This means the system allows plumping, but not cummulation (Cox, 1997). Permitting three votes in at-large
elections was requested by participating NGOs, who considered it a high probability that, if villagers were accorded
only one vote in at-large elections, the number of candidates receiving votes would be fewer than the number of
council seats, thereby necessitating multiple rounds of voting which would not be feasible.
11
A detailed description of the monitoring results can be found at: http://www.nsp-ie.org/reports/CDCE-MR.pdf
10

8

(see Figure 1). Despite the necessary exclusion of southern areas from the sample due to security
concerns, the 10 districts are broadly representative of Afghanistan’s ethnolinguistic diversity, with
five predominantly Tajik districts, four predominantly Pashtun districts, one predominantly Hazara
district, and two districts with significant populations of Uzbek and Turkmen minorities.12

Figure 1: Ten sample districts.
Random assignment of electoral rules was made concurrently with the assignment of the two
alternative project selection procedures.13 Specifically, 25 treatment villages in each district were
paired to minimize diﬀerences in background characteristics within each pair (leaving one village
unpaired) and then matched in pairs of pairs to form quadruples.14 Unpaired villages across
districts were also grouped into two quadruples (leaving two villages unmatched). Each village
within the quadruple (and the two unmatched villages) was then randomly assigned one of the four
combinations of council election rules and project selection procedures.
This assignment procedure ensures that each village in the sample had an equal probability
12
An assessment of the demographic and economic characteristics of the sample villages reveal few substantive
diﬀerences with those of a random sample of villages surveyed by the 2007-08 National Risk and Vulnerability
Assessment.
13
Development projects were selected either through a secret-ballot referenda or at a village meetings. For more
on those results, see Beath, Christia and Enikolopov (2013b).
14
These characteristics include village size (based on data collected by Afghanistan’s Central Statistics Oﬃce) and
a set of geographic variables (distance to river, distance to major road, altitude, and average slope). Pairs of pairs
were formed by performing the same matching procedure treating each pair as a single village with background
characteristics that equal the average of the respective characteristics for the two villages in a pair.

9

of being assigned to each of the two electoral rules and this assignment was orthogonal to the
assignment of project selection procedures. To account for stratification at the randomization
stage, we include quadruple fixed eﬀects in the empirical analysis (Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009).
The randomization resulted in a well-balanced set of villages. Table 1 presents a comparison
between the two groups of villages with regard to a number of pre-intervention characteristics,
which shows that the diﬀerences between the two groups never exceed 13 percent of a standard
deviation.

2.5

Phasing of Intervention and Data Collection

The baseline survey was administered in September 2007, prior to the assignment of allocation
procedures. Council elections occurred between October 2007 and May 2008. Elections in 131 out of
250 villages were monitored, providing additional data on the processes. Project selection occurred
between November 2007 and August 2008, whereas project implementation occurred between April
2008 and September 2011.

3

Theory

The setup of the theoretical model is designed to take into account important features of the setting
of the experiment, such as the absence of entry costs for candidates, absence of parties and political
campaigns, etc. However, the model was not backward engineered to match the empirical findings
and all the empirical predictions except one were first formulated as theoretical propositions and
only then tested empirically (see Section 4 for more details).

3.1

Setup

The society consists of a continuum of individuals distributed uniformly on a compact  = [− ].
The policy space that these agents care about coincides with the set . The literal interpretation
of the model is a society which cares solely about the location of a public good, such as a school
or a water well; however, the results of the model naturally extend to a much more general set of
environments where an individual’s preferences are correlated with geographic location. We assume
that if policy  ∈  is enacted, then an individual with bliss point  ∈  gets the baseline utility
10

 ( ), which we assume, for simplicity, to be quadratic:
 ( ) = − ( − )2 ,
where   0 measures the importance of the policy issue to the society.
In addition to diﬀerent bliss points, individuals in the society diﬀer by their competence, or
education, which may be high or low:  ∈ {0 }, with   0. In other words, each citizen 
is characterized by a pair (   ), where the first component is his competence ( for ability),
and the second is his location ( for bliss point). To study the trade-oﬀ between policy position
and competence, we assume that almost all individuals are incompetent ( = 0), except for a
finite number  randomly picked ones, who have high competence  = . The results are most
transparent when  = 1, which we assume for the rest of the paper; in Appendix A (Subsection
A1) we show that the results go through if we allow  to be any number. We assume that the
types of all individuals are known to all other individuals.15 We also make a technical assumption
that for any  ∈ [− ] there is a citizen  with (   ) = (0 ); this assumption that there is an
incompetent citizen for any policy position ensures existence of an equilibrium.
Policy  is chosen and implemented by a governing body (henceforth “council”), which is elected
by the citizens and from the citizens. We assume that the council consists of two elected individuals
(again, this assumption is relaxed in Appendix A in Subsection A4), and both must agree on a
policy for it to be chosen. We also assume that the competence of council members increases the
quality of policy implementation regardless of the policy, e.g., by providing the public good better
or earlier, which is consistent with the data. If the two council members have types (   ) and
(   ) and implement policy , then individual  will get utility:
 (   ; ) =  +  +  (  ) =  +  −  ( −  )2 .
To simplify exposition, we assume that the council members pick a policy that maximizes their joint
utility:  =

 +
2 .

Notice that this policy will be the outcome of a bargaining game with alternating

oﬀers (Rubinstein, 1982) or a legislative bargaining game with random recognition (Baron and
15
Given the context of the experiment, it is natural to assume that location of villagers’ dwellings and education
are observable to fellow villagers.

11

Ferejohn, 1989; Banks and Duggan, 2000) in the limit where oﬀers are made very frequently.16
We consider such game explicitly when we generalize the game to incorporate councils with more
than two members and show that the results are robust to alternative assumptions regarding the
bargaining process (see Appendix A). Here, slightly abusing notation, we assume that having a
council with members (   ) and (   ) yields utility:

 (       ) =  +  + 

µ

 + 
 
2

¶

=  +  − 

µ

 + 
− 
2

¶2

.

We compare two electoral procedures: at-large elections and district elections. In district elections, the society is divided into two districts: left district , containing individuals with   0,
and right district , containing individuals with  ≥ 0. This division is made according to the
location of an individual’s residence, so that the two districts also diﬀer by the policy preferences of
their inhabitants. Each individual casts a vote for one of the citizens living in his/her district, i.e.,
every individual living in the district is considered a candidate, again in line with the experimental
setup.17 Then in each district the individual who got the largest share of votes is elected, and in
the case of a draw, a random person among those who received the most votes is chosen. In at-large
elections, the entire society comprises a single district, and each individual casts two votes for two
(diﬀerent) citizens. The two candidates who received the most votes are elected.18
The strategy of each voter in district elections is therefore  (), the identity of the individual
in his district for whom he casts his vote (since only members of the same district may be elected,
() ∈ [− 0) if  ∈ [− 0) and () ∈ [0 ] if  ∈ [0 ]). The strategy of each voter in at-large
elections is Λ () = (1 ()  2 ()), which corresponds to the (unordered) pair of individuals for
16

If the oﬀers are not made frequently,  =  +
is still the expected outcome of the game, but there is some
2
variance, which will result in disutility for the citizens. We consider an explicit bargaining game in Appendix A
(Subsection A2).
17
Our model of elections thus fall into the category of citizen-candidate models with costless entry (Besley and
Coate, 1998; see also Osborne and Slivinski, 1996, and Besley and Coate, 1997).
18
We will prove that in at-large elections there is a Condorcet winner, i.e., a pair of citizens such that there is no
other pair that a majority would prefer to be elected. The voting model we picked ensures that the Condorcet winner
pair is elected. The assumption that voters cannot cast both their votes for the same candidate is important here; if
they could, there may be a continuum of election outcomes even if coalitional deviations are alowed, as in Definition
1 (we show that in Appendix B). We would run into the same problem if each citizen had only one vote. However,
if citizens could cast more than two votes, or if they could cast votes for pairs of candidates rather than individuals,
the same Condorcet winner pair would always be elected. This is an interesting observation per se: because citizens’
preferences in at-large elections are defined over pairs of politicians, voting procedures that facilitate extracting this
information are more successful in aggregation of these preferences. (In district elections, each district has a standard
majority voting rule and for any choice by the other district it elects the Condorcet winner.)

12

whom he votes. All voting decisions are made simultaneously, which gives rise to a coordination
problem. We make the following refinement:
Definition 1 Voting strategies { } in case of district elections or {Λ } in case of at-large elections
constitute an equilibrium if, for any electoral district (i.e.,  or  in the first case, or the entire
society  in the second), there is no subset of voters  in this district who would strictly improve
the utility of all voters in  by choosing diﬀerent voting strategies.
In other words, we refine the (otherwise huge) set of Nash equilibria by allowing for deviations
by coalitions of voters, but only within a district. For at-large elections, our equilibrium concept
coincides with Strong Nash.

3.2

Analysis

Our analysis of the game is greatly simplified by the fact that the median voter theorem applies in
both at-large and in district elections. In district elections, each of the two districts  and  will
elect the council member most favored by the median voter in that district, holding the decision
of the other district fixed (denote these median voters by  and  , respectively). In at-large
elections, the median voter of the entire society,  , will elect the pair of candidates that he likes
best. These individuals (or this pair of individuals) will, in fact, be the Condorcet winners in their
respective districts. These results hold because individual preferences exhibit the single-crossing
property: if a citizen  prefers policy 1 to 2  1 , then so does a citizen  with    . The fact
that one of the citizens is competent (denote his policy preference by , so his type is ( )) makes
the argument just marginally more involved. The proof of Proposition 1 (below) fills in the details.
Proposition 1 In both district elections and at-large elections, equilibria exist, and the types of
elected politicians are uniquely determined for almost all realizations of . Moreover:
1. In district elections, the district without the competent citizen elects the most biased individual
(with  = ±), and the district with the competent citizen ( ) elects either this citizen or
the most biased individual (with  = ±).
2. In at-large elections, the two elected citizens are the most competent individual ( ) and a
citizen with the opposite political preferences (0 −).
13

Proposition 1 implies that the equilibrium concept we use (Definition 1) is suﬃciently strong to
pick a (generically) unique equilibrium. To build an intuition for types of citizens who get elected,
consider at-large elections first. The median voter in the whole district,  , has the bliss point
 = 0 and his ideal outcome is to elect two council members who negotiate and implement his
ideal policy 0, at the same time making sure that one of the two is competent. This is feasible:
he can achieve this ideal outcome by having the competent citizen ( ) and his political antipode
(0 −) elected.
Next consider district elections. The reason to elect the most competent citizen if he lives in
the district is clear, but what is the rationale to elect the most biased individual? To answer this
question, suppose that district  elects a citizen of type (   ) and consider the best response of
the median voter of district ,  . His ideal policy is


2,

and if he elects a resident with type

(   ), he would get utility:

 (       ) =  +  − 

µ

 +  
−
2
2

¶2

.

(1)

The right-hand side of (1) is strictly increasing in  for  ≤ , because  ≤ 0, and thus it reaches
its maximum for  = . In other words, holding competence fixed, the median voter of district
 prefers the most biased candidate, and this is true regardless of voting strategies of the citizens
in the left district.19 We thus see the following strategic delegation eﬀect: even though the median
voter  likes policies which are close to  , he/she prefers to elect an extreme council member
because he/she would negotiate a better policy; this is similar to delegating bargaining to a more
committed type.20 The same eﬀect causes the median voter in the left district,  , to favor a
candidate with  = −. Of course, it is also possible that the most competent candidate will be
chosen over the most biased, and the next proposition tells us exactly when this happens.
Proposition 2 In district elections, both districts elect the most biased and incompetent candidates
if:
||  ̂ ≡ 2 −

r

4


+ 2,


(2)

19
This preference for the most biased candidate would not necessarily hold if the distribution of individuals were
non-uniform, for example, in the case of non-bounded support. However, the tendency to elect a relatively biased
candidate would remain. We maintain the assumption of a uniform distribution for expositional purposes.
20
This eﬀect is similar to strategic polarization in the case of divided government in Alesina and Rosenthal (2000)
and in the case of party competition in Ortuño-Ortín (1997).

14

where  is the ideal point of the competent citizen. If (2) does not hold, then one district elects the
most biased of its residents, and the other one elects the competent citizen. The competent citizen
is more likely to be elected if:
(i) the society is more homogenous, i.e. less polarized in their preferences ( is lower);
(ii) competence is more pronounced ( is higher);
(iii) policy matters less relative to competence ( is lower).
The district without a competent citizen is bound to elect the most biased council member,
(0 −) or (0 ). The median voter of the other district faces a trade-oﬀ between electing the
most biased citizen and the competent citizen. Thus, he is more likely to choose competence over
policy if competence is more important ( is high and  is low) or if the competent citizen is also
biased ( is close to ±). Interestingly, polarization hurts the chances of the competent citizen,
and the reason is that high polarization makes the median voter more sensitive to the political
preferences of the council member he elects.
We can now compare the expected outcomes of at-large elections with those of district elections.
Ex ante, the identity of the competent individual is not known, but in expectation the following
proposition holds:
Proposition 3 In at-large elections, as compared to district elections:
1. the expected competence of an elected council member is higher (strictly higher if




 34  2 )

and this diﬀerence is increasing in  and ;
2. the expected polarization (distance between preferences of a council member and the society’s
median voter, normalized by dividing by ) is strictly lower, and this diﬀerence is increasing
in  and ;
3. there is no correlation between preferences and competence of council members in at-large
elections, while in district elections, competence and distance from the median voter are negatively correlated.
These results follow from Propositions 1 and 2 and they are especially easy to see on Figure 2,
where we depicted the outcome of elections (types of council members) for diﬀerent realizations of
15

Figure 2: Types of council members (competent in red/thick, incompetent in blue/thin) as a
function of the competent citizen’s ideal point.
. In at-large elections, the competent individual is always elected, and this is not true in district
elections, provided that ̂  0. Interestingly, if  is high or  is low or  is low, the competent
individual will be elected in both cases, and the diﬀerence between the two types of elections
disappears. The result on polarization is easy to see from the following consideration: the two
council members elected in at-large elections are as far from the median as the competent one,
while in district elections, one or both districts elect individuals who are further from the median
than the competent individual. In addition, if ̂  0, then in district elections, the most moderate
types will never be elected. Finally, in at-large elections, there is no correlation between preferences
and competence of a council member: as one can see from Figure 2, any council member with any
political bliss point is equally likely to be competent or incompetent. In contrast, in district
elections, the most biased council members are likely to be incompetent, and any council member
with a more moderate ideal point is likely to be competent.21
Apart from the empirical predictions about competence and polarization, our model has clear
welfare implications.
21

The ability of the median voter to choose both council members at once help him achieve the first best, but it
does not drive the results in Proposition 3, as we show in Appendix A (Subsection A2 shows that at-large elections
lead to a worse outcome than district elections if oﬀers are made infrequently and Subsection A6 shows that at-large
result in more competent council members even if one member is elected at a time. The results are entirely driven
by the bargaining over policies by the council members, which is anticipated by voters at the time of elections.

16

Proposition 4 In at-large elections, compared to district elections, the expected utility of every
individual is higher, and thus social welfare is higher.
In light of Proposition 3, it is not surprising that social welfare is higher, in expectation, in
at-large elections. It is more striking that the expected utility of every single individual is higher in
at-large elections, provided that expectation is taken before the location of the competent citizen
becomes known. The intuition, however, is simple: the expected policy is E = 0 under both
procedures, and by moving from at-large to district elections, the society makes the policy outcome
less certain and runs the risk of electing two incompetent citizens; both eﬀects hurt every citizen
equally.

4

Empirical Predictions

The theoretical results generate several empirical predictions, which we test using data from the
field experiment. It should be emphasized that only empirical results for the first prediction had
been obtained before the model was formulated. All the remaining empirical predicitons were first
obtained from the model and only then tested empirically.
Based on the first statement of Proposition 3 we can formulate the following empirical prediction:
1. The quality of elected candidates is higher in at-large elections than in district elections.
Following Besley, Pande, and Rao (2005), we use educational attainment as a measure of candidate quality, since there is evidence that leaders’ level of education has a positive eﬀect on
governance outcomes. In Section 6 we show that educational attainment is associated with better
council performance in the context of our experiment.
The first statement of Proposition 3 also asserts that the eﬀect of the electoral system on
the quality of politicians is stronger in communities with more diverse preferences (higher ) or
where the choice of policy is relatively more important than the politicians’ competence (higher ),
whereas for communities with suﬃciently homogenous preferences (where 34  2   ) there should
be no diﬀerences between electoral systems. Thus, we can formulate the following two empirical
predictions:

17

2. The diﬀerence in the quality of council members between at-large and district elections is
higher in more heterogeneous villages.
3. In homogenous villages, the quality of council members does not depend on the electoral
method.
In the empirical analysis, we use three alternative measures of heterogeneity — fractionalization
of preferences over projects, ethnic heterogeneity, and geographic size of villages. The choice of
these measures is driven by the nature of the tasks performed by council members. As noted above,
the main tasks of the elected council members is to guide the choice over development projects and
then oversee the implementation of these projects. At the project selection stage, a candidate’s
preferences over projects can aﬀect both the type and the location of development projects, which
can be treated as the policy dimension in the model.
Fractionalization of preferences over projects directly measures heterogeneity of interests in
terms of project type. More diverse villagers’ preferences regarding the project type correspond to
higher  in the model. In addition, quality of implementation is likely to be more important if
preferences are aligned and people get their preferred project; at the same time, if preferences are
diverse, then policy choice becomes more important. Thus, fractionalized preferences correspond
to the case where policy is important relative to competence, i.e., high . Ethnic heterogeneity
is often used in the literature to capture diﬀerences in tastes (e.g. Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly,
1999) that might aﬀect preferences over both project type22 and location (if villages are ethnically
segregated),23 so ethnically heterogeneous villages are also likely to have higher  and . Finally,
preferences over project location are likely to be driven by the location of voters and candidates.
The larger the village, the more diverse the preferences of villagers with respect to project location
(which corresponds to higher ), and the more important the policy dimension relative to the
quality of candidates (which corresponds to higher ).
According to the model, the quality of elected candidates improves outcomes for any policy
choice. In the context of the experiment, the quality of elected candidates is likely to aﬀect project
22
This is confirmed in our context, as ethnic heterogeneity is correlated with fractionalization of preferences over
types of projects (the correlation is significant at the 5 percent level).
23
Unfortunately, the number of observations within villages is not large enough to test for the existence of segregation directly.

18

implementation regardless of their type and location. In particular, council members of high quality
are likely to implement projects faster. Thus, we can formulate the following empirical prediction:
4. The speed of project implementation is higher in at-large elections as compared with district
elections.
The second statement of Proposition 3 suggests that expected polarization is lower in at-large
elections, leading to the following prediction:
5. Elected council member preferences are less biased under at-large elections as compared to
district elections.
In the model, polarization corresponds to the distance between council member preferences
and the median voter. In the empirical analysis, we focus on candidate preferences with respect to
project location, taking the assumption that the geographic location of elected candidates and voters
reflects their policy preferences literally. Thus, we use the distance between council members’s house
(which reflects his preferences) and the center of the village (which reflects the preferences of the
median voter) as a proxy for the bias in his preferences.
Finally, the third statement of Proposition 3 corresponds to the following empirical prediction:
6. In district elections, there is a negative correlation between elected candidate’s quality and
his bias in terms of preferences, with no such relationship in at-large elections.
We test this prediction using the same measures as above — educational attainment as a proxy
of elected candidate’s quality and the distance between an elected candidate’s house and the center
of the village as a proxy for the bias in his preferences.

5

Data

The data used in the empirical analysis come from several diﬀerent sources. Information on the
characteristics of elected council members was supplied by the contracted NGOs. Specifically, the
data contains information on electoral results and personal characteristics of all council members,
including their gender, age, educational attainment, and occupation, as well as their district of
19

residence. Data was provided for 2,044 male council members from 241 villages.24 We construct a
dummy variable that equals one if the person has full secondary education (i.e., finished high school)
and zero otherwise and a similar measure for getting lower secondary education (i.e., finishing middle
school). Among male council members only 9% have finished high school, and 17% have finished
middle school (see Table 2).
Information on the geographic distribution of elected council members is based on GPS coordinates of their residences collected during the monitoring of program implementation. This
information is available only for a subset of villages, since some monitors failed to follow the instructions and did not collect the required information. In addition, some coordinates contained
obvious mistakes and were excluded from the analysis.25 The resulting database contains coordinates of the residences of 1,104 male council members in 140 communities in nine out of ten
evaluation districts. Although sample attrition is substantial, there are no reasons to believe that
it was systematic in a way that can aﬀect the corresponding results.
We restrict our analysis to male council members for two reasons. First, in Afghan villages,
as discussed above, women are traditionally excluded from community-level decision making. The
female council members elected through the gender quota are therefore not expected to have a
significant eﬀect on project selection and implementation.26 Second, the average level of education
of female council members was so low that there was almost no variation in educational attainment.
In particular, more than 90% of female candidates did not have any formal education and only 0.8%
had finished high school.
Information on the size and the ethnic composition of villages, as well as information on the
preferences over the types of development projects, comes from the baseline survey, conducted
before the start of the program. The survey was administered to ten randomly selected male
heads of household in each village. The resulting dataset contains information on demographic and
24

Of the 9 villages for which the data was not received, 7 villages did not comply with the NSP treatment assignment,
an error driven primarily by confusion between villages with similarly-sounding names. For the remaining 2 villages,
the relevant NGO did not provide the necessary information. In both cases, attrition was not correlated with the
assigned electoral rules.
25
These mistakes were identified by superimposing location of council members’ houses and satellite images of the
respective villages and identifying the instances in which coordinates did not belong to the village. We documented
all such instances and ensured that the data cleaning exercise was conducted in absence of information about the
treatment status of the villages, so that it does not bias the results.
26
This is confirmed by the results in Beath, Christia and Enikolopov (2013b) which indicate that the preferences of
even the most important female villagers do not have a significant eﬀect on the choice of projects, whereas preferences
of the male villagers are higly correlated with the subsequent choice of development projects.

20

socio-economic characteristics for 2,387 male heads of household.
To construct a measure of heterogeneity of preferences with regard to the types of development
projects, we use a question from the baseline survey in which respondents were asked to indicate
— from a list of fifteen potential projects that correspond to the types of projects sponsored by
NSP — the project that they believed should be selected if the village was provided with a $60,000
grant. In each village  for each type of project  we calculate the share  of respondents that
X
2 .
indicated this project and calculate fractionalization of preferences in the village  = 1 −

Next, we construct a dummy variable, which equals one if fractionalization is above the median in

the sample and zero otherwise. We also calculate the average distance between the households of
the respondents based on the GPS coordinates of their houses and construct a dummy variable for
large villages which equals one if the average distance is above the median in the sample and zero
otherwise. As a measure of ethic heterogeneity of villages, we use a dummy variable that equals
zero if all villagers belong to one ethnicity and one otherwise.27
Information on project implementation comes from the administrative records of NSP’s central
oﬃce. The data contains information for 595 projects that were implemented in the villages as part
of NSP and includes the dates when implementation of each project started and when it ended. The
start dates range from April 2, 2008 to February 22, 2011; the completion dates range from July
23, 2008 to September 24, 2011.28 Based on this information, we construct five dummy variables
for whether a project started before the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2008 and each of the
quarters in 2009. Similarly we construct five dummy variables for whether a project started before
the beginning of each of the quarters in 2009 and the first quarter of 2010.

6

Empirical Results

To provide evidence that educational attainment is a reasonable proxy for council members’ quality,
we check that it is associated with better council performance. In particular, we examine how
council member education aﬀects the speed of project implementation using the following OLS
27

The measure is based on a question that asks heads of households to indicate their ethnicity with seven options:
Pashtun, Tajik, Hazara, Uzbek, Turkmen, Baluch, and other. All results hold if we use a similar measure based on
the question from the focus group of village leaders that asked them to indicate what ethnicities reside in the village
or if we use a measure of ethnic fractionalization instead, although the latter measure of fractionalization is not very
reliable given the small number of observations per village.
28
Six projects failed and were not completed.

21

model:29

  =  +  ·  +  ·   +  +  

(3)

where   is an indicator for whether project  in village  has started or finished by
a specific date,  is an indicator for whether at least one council member has
finished high school (which is true for 32% of the villages),   is an indicator for
whether at least one of the villagers in the baseline survey has finished high school (which is true
for 26% of the villages),  is the quadruple fixed eﬀect, and  is the error term.
Results of the analysis indicate that both villager education and council member education are
important predictors of the project’s implementation progress (see Table 3). In villages with more
educated council members, projects were more likely to start earlier and to be completed faster.
Although these results do not prove that there is a causal eﬀect of council member education on
project implementation, they provide evidence that their educational attainment is associated with
better outcomes, and thus can be used as a proxy for council member’s quality.
To test the first empirical predictions of the model we use the following OLS model:

 =  +  ·  +  +  

(4)

where  is a dummy variable for whether council member  in village  has finished high
school,30  is a dummy variable, which equals one if village  has been assigned at-large elections
and zero if the village has been assigned district elections,  is the quadruple fixed eﬀect, and 
is the error term. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The first empirical prediction
posits that   0.
Results of the estimation confirm that male council members elected through at-large elections
are better educated as compared with male council members elected through district elections (see
column 1 in Table 3). The share of council members who finished high school among the council
29

In all specifications with binary dependent variables we use linear models, since our sepcifications are close to a
saturated model (Angrist and Pischke 2008), while linear specification makes interpretation of the coeﬃcients easier
and avoids the incidental parameter problem caused by the inclusion of quadruple fixed-eﬀects. The results are robust
to using a logit model instead.
30
The results are robust to using a dummy variable for finishing middle school (see Table C1 in Appendix C).

22

members elected under at-large elections is higher by 4 percentage points as compared to an average
of 7 percent among councils members elected under district elections (the diﬀerence is statistically
significant at the 1% level). Although modest in absolute magnitude, this eﬀect constitutes a 57
percent increase in the share of council members who have finished high school. Given the overall
low level of education of council members and the very low level of education and literacy in the
rural Afghan context, the eﬀect is substantively large. Thus, the results confirm the first empirical
prediction of the model.
The second empirical prediction posits that the eﬀect of at-large elections on the quality of
elected council members is higher in more heterogeneous villages, while the third empirical prediction states that the eﬀect of at-large elections is insignificant in homogenous villages. To test the
second and third empirical predictions of the model we use the following OLS model:

 =  +  ·  +  ·  ·  +  ·  +  +  

(5)

where v is a measure of heterogeneity of village  and all other variables are the same
as in equation (4). The second empirical prediction posits that   0 and the third one that  = 0
(as long as the measure of heterogeneity is normalized to zero in homogenous villages).
We find that the eﬀect of at-large elections is indeed significantly stronger in more heterogeneous
villages for all measures of heterogeneity (columns 2-4 in Table 3), which is consistent with the second empirical prediction. Moreover, consistent with the third empirical prediction, in homogenous
villages, there is no significant eﬀect of electoral rules on the quality of elected candidates. The
results also provide some evidence that increasing heterogeneity is associated with lower quality of
elected candidates in villages with district elections, which is consistent with Proposition 2. The
latter result, however, should be treated with caution, as it is not based on randomized variation
in electoral rules, so it can be driven by endogeneity bias.
According to the fourth empirical prediction, the speed of project implementation should be
higher in at-large elections as compared with district elections. To test this hypothesis we estimate
the following OLS model:
  =  +  ·  +  +  

23

(6)

where all the variables are the same as in (3) and (4). According to the fourth empirical prediction
  0. The results indicate that in villages with at-large elections, project implementation was
more likely to start earlier and be completed faster (see Table 5). The magnitude of the eﬀect
is noticeable, with projects being 9 percent more likely to have started before April 2009 and 5
percent more likely to have finished before July 2009. Figures C1 and C2 in Appendix C show the
distribution of dates for project commencement and completion by type of elections.31 The results
are robust to controlling for the type of implemented projects, so that the eﬀect is not driven by
the choice of diﬀerent types of projects in villages that held at-large elections. This is consistent
with the finding that there is no significant eﬀect of the electoral system on the type of selected
projects, which conforms with the prediction of the model that, on average, there is no diﬀerence
in policies implemented under at-large and district elections. Thus, the results are in accordance
with the fourth empirical prediction.
If the electoral system aﬀects project implementation only through its eﬀect on the education of
council members, one can estimate the causal eﬀect of council members education on the speed of
project implementation using an IV specification in which electoral system is used as an instrument
for the education of council members. The results of such an estimation are generally higher in
magnitude than the result of the respective OLS estimation (see Table C2 in Appendix C for the
results). These results, however, should be taken with extreme caution, as the exclusion restriction
is unlikely to hold, since the electoral system can aﬀect project implementation through other
channels. For instance, greater diﬀerence in preferences of elected candidates in district elections,
as predicted by the theoretical model, may cause a gridlock, which would delay the implementation
of projects.
The fifth empirical prediction posits that district elections will lead to the election of candidates
with more biased preferences. We test this prediction by estimating a model similar to (4) with
the logarithm of the distance between the house of an elected council member and the village
center (calculated by averaging the coordinates of the houses of baseline survey participants) as the
outcome variable.32 To account for diﬀerences in the size of the village, we can include a measure of
31

There is no eﬀect on the duration of implementation of projects, which might be driven by the fact that more
educated council members choose more complicated projects, which is partially confirmed by the fact that villages
with more educated council members tend to implement a smaller number of more expensive projects.
32
We winsorize the distance at the 95 percent quintile to limit the influence of potential outliers.

24

the distance between the villagers’ homes in the baseline survey as an additional control. The results
indicate that consistent with the empirical prediction, the distance between the homes of elected
oﬃcials and the village centers is smaller in at-large elections (see Table 6). Not surprisingly, the
distance between the homes of elected oﬃcials and village centers is larger in villages with greater
distance between the houses of baseline respondents.
Finally, according to the sixth empirical prediction, we should observe a negative correlation
between a candidate’s quality and the extent of his bias. We test this prediction by estimating the
following model:

 =  +  ·  +  ·  ·  +  ·  +  +  

(7)

where  is the distance between the house of council member  and the center of the
village. The empirical prediction posits that   0 and  +  = 0.
The results indicate that in district elections there is indeed a negative, although not statistically
significant, correlation between an elected candidate’s education and the distance between his
house and the center of the village (see Table 7). At the same time, the diﬀerence between the
eﬀects of distance in villages with at-large and district elections is indeed positive and statistically
significant in all specifications, confirming that   0. We also document that the correlation
between education and distance to the center of the village in at large elections is positive (rather
than zero, as implied by the model), although it is statistically significant only if we do not control
for village size.33 Thus, we find limited support for the sixth empirical prediction.

7

Discussion

According to our theoretical model, electoral rules aﬀect the quality of elected oﬃcials by changing
voters’ incentives to support candidates with more biased preferences over more qualified candidates. The results from the field experiment prove to be consistent with the predictions of the
theoretical model. In particular, we find that the quality of elected candidates is higher in at-large
elections and that this diﬀerence is higher in more heterogeneous villages. There is also evidence
33

We also test and find that for the random sample of villagers in the baseline survey there is no significant
relationship between their education and the distance from their houses to the center of a village.

25

that in more heterogeneous villages, district elections lead to the election of candidates with more
biased preferences at the expense of their quality.
There are several possible alternative explanations for the positive eﬀect of at-large elections on
the quality of candidates. First of all, this eﬀect can be driven by the restriction on the residence
of candidates in district elections. If there are two high-quality candidates that live in the same
district, only one of them can be elected under district elections, but both of them can be elected in
at-large elections. This restriction can have a negative eﬀect on the quality of elected candidates in
a context where candidates of good quality are scarce. To see if the diﬀerence in the quality of the
elected council members is driven by this restriction, we look at the distribution of elected council
members across districts. Villages with district elections had exactly one male candidate elected to
the council from each district. Although in at-large elections there were no formal restrictions on
the distribution of candidates across districts, the distribution turned out to be not much diﬀerent
from that in villages with district elections. Specifically, in villages with at-large elections, 93
percent of districts had a person residing in that district elected to the council. Only 37 out of
125 at-large villages had at least one district which did not have a resident council member. Of
these, in 25 villages there was only one district that did not have a resident in the council. Thus,
the negative eﬀect of at-large elections on the probability of a district having a resident council
member was very small.
To further address this point, we exclude from the sample candidates in at-large elections
from districts that had more than one candidate elected to the council. Thus, we look only at
the quality of candidates for whom the restriction on the number of candidates from the same
district was not binding. Although this restriction is endogenous and these results should be
interpreted with caution, it provides some evidence regarding the robustness of our results to this
alternative explanation. The results in Table C3 in Appendix C indicate that the eﬀects obtained
in the benchmark specification are robust to such a sample restriction. Finally, the restriction
on candidates’ residence in district elections should matter more in smaller villages. However,
empirical results indicate that the eﬀect of electoral rules on the quality of candidates is stronger
in larger, rather than smaller, villages. Overall, the empirical results suggest that the eﬀect of
electoral rules on the quality of elected candidates is not driven by the restriction on candidates in
district elections.
26

Another potential explanation is that an increase in district magnitude in at-large elections
makes it harder for the incumbent to coordinate voting, which should reduce the incumbency
advantage of the members of the pre-existing elites and increase the quality of candidates. To
examine the potential role of incumbency, we look at the share of council members who were
identified as pre-existing elite members. Specifically, as the results in Table C4 in Appendix C
indicate, the share of council members that were members of the pre-existing elite, even if we use
the most inclusive definition of pre-existing elites, is 39 percent. While sizable, this result suggests
that pre-existing elites do not dominate the elected council. Importantly, electoral rules have no
significant eﬀect on the share of pre-existing elites among council members. The only marginally
significant result is that the share of council members who were named ex-ante as the main decision
makers is somewhat higher in villages with at-large elections. We obtain similar results if we use
an alternative measure of incumbency advantage and look at the proportion of pre-existing elite
members who subsequently were elected to the council. The share of elite members elected to
the council varies between 19 and 44 percent depending on the measure, but again there is no
significant diﬀerence between villages that used alternative electoral rules. Overall, results indicate
that electoral rules have no significant eﬀect on incumbency advantage.
Yet another potential explanation is that formal education serves as a proxy for candidate
quality, if voters do not have exact information on his quality. In district elections, the size of the
districts is smaller and voters are likely to have better information about the candidates, so they do
not need to rely on formal education as a proxy for candidate quality, whereas larger district size in
at-large elections leads to less information about actual candidate quality and to the need to rely on
formal education as a proxy for their quality. This interpretation, however, cannot explain why the
results are stronger in more heterogeneous villages and why the education of elected candidates is
on average lower in more heterogeneous villages. In more heterogeneous villages, voters are likely to
have less information about the candidates, so according to this explanation voters should rely more
on formal education more. This would lead to higher levels of education of elected candidates in
more heterogeneous villages, which contradicts our empirical findings. In addition, this explanation
cannot account for the results on the location of the homes of elected candidates.
In general, the diﬀerence in the quality of elected representatives can also reflect barriers to entry,
which are higher in electoral systems with small district magnitudes (Myerson, 1993). However,
27

this explanation is not relevant in our context, as all citizens are considered candidates and there
are no entry barriers.
The observed diﬀerence in the quality of politicians may also be driven by the fact that the
at-large elections format gives a disproportionate advantage to higher quality candidates for reasons
other than voting decisions by citizens. Imagine, for example, that candidates get support through
rallies (public speeches) and bribing (vote-buying) during the electoral campaign. Arguably, in
bigger districts, public events are more important due to economies of scale. As long as high quality
candidates have a comparative advantage at public speaking (and a comparative disadvantage
at vote-buying), this would give them an advantage in electoral systems with larger districts.
This explanation relies on a strong assumption that higher quality candidates are relatively better
at speaking and not at bribing, which may or may not be true. Moreover, this explanation,
while attractive theoretically, cannot explain the results of the field experiment, because political
campaigning was forbidden, and based on our monitoring data vote-buying did not take place. In
addition, this story does not imply any relation between the type of elections and location of council
members’ houses, whereas empirical results imply such a relation.
It is also true that the consequences of having high quality council members, especially in atlarge elections, may go beyond better implementation of development projects. More educated
council members may also improve villagers’ attitudes toward elected local leaders, making them
more likely to support elections as the preferable method of selecting local leaders. In Table C5 in
Appendix C, we provide some evidence that at-large elections have a positive eﬀect on villagers’
attitudes toward local leaders and elections as a method of selection of the village head. These
results are broadly consistent with the model’s prediction that at-large elections lead to higher
social welfare.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we examine the eﬀect of electoral rules on the quality of elected representatives. We
consider two alternative electoral rules — district and at-large elections. We provide a theoretical
model in the tradition of citizen-candidate models with free entry of candidates, and show that atlarge elections should lead to better educated council members, and that this eﬀect is stronger in

28

more heterogeneous communities. Moreover, the model predicts that the candidates elected under
district elections should be more biased relative to those elected under at-large elections. In the
model, these eﬀects are driven by the voters’ strategic incentive to elect more biased politicians in
district elections, in anticipation of the legislative bargaining process in the council. Our empirical
results from a field experiment in 250 villages in Afghanistan are consistent with the theoretical
predictions of the model.
The suggested mechanism is obviously not the only way through which electoral rules may aﬀect
the quality of elected oﬃcials and, in particular, their level of education. There is, however, substantial evidence that the mechanism we describe is driving the identified results. First, the design
of the experiment rules out alternative possible channels such as barriers to entry or comparative
advantage in political campaigning. More importantly, we find a direct link between the type of
election and location of council members’ residences, which at least implies that geographical considerations played a role in voting decisions. Given the decisions that elected oﬃcials had to make
on the type and location of a public project, the strategic voting / delegation mechanism implied
by the model appears to be the simplest and most natural mechanism consistent with the available
empirical evidence.
The unique conditions of our experiment (first-time local elections; absence of political parties,
campaigns or canvassing; a single question that the council had to decide) allow us to not only
establish the causal link between the type of elections and quality of elected representatives, but
also to identify a specific mechanism. However, these unique conditions may also give rise to
questions of external validity. Such questions are reasonable and it is feasible that the identified
mechanism may not operate in a similar manner in contexts with diﬀerent characteristics. At the
same time, our paper obtains two results we believe to be important in other contexts. First, the
quality of elected politicians depends on the electoral rule. Second, voters may vote strategically,
taking into account not only their delegate’s position, but also anticipating collective bargaining
in a decision-making body. Understanding the impact of electoral rules on election outcomes and,
in particular, the quality of politicians, in more general settings appears to be a fruitful avenue for
future work.

29

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2010) “Political Selection and Persistence
of Bad Governments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(4), 1511-1575.
Adams, Greg (1996) “Legislative Eﬀects of Single-Member vs. Multi-Member Districts,” American
Journal of Political Science, 40(1), 129-144.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly (1999) “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4): 1243-1284.
Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal (2000) “Polarized Platforms and Moderate Policies with
Checks and Balances.” Journal of Public Economics, 75(1), 1-20.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke (2008) Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press.
Aragones, Enriqueta, and Thomas Palfrey (2004) The Eﬀect of Candidate Quality on Electoral
Equilibrium: An Experimental Study, American Political Science Review 98 (1): 77-90.
Austen-Smith, David, and Jeﬀrey S. Banks (2005) Positive Political Theory II Strategy and Structure, The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Rohini Pande (2007) “Parochial Politics: Ethnic Preferences and Politician
Corruption,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP6381.
Banks, Jeﬀrey S., and John Duggan (2000) “A Bargaining Model of Collective Choice,” American
Political Science Review, 94(1): 73-88.
Banks, Jeﬀrey S., and Rangarajan K. Sundaram (1998) “Optimal Retention in Principal/Agent
Models,” Journal of Economic Theory, 82(2): 293-323.
Barfield, Thomas Jeﬀerson (1984) Weak Links on a Rusty Chain: Structural Weaknesses in
Afghanistan’s Provincial Government Administration. Berkeley, CA: Institute of International
Studies, University of California, Berkeley.
Baron, David. P., and Ferejohn, John.A. (1989) “Bargaining in legislatures,” American Political
Science Review, 83(4): 1181-1206.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia and Ruben Enikolopov (2012) “Winning Hearts and Minds through
Development Aid: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan,” MIT Working Paper.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia and Ruben Enikolopov (2013a). “Empowering Women: Evidence

30

from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan,” American Political Science Review, 107(3): 540-557.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia and Ruben Enikolopov (2013b) “Direct Democracy and Resource
Allocation: Experimental Evience from Afghanistan,” MIT Working Paper.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia and Ruben Enikolopov (2013c) “Do Elected Councils Improve
Governance? Experimental Evidence on Local Institutions in Afghanistan,” MIT Working Paper.
Besley, Timothy (2005) “Political Selection,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3): 43-60.
Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, and Vijayendra Rao (2005) “Participatory Democracy in Action:
Survey Evidence from India,” Journal of the European Economics Association Papers and Proceedings, 3(2-3): 648-657.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997) “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 85-114.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1998) “Sources of Ineﬃciency in a Representative Democracy:
A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, 88(1): 139-56.
Besley, Timothy, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne (2013) “Gender quotas and the
crisis of the mediocre man: Theory and evidence from Sweden.” Working paper.
Besley, Timothy, Jose Montalvo and Marta Reynal-Querol (2010) “Do educated leaders matter?”
Economic Journal, 121, 205-227.
Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, and Vijayendra Rao (2005) “Political Selection and the Quality
of Government: Evidence from South India.” London School of Economics and Political Science,
Working Paper.
Besley, Timothy, and Marta Reynal-Querol (2011) “Do democracies select more educated leaders?”
American Political Science Review, 105(3).
Boesen Inger W. (2004) “From Subjects to Citizens: Local Participation in the National Solidarity
Programme,” AREU Working Paper Series.
Brollo, Fernanda, Tommaso Nannicini, Roberto Perotti, and Guido Tabellini (2013) “The Political
Resource Curse,” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1759-96.
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie (2009) “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
Development Field Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4): 200-232.
Caselli, Francesco, and Massimo Morelli (2004) “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics,
88(3-4), 759-782.
31

Cox, Gary W. (1984) “Electoral Equilibrium in Double Member Districts,” Public Choice, 44:
443-451.
Cox, Gary W. (1997) Making Votes Count: Strategic Coordination in the World’s Electoral Systems.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, and Martín A. Rossi (2013) “Strengthening State Capabilities:
The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service.“ Quarterly Journal of Economics
128(3): 1169-1218.
Duverger, Maurice (1954) Political Parties: Their Organization and Activity in the Modern State.
Wiley, New York.
Egorov, Georgy, and Konstantin Sonin (2011) “Dictators and Their Viziers: Endogenizing the
Loyalty-Competence Trade-oﬀ,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(5): 903-930.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan (2011) “Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary
Incentives on Quality and Performance,” Working paper.
Ferree, Karen E., Bingham G. Powell, Jr., and Ethan Scheiner (2013) “How Context Shapes the
Eﬀects of Electoral Rules,” in APSA Report of the Task Force on Electoral Rules and Democratic
Governance.
Folke, Olle, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne (2014) “Preferential Voting, Accountability and
Promotions into Political Power: Evidence from Sweden.” Working paper.
Gagliarducci, Stefano and Tommaso Nannicini (2013) “Do Better Paid Politicians Perform Better?
Disentangling Incentives from Selection,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11, 369398.
Iversen, Torben, and David Soskice (2006) “Electoral Institutions and the Politics of Coalitions:
Why Some Democracies Redistribute More than Others,” American Political Science Review,
100(2), 165-181.
Kakar, Palwasha (2005) “Fine-Tuning the NSP: Discussions of Problems and Solutions with Facilitating Partners,” AREU Working Paper.
Lijphart, Arend (2004) “Constitutional Design for Divided Societies,” Journal of Democracy, 15:
96-109.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico (2001) “The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative
Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, 91: 225-245.
32

Madison, James (1788, 1961). The Federalist Papers: A Collection of Essays in Support of the
Constitution of the United States. New York: Doubleday.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica (2013) “Educate to Lead? The Eﬀect of Politicians’ Education on Public
Good Provision: Evidence from Java,” working paper.
Mattozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo (2007) “Mediocracy,” NBER Working Paper 12920.
Mattozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo (2008) “Political Careers or Career Politicians?” Journal of
Public Economics, 92: 597-608.
Mattozzi, Andrea, and Erik Snowberg (2014) “The Right Type of Legislator,” mimeo.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti and Massimo Rostagno (2002) “Electoral Systems and
the Composition of Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 609-657.
McKelvey, Richard, and Raymond Reizman (1992) “Seniority in Legislatures,” American Political
Science Review, 86, 597-608.
Moser, Robert G. (2008) “Electoral Systems and the Representation of Ethnic Minorities: Evidence
from Russia,” Comparative Politics, 40(3): 273-292.
Moser, Robert G., and Ethan Scheiner (2012) Electoral Systems and Political Context: How the
Eﬀects of Rules Vary Across New and Established Democracies. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Myerson, Roger (1993), “Eﬀectiveness of Electoral Systems for Reducing Government Corruption:
A Game-Theoretic Analysis,” Games and Economic Behavior, 5: 118-132.
Nojumi, Neamat, Dyan E. Mazurana, and Elizabeth Stites (2004) Afghanistan’s Systems of Justice:
Formal, Traditional, and Customary. Working Paper: Feinstein International Famine Center,
Youth and Community Program, Tufts University.
Norris, Pippa (2004) Electoral Engineering: Voting Rules and Political Behavior. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ortuño-Ortín, Ignacio (1997) “A Spatial Model of Political Competition and Proportional Representation.” Social Choice and Welfare 14(3), 427-438.
Osborne, Martin, and Al Slivinski (1996) “A Model of Political Competition with CitizenCandidates, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 65-96.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (1999) “The Size and Scope of Government: Comparative
Politics with Rational Politicians, 1998 Alfred Marshall Lecture,” European Economic Review 43,
33

699-735.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political economics: Explaining economic policy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2004) “Constitutional Rules and Fiscal Policy Outcomes,”
American Economic Review, 94, 25-45.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2005) The Economic Eﬀects of Constitutions. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Persson, Torsten, Guido Tabellini, and Francesco Trebbi (2003) “Electoral rules and corruption,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(4), 958-989.
Rahmani, Ahmad Idrees (2006) The Role of Religious Institutions in Community Governance Affairs: How are Communities Governed Beyond the District Level? Budapest, Hungary: Open
Society Institute, Central European University Center for Policy Studies.
Rubinstein, Ariel (1982) “Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model,” Econometrica 50(1): 97-109.
Trebbi, Francesco, Philippe Aghion & Alberto Alesina (2007) “Electoral Rules and Minority Representation in U.S. Cities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1): 325-358.

34

2264

121.70

115.08

0.06

Household Members

9.79

5.00

2374

9.57

10.02

0.09

Household Members Under 15 Years

4.58

2.76

2374

4.50

4.66

0.06

Distance in Meters from the Respondent’s House to
Village Center

402

1011

2078

351

455

0.10

Primary Source of Household Income is Agriculture

Standardized
Difference

Mean in
At-large Villages

115.71

Number of Households in Village

Observation
(Full Sample)

118.43

Mean
(Full Sample)

Mean in
District Villages

Standard Deviation
(Full Sample)

Table 1. Balance of Pre-treatment Covariates

0.66

0.47

2360

0.67

0.64

0.07

Age of Male Head-of-Household Respondent

43.81

13.30

2336

43.97

43.65

0.02

Male Head-of-Household Respondent Has No
Formal Education

0.71

0.45

2387

0.73

0.69

0.09

Male Head-of-Household Respondent Finished
Middle School

0.07

0.26

2387

0.07

0.08

0.02

Male Head-of-Household Respondent Finished High
School

0.04

0.20

2387

0.04

0.05

0.03

First Language of Male Head-of-Household
Respondent is Dari

0.70

0.46

2387

0.72

0.69

0.05

Village is Ethnically Mixed

0.24

0.43

250

0.21

0.26

0.13

Household Never or Rarely Faces Food Shortages

0.45

0.50

2387

0.43

0.47

0.09

Household’s Main Source of Drinking Water is
Unprotected Spring

0.27

0.44

2387

0.28

0.26

0.03

Household has Access to Electricity

0.15

0.35

2387

0.14

0.15

0.04

Household has a Mobile Phone

0.18

0.38

2387

0.19

0.17

0.04

Household has a Radio

0.75

0.43

2387

0.74

0.76

0.05

Household Expenditure on Food in Last 30 Days

3561

1982

2340

3524

3600

0.04

Household Received Loan in Past 12 Months

0.47

0.50

2387

0.48

0.46

0.05

Most Preferred Project of Male Respondents is
Drinking Water

0.29

0.46

2387

0.30

0.28

0.05

Most Preferred Project of Male Respondents is
Irrigation

0.13

0.33

2387

0.11

0.15

0.11

Most Preferred Project of Male Respondents is
Electricity

0.06

0.24

2387

0.06

0.06

0.02

Most Preferred Project of Male Respondents is Road
or Bridge

0.15

0.36

2387

0.16

0.14

0.04

Male Head-of-Household Respondent Attends Shura
Meetings

0.32

0.47

2387

0.33

0.31

0.05

35

Table 2. Summary Statistics for Outcome Variables
Mean

Standard
Error

Obs.

Council Member Finished High School

8.7

28.2

2,016

Council Member Finished Middle School

16.8

37.4

2,016

Distance between Residences of Council Members and Village Center
(Meters)

406

867

1,018

October 2008

0.13

0.34

1317

January 2009

0.41

0.49

1317

April 2009

0.76

0.43

1317

July 2009

0.82

0.39

1317

October 2009

0.87

0.34

1317

January 2009

0.41

0.49

1317

April 2009

0.82

0.39

1317

July 2009

0.87

0.34

1317

October 2009

0.90

0.31

1317

January 2010

0.91

0.29

1317

Project Implementation Started Before:

Project Implementation Finished Before:

36

Table 3. Effect of Council Members’ Educational Attainment on Project Implementation
Panel A

Project Implementation Started Before:
October 2008
(1)

At Least One Council Member
Finished High School
At Least One Male Baseline
Survey Respondent Finished
High School
Quadruple Fixed Effects

January 2009

April 2009

July 2009

October 2009

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.016

0.033

0.249***

0.304***

0.298***

[0.049]

[0.051]

[0.065]

[0.061]

[0.056]

0.092*

0.171***

0.195**

0.211***

0.189***

[0.053]

[0.058]

[0.078]

[0.066]

[0.068]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

595

595

595

595

595

R-squared

0.29

0.48

0.41

0.36

0.28

Panel B

Project Implementation Completed Before:
January 2009

April 2009

July 2009

October 2009

January 2010

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.033

0.304***

0.281***

0.270***

0.245***

[0.051]

[0.061]

[0.057]

[0.049]

[0.048]

0.171***

0.211***

0.190***

0.252***

0.267***

[0.058]

[0.066]

[0.069]

[0.054]

[0.052]

Quadruple fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

595

595

595

595

595

At Least One Council Member
Finished High School
At Least One Male Baseline
Survey Respondent Finished
High School

R-squared
0.48
0.36
0.27
0.34
0.39
Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.

37

Table 4. Effect of Electoral Rules on Council Members’ Competence
Council Member Finished High School
(1)
At-Large Election

(2)

(3)

3.96***

0.07

1.95

-0.90

[1.32]

[1.80]

[1.23]

[1.55]

7.97***

Fractionalized Project Preferences
* At-Large Elections

[3.01]

-3.10

Fractionalized Project Preferences

[1.99]

7.96**

Ethnically Mixed Village
* At-Large Elections

[3.21]

-3.27

Ethnically Mixed Village

[2.21]

9.96***

Geographically Large Village
* At-Large Elections

[3.01]

-3.36*

Geographically Large Village
Quadruple Fixed Effects

(4)

[1.96]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

2,016

2,016

2,016

2,016

R-squared

0.18

0.19

0.19

0.19

Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

38

Table 5. Effect of Electoral Rules on Project Implementation
Panel A

Project Implementation Started Before:
October 2008
(1)

January 2009

April 2009

(2)

(3)

-0.001

0.032

[0.043]

[0.045]

Quadruple Fixed Effects

Yes

Observations
R-squared

At-Large Election

July 2009

October 2009

(4)

(5)

0.086**

0.047

0.058***

[0.035]

[0.031]

[0.018]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

506

506

506

506

506

0.39

0.56

0.53

0.40

0.22

Panel B

Project Implementation Completed Before:
January 2009
(1)

April 2009

July 2009

October 2009

(2)

(3)

(4)

January 2010
(5)

0.032

0.047

0.051***

0.019*

0.005

[0.045]

[0.031]

[0.018]

[0.010]

[0.005]

Quadruple Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

506

506

506

506

506

R-squared

0.56

0.40

0.21

0.21

0.09

At-Large Election

Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.

39

Table 6. Effect of Electoral Rules on Council Members’ Location
Natural Log of Distance
between Residences of Council
Members and Village Center

At-Large Election

(1)

(2)

-0.32***

-0.28***

[0.11]

[0.08]

0.75***

Natural Log of Median Distance
between Residences of Villagers

[0.06]

Quadruple Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Observations

1,003

1,003

R-squared

0.21

0.36

Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant
at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

40

Table 7: Location of Council Members’ Residences and their Educational Attainment
Council Member
Finished High School
(1)
Natural Log of Distance between Council Members’
Residences and Village Center
At-Large Election * Natural Log of Distance between
Council Members’ Residences and Village Center
At-Large Election

(2)

-0.65

-1.89

[1.22]

[1.24]

4.45**

4.75**

[2.24]

[2.20]

-16.16

-17.62

[11.20]

[11.00]

4.10**

Natural Log of Median Distance between Residences
of Villagers

[1.70]

Quadruple Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

p-Value for Effect of Distance in At-Large Villages

0.05

0.15

Observations

857

857

R-squared

0.21

0.21

Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

41

Online Appendix
Appendix A: Robustness
The model in Section 3 is simple and makes clear predictions. In Appendix A, we show that
these predictions are not due to excess simplification of the environment and that our results are
robust. Subsection A1 considers an extension of the model in which we allow for multiple competent
candidates. In subsection A2, we study an explicit legislative bargaining game. In subsection A3
we contrast joint decision-making with individual decision-making by the elected council members.
In subsection A4 we consider the case of multiple electoral districts, and thus more than two
council members. In subsection A5 we discuss where competence of council members aﬀects their
bargaining power. Finally, in subsection A6 we demonstrate that the results from the baseline
model hold if council members are elected sequentially.

A1

Several competent individuals

The results of the paper are driven by scarcity of competent individuals; if for any policy position it
were possible to find a competent citizen with such ideal point, there would be no trade-oﬀ between
policy and competence. Yet the assumption that there is only one competent individual may seem
somewhat extreme. The truth is, it simplifies exposition considerably, but is not critical.
To show this claim formally, assume that the society includes  competent citizens and, as
before, needs to elect two council members. Formally, assume that citizens with ideal points
1       are competent, where 1       are independent random variables distributed uniformly
on [− ] (as usual, we will denote the order statistics by (1) ≤ · · · ≤ ( ) ). As before, assume
everyone knows who is competent and who is not. The case  = 1 was considered in Section 3.
We start by showing that for any  and any realization of 1       , there exists an equilibrium
in pure strategies, both in district and in at-large elections. The median voter theorem applies
again, and for at-large elections, a pair of citizens that maximizes the utility of the median voter,
 (       ), will be elected in an equilibrium. Notice that the median voter only needs to
consider  ( − 1) 2 pairs of competent citizens plus a combination of one competent citizen with
type, say, ( 1 ) and his political antipode (0 −1 ); since he only needs to choose among a finite
A-1

number of pairs, the maximum is attained at some pair.
The argument is only slightly more involved in the case of district elections. Suppose that in
some pure strategy equilibrium the left district  elects a citizen (   ). The best response by
the right district’s median voter is either to elect the most extreme of the competent individuals
¡
¢
 ( ) , provided that there is a competent individual in the district (() ≥ 0), or to elect the

most extreme individual (0 ); this only depends on  . Thus, the political preferences of the best©
ª
response individual is  ( ) ⊂ ( )   . Moreover, this best-response function is monotone:
if 0   and  ∈  ( ), then  ∈  (0 ), and if () ∈  (0 ), then () ∈  ( ).

Similarly, if the right district elects a citizen (   ), the political preferences of the best-response
ª
©
individual in the left district  is  ( ) ∈ − (1) . It also satisfies monotonicity: if 0  
and − ∈  ( ), then − ∈  (0 ), and if (1) ∈  (0 ), then (1) ∈  ( ). This

monotonicity of best responses already implies existence. Obviously, if  ∈  (−) and − ∈
 (), then there is an equilibrium where (   ) = (0 −) and (   ) = (0 ) are elected. If
the first inclusion does not hold, then  ( ) = () for any  , and thus there is an equilibrium
¢
¡
¢
¡
where  elects individual with type  () and  elects (   ), where  ∈  () . Similarly,
¡
¢
if the second inclusion fails, then there is an equilibrium where  elects  (1) and  elects (   )
¡ ¢
with  ∈  (1) . In any case, there is an equilibrium in pure strategies. The argument above
applies, with obvious modifications, to  = 0 as well.

Notice, however, that it in the case of district elections, the equilibrium need not be unique
(even in terms of elected types). For example, take  = 2,  = 1,  = 1,  =

1
4,

and suppose

1 = − 12 , 2 = 12 . Then there is an equilibrium where ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are elected: indeed, the
µ1
¶2
+(− 1 )
median voter in district  gets 14 + 14 − 2 2 2 − 12
= 14 by electing the competent citizen, but
³ 1
´2
1−
3
only 14 − 2 2 − 12 = 16
by electing the extreme one, and thus does not want to deviate (and the
calculation for district  is symmetric). At the same time, there is an equilibrium where (0 −)
³
´2
1
and (0 ) are elected: in this case, the median voter in district  gets − 1+(−1)
−
= − 14
2
2
³1
´2
+(−1)
5
by electing the most extreme one, but only 14 − 2 2
− 12 = − 16
by electing the competent

one. This multiplicity of equilibria is due to strategic complementarity: the median voter in either
district is more willing to elect an extreme council member if the other district elects an extreme
one.

A-2

We thus have the following result.
Proposition A1 Suppose that there are  competent individuals, where  is a non-negative integer. Then for any realization of their political preferences there exists an equilibrium.
To proceed further, we need the following technical lemma, which is proven, along with other
results, in Appendix B.
Lemma A1 Suppose that  ≥ 2 random variables 1       are independent and uniformly distributed on [−1 1]. Fix any real number  ∈ (0 1). Let
 ( ) = Pr (∃ ∈ {1      } : 1 −  ≤ ) ,
 ( ) = Pr (∃  ∈ {1      }   6=  : | +  | ≤ ) .
Then  ( ) and  ( ) are strictly increasing in  and in  , and  ( ) ≤  ( ) for all
 and .
In what follows, assume that




 14  2 ; this assumption means that the political dimension is

suﬃciently important. It says that any citizen prefers his ideal point implemented by an incompetent council member to a point at distance 2 implemented by a competent one. The assumption
guarantees that in within-district elections, a competent citizen with  close to 0 will not be elected,
so there is a real competence-vs.-bias trade-oﬀ in district elections.
Consider at-large elections. The median voter can always guarantee himself utility  by electing
any competent citizen, e.g., ( 1 ), and a corresponding incompetent citizen (0 −1 ). However, he
³
´
 + 2
could do better if there were two competent citizens  and  with   2 
 ; in this case,
³
´2
 +
he would get 2 −   2  . Therefore, in at-large elections, if there are two competent citizens
q
with | +  | ≤ 2  , then the council will consist of two competent citizens, and otherwise will
contain one competent and one incompetent one. By Lemma A1 (which we may apply with an

appropriate normalization), the probability that both members are competent equals  ( ),
q
where we denoted  = 2   1.

Now consider district elections. Two competent citizens will be elected only if both districts

elect competent citizens. Suppose district  elected a citizen with political position  ; then the the
A-3

median voter in district  will elect a competent citizen only if there is one with political position 
q
³
³
´2
´2
 +

such that  −   2  − 2
≥ −  +
−
,
i.e.,
if

≥

−

−
4  + 2 . This is equivalent


2
2
r
³ ´2




+ 4 
+
; therefore, by Lemma A1, for any given  , the probability that
to 1 −  ≤ 
2

r
³ ´2



district  elects a competent citizen is  (  ( )), where  ( ) =  + 4 
+
. Notice
2


that  ( ) ≤  for all  ∈ [− 0], and the inequality is strict for  6= 0.

From the reasoning above, in district elections, district  would only elect council members
q
with  ≥  −  − 4  + 2  0, and, similarly, district  would only elect those with  ≤
q
− −  + 4  + 2  0. Therefore, for any fixed council member from the left district who may
be elected, we have  ( )  , and thus  (  ( ))   ( ) ≤  ( ), which means that the

probability that district  elects a competent politician is strictly less likely than the probability
that two competent politicians are elected in at-large elections. Consequently, the probability that
both council member are competent is strictly smaller in district elections than in at-large ones.
This establishes the following result.
Proposition A2 For any number of competent citizens  ≥ 1, the expected quality of council
members under at-large elections is higher than under district elections. Moreover, the number of
competent council member under at-large elections first-order stochastically dominates that under
district elections.
It is trivial to extend the result to the case where  is random (say, a Poisson variable); in this
case, the villagers would observe the identities of competent citizens, and thus  , prior to voting,
and then the reasoning above for this  applies.

A2

Legislative bargaining game

In this subsection, we modify the game from Section 3 by assuming that the two elected council
members do not automatically choose the policy midway between their ideal points, but rather
participate in a legislative bargaining game, as in Banks and Duggan (2000). Namely, the two
council members,  with type (   ) and  with type (   ) (where    ) play the following
game.
There are an infinite number of periods, starting with period 0. In each period, each of the
council members becomes agenda-setter with probability 12 . The agenda-setter proposes policy ,
A-4

and the other member either accepts or rejects it. If  is accepted in period , then each citizen 
(including the two council members) get  (  ) = − ( −  )2 in each subsequent period. In every
period before a policy is accepted, all citizens suﬀer a penalty − , where   4 2 (since the
payoﬀ from policy  (  ) is non-positive, we need to assume that the payoﬀ without any policy
is even worse, even if the distance to that policy is 2). All citizens maximize their discounted
expected payoﬀ, and  ∈ (0 1) is a common discount factor. In this model, we assume




 12  2 ;

this is required to obtain strict results in Proposition A3 below, but it does not aﬀect existence of
equilibrium.
We first solve for the outcome of the bargaining game. It is characterized by an acceptance set
 ⊂ , which is a connected compact, and each of the council members, when he becomes the
agenda-setter, picks the policy from set  which maximizes his  (  ) over  ∈ . The immediate
acceptance result applies; along the equilibrium path, the first policy proposed will be accepted.
We can easily prove the following result.
Lemma A2 Suppose that two council members,  and , have ideal points (   ) and (   ) with
   . Then in equilibrium:
(i) If  ≥
Ãr

 +
2

+




 −( − )2
,
( − )2
−
2

+

³

 −
2(1−)

´2

 +
2

then  and  propose
!

 (2 − ) −

 −
2(1−)

−

Ãr




+

³

 −
2(1−)

´2

 (2 − ) −

 −
2(1−)

!

and

, respectively, and other council member is indiﬀerent

between accepting and rejecting these proposals;
(ii) If  

 −( − )2
,
( − )2
− 2 

then  and  propose their ideal points,  and  , and the other council

member strictly prefers to accept it.
Lemma A2 says the following. If the discount factor  is suﬃciently high, then the acceptance
set  is suﬃciently narrow; it lies strictly between the ideal positions of the two council members,
and each agenda-setter proposes the policy at the extreme of the acceptance set. If the discount
factor is suﬃciently low, then the acceptance set is wide, as the politicians are too impatient and
are willing to accept policies that are far from their ideal point. This allows each politician to insist
on their ideal policy in equilibrium. It is easy to see that if punishment  is very high, then the
acceptance set is likely to be large, and politicians will propose their ideal policy.
As in many bargaining models, the extreme case where  is close to 1, i.e., politicians are either

A-5

patient or are able to make proposals frequently, is the most interesting one. However, the opposite
case where  is close to 0 is also noteworthy. The following characterizes comparative statics in
these extreme cases.
Proposition A3 For any , there exists an equilibrium. Moreover, there exist 0   1   2  1
such that:
(i) If    2 , then the expected competence of council members elected in at-large elections is
higher than that in district elections. Moreover, as  → 1, the types of elected council members
converge (in distribution) to the case where they chose the midpoint automatically, as in Section 3;
(ii) If    1 , then the expected competence in district elections is higher than the expected
competence in at-large elections. Moreover, when bargaining, each council member proposes his
own ideal point.
Proposition A3 gives two important takeaways. First, if oﬀers are made frequently and  is
close to 1, the outcomes of elections are similar to the outcomes of the game studies in Section
3, and this implies robustness of those results. Second, if oﬀers are made rarely, the results are
overturned, and district elections lead to more competent council members. This goes in contrast
to the previoust results; to see the intuition, it is helpful to observe that if  is low enough, then
each council member will propose his ideal point. This creates very diﬀerent incentives to voters
in district elections: instead of electing a very biased council member in hope that his influence
would moderate the council member from the other district, the median voter in a district would
prefer to elect someone with ideal point close to him. Indeed, this median voter has no hope of
influencing the oﬀer made by the council member elected by the other district, and instead he wants
to get higher utility from oﬀers made by his own delegate. As a result, a district which lacks a
competent individual elects his median voter to the council, whereas a district with the competent
¡
¢2
person elects him if he is close enough to the median voter, i.e., if   − 2
≤  in district 
¡
¢
2
and if   + 2 ≤  in district , and otherwise it elects the median voter in that district. The

incentives are also changed in at-large elections. Now, the median voter prefers to elect one council
member with  = 0, and also the competent person, provided that 2 ≤ . Thus, to get elected,
q
the competent person needs to be within  distance from 0 in at-large elections, and within such

distance from either − 2 or


2

in district elections, and the second is clearly more likely.
A-6

We therefore see that district elections dominate at-large elections if oﬀers are suﬃciently infrequent, and the reason is that the size of each district is smaller, and therefore even relatively
extreme citizens in the district are not so extreme from the perception of the district’s median
voter. Thus, the eﬀect that at-large elections produce more competent council members (which we
see in the data) is due to legislative bargaining considerations, rather than the ability of all voters
to coordinate in at-large elections.

A3

Joint and individual decisions

So far, we have assumed that the two council members make a joint policy decision, and in doing
so, they bargain eﬃciently. This seems to be a reasonable approximation to the environment we
are interested in. One could, however, consider diﬀerent models of decision-making.
Suppose, for example, that the legislative body makes decisions on a number of questions, and
only share  requires a joint decision, while for 1 − , a random council member is appointed to
make a unilateral decision. The case considered in Section 3 corresponds to  = 1, while   1
may correspond to situations where some policy decisions are local, and the local council member
has the sole responsibility of making the decision.
It turns out that our results remain intact for  suﬃciently high, but as  becomes smaller,
district elections will dominate at-large ones. To see why, consider the extreme,  = 0, and notice
that in this case the median voter in district elections does not have a strategic reason for voting
for biased candidates. His ideal candidate has the same ideal point as he does (−2 or 2), and
moreover, the problems of the two districts are independent. Now, the reason why district elections
would lead to more competent candidates is clear: the median voter in the district is not too averse
to any of the candidates in this district; for example, if    (2)2 , the most competent candidate
is guaranteed to be elected. In at-large elections, the median voter (at 0) would be quite a bit averse
to competent but biased candidates; in this case, we can only guarantee that the competent citizen
will be elected if    2 , which is a stronger condition. Notice that this result is very similar
to the prediction of Subsection A5 (Proposition A3): there, if  is low enough, the ideal points of
council members would be picked with equal probability, which matches the case  = 0.
This result once again confirms that our results are driven by the joint nature of decision-making
in councils. At-large elections are preferred if council members make a joint decision. If they have
A-7

multiple policy questions which they split between themselves, then district elections should have
an edge. Studying such trade-oﬀs in more detail seems to be a fruitful area for future research.

A4

Multiple districts

In this subsection, we explore robustness of the results if there are multiple districts. Suppose that in
district elections, the village is divided into  equally-sized contiguous districts, so for  ∈ {1  },
£
¤
2
district  = − + 2
 ( − 1)  − +   , and each district needs to elect one council member.
In at-large elections, the entire village elects  council members (to keep the model similar to the

previous case, it is natural to assume that each citizen has  votes and can vote for  diﬀerent
citizens; this ensures existence of equilibrium, which will maximize the utility of the median voter.
To generalize the decision-making in the council, we start with the case where council members play
a bargaining game with random recognition as in Subsection A2. Namely, each council member
is chosen randomly to make a proposal, and a proposal is accepted if suﬃciently many council
members support it. Let us focus on simple majority rules (which generalizes Subsection A2): a
proposal is accepted if more than


2

council members support it.

With this setup, one can easily show that decisions will be made by median voters in respective
districts both in at-large and in district elections. To understand their incentives, consider the
outcome of bargaining between four council members with political preferences 1 ≤ · · · ≤  . Since
this model is a particular case of Banks and Duggan (2000), it is characterized by an acceptance
set, with each council member proposing ideal point from this set. It is not hard to show that if
 is close to 1, then the acceptance set converges to a point (see Austen-Smith and Banks, 2005).
Moreover, since the utility functions are symmetric (and quadratic, so all council members have the
same preferences regarding the uncertainty of the outcome if the current one is rejected), this point
coincides with the preferences of the median council member  +1 if  is odd and it lies halfway
³
´2
1
between the two median council members (i.e., 2   +   +1 ) if  is even. The intuition is
2

2

very simple. If  is odd, then every council member, except for the median one  +1 , chooses
2

his proposal subject to the constraint that the median voter is indiﬀerent between accepting and
waiting; once this is true, all members lying on one of the sides would be in favor of accepting, which
is enough for a majority. Thus,  +1 must always be in the acceptance set. If  is even, then an
2

agenda-setter needs to get agreement from the two median voters, and then standard arguments
A-8

would imply convergence to the midpoint between them.
Let us take the limit  → 1 and assume, for simplicity, that a council with an odd number of
³
´
members chooses   +1 , and a council with an even number of members chooses 12   +   +1 . In
2

2

2

at-large elections, it is feasible to achieve the first best by electing the competent citizen ( ) and
complementing him with other members so that the council chooses policy 0. In district elections,
only the median districts (one or two) have strategic incentives not to elect the competent citizen
if he happens to reside there; other districts do not have an influence on policy in equilibrium,
and therefore will elect the competent citizen if they can, or may pick a random citizen otherwise.
Consequently, at-large elections are more likely to elect the competent citizen if he lives close to
the center, but the diﬀerence disappears if he lives far; note, however, that this result relies on the
assumption of majority voting.

A5

Education and bargaining power

We have assumed that competence directly aﬀects citizens’ utilities, and have demonstrated that
education is indeed correlated with faster completion of projects (see Table 3). It is, however, also
possible that education implies a higher bargaining power in the council. We may assume, for
simplicity, that if a competent person bargains with an incompetent one, he is more likely to make
a proposal. If so, then the equilibrium policy choice will be closer to the alternative that he prefers.
The median voter logic would still apply, but the incentives would be distorted. In at-large
elections, the median voter would not always be able to get his ideal point 0 with a competent
council member, if he resides suﬃciently close to the border, because a more distant second member
would be needed. Thus, it is now possible that the most competent person will not be elected;
this will happen if the eﬀect of competence on utility is small ( is small), but the distortion of
bargaining power is substantial. At the same time, in district elections, the median voter would be
more willing to elect the competent citizen, as he wants the equilibrium policy (0 if two extreme
and incompetent citizens are elected) to be distorted towards his district.
Overall, if education is positively correlated with bargaining power, the eﬀect that at-large
elections lead to more competent council members will diminish. Intuitively, voters in district
elections would prefer to elect competent council members, because this would help them distort
the policy rather than hurt, as in the baseline model (see also Mattozzi and Snowberg, 2014, for
A-9

a similar eﬀect). Yet, if the correlation between bargaining power and education is small, at-large
elections would still lead to better councils, as in the baseline model.

A6

Electing one council member at a time

In the main model in Section 3, at-large elections led to more competent council members partly
because the voters were able to perfectly balance the competent individual they wanted to elect
with someone who has exactly the opposite policy preferences. In Subsection A2, we showed that
this result disappears if both council members are elected at the same time, but instead of working
out a joint decision, each of them chooses his ideal policy with equal probability (this happened if
the discount factor  was low enough). This suggested that the results are driven by joint policy
decisions rather than coordination. Similarly, in Subsection A3, if council members make decisions
separately, the advantage of at-large elections disappears.
In this Subsection, we emphasize this further by showing that if the two council members are
elected sequentially, then our result of Section 3 go through, i.e., ability of voters to coordinate in
at-large elections does not drive the results. (For example, the U.S. Senate is elected this way: each
state elects two senators, but only one at a time.) More precisely, we take one council member as
given, and study the probability that the second council member would be competent. Suppose
that the type of the existing council member is (0  0 ). Without loss of generality, assume that
0  0, and consider two possibilities: in at-large elections, the whole society votes for the other
member, and in district elections, only district  votes.
We can again prove that the single-crossing conditions hold, so elections are determined by
the median voter in the corresponding elections. Let us again fix the bliss point of the competent
individual at . We focus on the case   0; if   0 (and in particular, if the competent citizen is
already elected), then the question of comparing at-large elections and district elections becomes
trivial, thus   0 is the interesting case.
Consider at-large elections first. The median voter is eﬀectively choosing between mirroring the
existing council member (thus electing someone with type (0 −0 ) and getting utility 0 = 0) and
³
´2
electing the competent citizen, thus getting utility  −  02+ . He will choose the competent
q
citizen if and only if (0 + )2 ≤ 4  , i.e., if  is in 2  -neighborhood of −0 .
In district elections, the median voter is choosing between the most biased candidate (which will
A-10

³
³ ´2
´2
0

give him utility − 0 +
−
=
−
) and the competent one (which will give him utility
2
2
2
³
´2
 −  02+ − 2 . The competent candidate is elected if and only if 4  + (0 )2 ≥ (0 −  + )2 ,
q
4  + (0 )2 -neighborhood of  − 0 . Since 0  0, this is true for  ∈
i.e., if  is in the
∙
¸
q
q
2

 + |0 | − 4  + (0 )   ; the length of this interval is less than 2  . It is now clear that

in expectation (taken over the value of 0 ), at-large elections are still more likely to elect the

competent candidate; one can also prove that the result for polarization holds as well.
The intuition for this result is the following. In at-large elections, the induced ideal point
of the median voter for the new council member is −0 , while in district elections, this point is
 − 0 . Thus, in the former case, the induced ideal point is strictly in the interval of [0 ], and
in the latter case it is beyond this interval. This immediately implies polarization, but given the
quadratic disutility function, the voters are also more sensitive to policy in the latter case, and thus
they are more willing to elect an incompetent individual. As a result, even if one council member is
to be elected, at-large elections produce superior results. It is worth noting that this would be true
even if in at-large elections, citizens had to elect someone from the right district (thus potentially
restricting their ability to elect the most competent candidate).

A-11

Appendix B: Proofs
B1

Proofs of main results

Proof of Proposition 1. Part 1. Let us show that the following increasing diﬀerences property
holds. In district elections, for any distribution of types (   ) elected by district , we have that
for two citizens   with    and any candidates (   )  (0  0 ) such that   0 ,
¡
¢
¡
¢
E (       ) − E     0  0  E (       ) − E     0  0 ,
where the expectation is taken over the distribution of (   ). Indeed, we have
¡
¢
E (       ) − E     0  0
µ
µ
¶2
¶2
 + 
 + 0
0
= E +  − E
−  − E −  + E
− 
2
2
µ
¶µ
¶
¢
¡
 − 0
 + 0
=  − 0 + 
2 − E −
,
2
2
which is again increasing in  . Obviously, a similar increasing diﬀerences condition holds for
elections in district , holding the distribution is district  fixed.
Suppose that  is an equilibrium in district elections. Take district  and consider the set of
types  that maximize the payoﬀ of median voter  , holding the strategies of voters in district 
fixed (this set is nonempty, since the space of types is compact: it is a segment {  :  = 0  ≤ 0},
plus perhaps a point ( ), if  ≤ 0). Let us show that district  must elect a council member from
set  with probability 1. Suppose not, i.e., there is a probability distribution over the elected types
(   ), and there is a positive probability that some type ( ) ∈
  is elected. Take (0  0 ) ∈  and
let us show that there is a coalition that is able and willing to deviate and elect (0  0 ). Indeed, we
have that the median voter  prefers (0  0 ) over the distribution of types in . Then if 0  E ,
then all individuals with  ≥ − 2 prefer (0  0 ) because of increasing diﬀerences, and some of those
with   − 2 prefer (0  0 ) by continuity, and thus there is a majority which can elect (0  0 ) and
profit from it. A similar argument applies if 0  E , whereas if 0 = E , then all citizens of district
 strictly prefer (0  0 ), and thus there is a profitable deviation. This shows that only types that
maximize the utility of the median voter may get elected; a similar argument applies to district .

B-1

Consider the expected utility of the median voter in district  if type (   ) is elected. It is
given by

E (       ) =  + E − E
=  + E − 

µ

µ

 +  
+
2
2

 + E 
+
2
2

¶2
¶2


− Var ( ) ,
4

and is monotonically decreasing in  . Thus, the only possible types that can maximize the utility
of  are (0 −) or ( ), provided that  ≤ 0. Similar considerations apply to district , which
proves that the district without the competent citizen elects the most biased individual, and the
district with this citizen electes either of the two. Moreover, the median voter in a district with
the competent citizen (say, district ) is only indiﬀerent between him and the biased voter if

 (0 − 0 ) =  (  0 ) .
Since in this case district  elects the type (0 ) as we just showed; this is equivalent to

−

µ


2

¶2

=−

µ

+ 
+
2
2

¶2

,

and this can hold for exactly one value of ,  = −̂. Similarly, the median voter in district 
may be indiﬀerent only if  = ̂. This proves that for almost all values of  the types elected in
equilibrium are uniquely determined.
It remains to prove that there exists an equilibrium. For || 6= ̂, consider voting strategies where
in every district, every voter votes for the candidate specified above. Then there is no profitable
deviation by any coalition; any such coalition must gather support of at least half of voters in the
the district and thus must make the median voter at least as well oﬀ; however, for these , there is
no such alternative. If  = ̂, then there is an equilibrium where voters to the left  in district
 vote for ( ) and the rest vote for (0 ); each gets half of votes and wins with probability 12 ;
the strategy is similar if  = −̂. It is easy to show that in these cases, too, there is no profitable
deviation by any coalition, and this finishes the proof of existence.
Part 2. Let us establish the following increasing diﬀerences property. In at-large elections,

B-2

for two citizens   with    , and any candidates (   )  (   )  (0  0 )  (0  0 ) such that
 +
2



0 +0
2 ,

¡
¢
¡
¢
 (       ) −  0  0  0  0   (       ) −  0  0  0  0 .
To see this, notice that
¡
¢
 (       ) −  0  0  0  0
¶2
¶2
µ
µ 0
 + 0
 + 
0
0
=  +  − 
−  −  −  + 
− 
2
2
µ
¶µ
¶
¢
¡
 +  0 + 0
 +  0 + 0
=  +  − 0 − 0 + 
−
2 −
−
,
2
2
2
2
which is increasing in  .
Let us show that there is an equilibrium where individuals with types ( ) and (0 −) are
elected. Fix the voting strategies where each citizen casts one vote for ( ) and another vote for
(0 −); let us show that there is no collective deviation that increases utility of all deviators. Indeed,
suppose that a subset of citizens  can deviate and get types (   )  (   ) elected. If  +  = 0
and not all citizens are indiﬀerent, it must be that  =  = 0, but in this case, all citizens are
worse oﬀ, so  must be empty and cannot make any deviation. Thus,  +  6= 0, and without loss
of generality suppose  +   0. Then for median voter 0 , 0 (  0 −)  0 (       ),
and by increasing diﬀerences,  (  0 −)   (       ) for any  with   0; continuity
implies that the same inequality holds in the neighborhood of 0, if  

 +
4

(which is negative).

Thus, the share of voters who strictly prefer (   )  (   ) to ( )  (0 −) is less than

1
2,

and

 is a subset of this set. Thus, after deviation, ( ) and (0 −) will share the votes of  \ ,
thereby each getting more than

1
4

of all votes. At the same time, any candidate supported by voters

in  will get less than 14 , even if all citizens in  give him one of their votes. This implies that
coalition  is unable to alter the results of the elections, a contradiction that proves existence of
an equilibrium with the required properties.
Now, suppose that there is an equilibrium  which induces some distribution over pairs of
individuals (   )  (   ) who get elected. Suppose first that E ( +  ) = 0. If the individual
with ( ) is elected with probability 1, then individual with type (0 −) is also elected with
B-3

probability 1, and thus  is an equilibrium stipulated by the Proposition. If ( ) is not part of
the pair with a positive probability, then E ( +  )  . In this case, the entire society  has a
deviation, where each citizen casts votes for ( ) and (0 −); this will not change the expected
policy, will not increase policy variance, but will increase the expected competence of the council.
Now suppose that E ( +  ) 6= 0; without loss of generality, E ( +  )  0. Consider coalition 
of citizens with  

E( + )
;
4

each of them prefers policy 0 to policy

E( + )
,
2

and therefore each

of them strictly prefers to have ( ) and (0 −) elected. They can also achieve this by voting for
these individuals; in this way, they will get more than
will be left with less than

1
4

1
4

votes each, whereas all other individuals

votes each. This is a profitable deviation, showing that only equilibria

where ( ) and (0 −) are elected may exist. This completes the proof. ¥
Proof of Proposition 2. As shown in the proof of Proposition 1, district  elects the competent
citizen if  (0 − 0 )   (  0 ), i.e., if   −̂, and similarly, district  does so if
  ̂. Thus, two most biased individuals are elected in the complementary case, i.e., if ||  ̂.
This set is nonempty if ̂  0, which holds if and only if 34  2   . When this is true, the probability
that the competent citizen is elected is
̂ − (−̂)
̂
=1−
=1−
=
2


r

4


+ 1 − 1.
 2

(B1)

Thus,  is increasing in  and decreasing in  and . This completes the proof. ¥
Proof of Proposition 3.

Part 1. In at-large elections, one council member is competent

and the other is not, thus expected competence is  =


2.

In district elections, the expected

competence is  =  2 (where  is given by (B1)). Thus,  ≥  , because  ≤ 1, and the
inequality is strict whenever   1, which may be simplified to   34  2 . The diﬀerence is
µ
¶
q


 −  = (1 −  ) 2 = 2 − 4  2 + 1 2 , which is increasing in  and .

Part 2. In at-large elections, for a given , both council members lie at distance  from
R
0, and thus expected polarization equals  = 1 0 1  = 12 . In district elections, it equals
³R
´ ´
³
´³
´
R ³
̂
̂
̂
1
 = 1 0 1  + ̂ 1 +

=
3
−
1
+
2
4

 , provided that ̂  0, and equals
µ
³ ´2 ¶
 0. In addition,  −  is increasing in
 = 34 otherwise. Thus,  −  = 14 1 + 2 ̂ − ̂
q
̂

4 
2 + 1, and thus is increasing in  and .
 =2−
B-4

³
´
Part 3.
In at-large elections, for a council member ( ), Pr ||


|

=

=

³
´
Pr ||
   |  = 0 =  (for  ∈ [0 1]). Therefore, in elected council members, competence and

bias are independent and thus uncorrelated. In district elections, if  = , the conditional distrih
i
³
´
h
i
−̂
̂
bution is uniform on ̂  1 , so Pr ||


|

=

=
for

∈

1
. At the same time, if


̂
³
´
 = 0, the conditional distribution is an atom at 1: Pr ||
 = 1 |  = 0 = 1. Hence,
¶
µ
¶
µ
¶
1
̂
||
||
|= =
1+
1=E
|= ,
E

2


µ

because ̂  . Consequently, in district elections,  and  are negatively correlated. This completes
the proof. ¥
Proof of Proposition 4. Consider the utility of a voter  with ideal point  if the location of the
competent person is . In case of at-large elections, it is equal to
 (  ) =  ( 0; 0) =  − 2 .
In case of district elections, it equals
⎧
³
´2
+
⎪
⎪

−

−

if   −̂

⎪
2
⎪
⎨
 (  ) =
if ||  ̂ .
−2
⎪
⎪
³
´
⎪
2
⎪
⎩  −  − − 
if   ̂
2

Taking expectation over , E (  ) =  − 2 , and

Ã
¶
µ
¶3 !
µ
̂
̂
1
−  2 +
1−
E (  ) =  1 −
.

12

Thus,

µ
¶
̂
1
̂ 3
E (  ) −  (  ) =  +  1 −
 0.
 12


This completes the proof. ¥

B-5

B2

Proofs of results from Subsection A1

Proof of Proposition A1. Existence (and generic uniqueness) of equilibrium in at-large elections
is proven similarly to the corresponding part of Proposition 1; this proof is omitted. Existence of
equilibrium in the case of district elections was proven in the text. ¥
Proof of Lemma A1. The fact that  ( ) and  ( ) are strictly increasing in both variables
is trivial. Denote the c.d.f. of each of  by  (); then  () =
show that
 ( ) = 1 −

µ

¶

2−
2

+1
2

for  ∈ [−1 1]. Let us first

.

Indeed,
¢
¡
¢
¡
 ( ) = Pr 1 − () ≤  = Pr () ≥ 1 − 
¢
¡
= 1 − Pr () ≤ 1 −  = 1 −   (1 − )
¶
¶
µ
µ
2− 
1−+1 
=1−
.
= 1−
2
2
We prove that  ( ) ≥  ( ) (with equality only if  = 2) by induction by  , separately
for even and odd  . We start with even  .
Suppose  = 2. Then

 (2 ) = Pr (|1 + 2 | ≤ ) = Pr (− ≤ 1 + 2 ≤ ) = 2 Pr (0 ≤ 1 + 2 ≤ ) ,
where the last equality follows from symmetry of distribution of 1 +2 . The p.d.f. of the distribution
of 1 + 2 is

2−||
4

for || ≤ 2, and thus
 (2 ) = 2 Pr (0 ≤ 1 + 2 ≤ ) = 2
µ
¶
2− 2
= 1−
=  (2 ) .
2

B-6

Z

0



2−
 (4 − )
 =
4
4

Now take  ≥ 4
 ( ) = Pr (∃  ∈ {1     }   6=  : | +  | ≤ )
 Pr (|1 + 2 | ≤  ∨ · · · ∨ |−1 +  | ≤ )
= 1 − Pr (|1 + 2 | ≥  ∧ · · · ∧ |−1 +  | ≥ )
= 1 − Pr (|1 + 2 | ≥ ) × · · · × Pr (|−1 +  | ≥ )
Ãµ
¶2 ! 2

2
−

= 1 − (1 −  (2 )) 2 = 1 −
=  ( ) ,
2
which proves the result for even  .
Consider the case of odd  . Suppose  = 3. Then we have

 (3 ) = Pr (|1 + 2 | ≤  ∨ |1 + 3 | ≤  ∨ |2 + 3 | ≤ )
 Pr (|1 + 2 | ≤  ∨ |1 + 3 | ≤ )
= 1 − Pr (|1 + 2 | ≥  |1 + 3 | ≥ )
= 1 − Pr (1 + 2 ≤ − ∨ 1 + 2 ≥  |1 + 3 | ≥ )
= 1 − Pr (|1 + 3 | ≥ ) Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 | |1 + 3 | ≥ )
= 1 − (1 −  (2 )) Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 | |1 + 3 | ≥ )
¶
µ
2− 2
Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 | |1 + 3 | ≥ ) .
= 1−
2
It therefore suﬃces to prove that Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 | |1 + 3 | ≥ ) ≤

2−
2 .

For that, it

suﬃces to prove that Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 ) for any 1 ∈ [−1 1]. To prove this, consider
the case 1 ≥ 0 (the case 1 ≤ 0 is symmetric and may be considered similarly). If  + 1 ≤ 1,
then Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 ) =

−−1 −(−1)
2

+

Pr (2 ≤ − − 1 ∨ 2 ≥  − 1 ) = Pr (2 ≥  − 1 ) =
 (3 )  1 −

µ

2−
2

¶2

B-7

1−(−1 )
2
1−(−1 )
2

= 1− ≤


2−
2 .

2−
2 .

If  + 1  1, then

Therefore,

2−
=  (3 ) .
2

Now suppose  ≥ 5. We have
 ( ) = Pr (∃  ∈ {1      }   6=  : | +  | ≤ )
 Pr (|1 + 2 | ≤  ∨ · · · ∨ |−2 + −1 | ≤  ∨ |−2 +  | ≤  ∨ |−1 +  | ≤ )
= 1 − Pr (|1 + 2 | ≥  ∧ · · · ∧ |−2 + −1 | ≥  ∧ |−2 +  | ≥  ∧ |−1 +  | ≥ )
= 1 − Pr (|1 + 2 | ≥ ) × · · · × Pr (|−4 + −3 | ≥ )
× Pr (|−2 + −1 | ≥  ∧ |−2 +  | ≥  ∧ |−1 +  | ≥ )
Ãµ
¶2 ! 2−3 µ
¶
 −3
2
−

2− 3
2
= 1 − (1 −  (2 ))
× (1 −  (3 )) = 1 −
=  ( ) .
2
2
This completes the proof. ¥
Proof of Proposition A2. The result will follow from the following argument. Let  and
 be random variables corresponding to total competences of councils and at-large and in district elections, respectively (where uncertainty is in locations of competent agents). We need to
prove that E ( )  E ( ). For this, it suﬃces to prove that  first-order stochastically dominates  . Since the support of both distributions involves only three points, 0 1 2, it suﬃces to
prove that Pr ( = 0)  Pr ( = 0) and Pr ( ≤ 1)  Pr ( ≤ 1). The first is true, because
Pr ( = 0) = 0 (in at-large elections, one council member will always be competent, because
electing some competent member (  ) and an incompetent person (0 − ) is always better for
the median voter than two incompetent members); at the same time, Pr ( = 0)  0 (e.g., if all
competent citizens are located close to 0, | |   for 1 ≤  ≤ , then two extreme agents will be
elected). It therefore suﬃces to prove that Pr ( = 2)  Pr ( = 2).
Consider at-large elections. As argued in the text, two competent citizens will be elected
q
if and only if for some    (where  6= ), | +  | ≤ 2  . If we take  random variable
 =


,

1 ≤  ≤  , they are independent and distributed uniformly on [−1 1]. Consequently,
q
Pr ( = 2) =  ( ) for  = 2   1.
Now consider district elections. We have Pr ( = 2) = Pr ( =  = )  Pr ( = ). The

latter probability is shown in the text not to exceed  ( ). Therefore, Pr ( = 2) =  ( ) ≥
 ( )  Pr ( = 2). This inequality shows that  first-order stochastically dominates  ,
which completes the proof. ¥
B-8

B3

Proofs of results from Subsection A2

Proof of Lemma A2. This bargaining model is a particular case of Banks and Duggan (2000),
with unanimity voting rule. Theorem 1 in that paper shows that there exists a no-delay equilibrium
and, moreover, every stationary equilibrium is a no-delay equilibrium; Theorem 2 implies that any
such equilibrium is in pure strategies. Finding the explicit formulas and showing uniqueness reduces
to a simple exercise, which is omitted. ¥
Proof of Proposition A3.The utility of any agent with ideal point  from a council with types
(   )  (   ), is
 +  − 

µ

¶2
 + 
−  −  (   ) 
2

(B2)

where  (   ) is the variance of the proposals by the two council members. As  → 1, the
equilibrium proposals of any two council members converge, uniformly, to

 +
2 .

Therefore, the
¯
¯
¯
¯
variance of  (   ) uniformly converges to 0. Moreover, one can easily check that ¯    (   )¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
and ¯   (   )¯ are bounded for all values of    , and the maximization problem (B2) is concave

in  and concave in  . This ensures existence of equilibrium.

Consider at-large elections. For  suﬃciently high, the utility of the median voter of electing
( ) and (0 −) exceeds any other option (in particular, electing two council members of type
(0 0)); therefore, the competent type will be elected. The other council member may have ideal
point other than −, but it is determined uniquely because of concavity of (B2). Since  (   )
uniformly converges to 0, the type of the other council member must be arbitrarily close to − for
 high enough.
Now consider district elections, and suppose that the competent citizen resides in district .
For  close to 1, district  will elect a council member with types exactly (0 ). District ,
following the logic of at-large elections, will either elect the competent citizen ( ) or the extreme
one, (0 −). As  → 1, this two-way problem of the median voter  will converge to the
problem he faces in the case where midpoint is selected automatically. This proves convergence
in distribution. Furthermore, for  high enough, at-large elections will always result in election of
the most competent citizen, while in district elections, this is not always the case (provided that



 34  2 , as in Proposition 3).
Now observe that for  suﬃciently close to 0, council members of any type propose their
B-9

ideal points in equilibrium; this follows from Lemma A2, given that   4 2 , which holds by
assumption. Consequently, the utility of a citizen with ideal point  from a council with types
(   )  (   ) is
1
1
 +  −  ( − )2 −  ( − )2 .
2
2
In at-large elections, one elected council member will have bliss point 0, and the competent citizen
( ) will be elected if and only if  ≥ 12 2 . In district elections, the problems of both districts are
¢2
¡
independent, and district  elects the competent citizen if and only if  ≥ 12   + 2 ; similarly,
¢2
¡
district  elects the competent citizen if and only if  ≥ 12   − 2 . Therefore, the probability of
µq
¶
2
electing the competent citizen in at-large elections is min
 1 ; the corresponding probability
 2
µ q
¶
2
in case of district elections is min 2 
2  1 . The former is weakly less, and it is strictly less if



 12  2 . This completes the proof. ¥

B4

Proof of auxiliary results claimed in Footnote 18

Proof that if in at-large elections each voter may cast two votes for the same candidate,
there may be multiple equilibria. This fact trivially follows from the result that we prove next.
Indeed, suppose that parameter values are such that if citizens can cast only one vote, there are
multiple equilibria. Take any such equilibrium , and consider strategy profile ̃ where each citizen
casts both votes for the same candidate he voted for under profile . Then ̃ is an equilibrium in
the game where two votes which may be cast for the same candidate. ¥
Proof that if in at-large elections each voter may cast only one vote, there may be
multiple equilibria. Let us prove that for some parameter values, there are several equilibria.
Suppose that the competent voter has bliss point , and suppose that  is high enough (namely,
 ≥

16
2
9  )

Let us show that any pair of council members ( ) and (0 ) may be elected in

equilibrium, provided that | + | 

2
3 .

Consider an equilibrium where share  of voters (where   0 is small) vote for the competent
citizen ( ), and the rest vote for (0 ); these two are then elected. The equilibrium policy in this
case is

+
2 .

The condition on  ensures that nobody wants to jeopardize election of a competent
³
´2
+
citizen. Indeed, a citizen with ideal point  gets  −  2 −  ; if a deviation prevents the
B-10

¯
¯
¯
¯
competent citizen from being elected, he will get at most 0. Since ¯ +
2 ¯ 
³
´2
¡ ¢2
 −  +
−

  −  43   0, and thus such deviation is not profitable.

2


3

and | | ≤ ,

It remains to consider the case where a coalition that plans to deviate and prevent (0 ) from

being elected must also ensure that it gives enough votes to the competent candidate ( ) so that
he is still elected. This implies that at least two-thirds of citizens must prefer electing of another
0

+
incompetent citizen 0 so that policy is +
rather than +
2
2 . This is only possible if 2 lies
£
¤
outside of the interval − 3  3 (otherwise no alternative is preferred by two-thirds). Therefore, if

| + | 

2
3 ,

no coalition will have a profitable deviation. This proves that there is a voting profile

which constitutes an equibrium, provided that | + | 

2
3 ,

which completes the proof. ¥

Proof that if in at-large elections each voter has more than two votes which must be
cast for diﬀerent candidates, there is a unique equilibrium. This proof is similar to the
proof of Proposition 1 and is omitted. ¥
Proof that if in at-large elections voters vote for pairs of candidates, there is a unique
equilibrium. It is trivial to show that a strategy profile where everyone votes for a pair of
candidates (( )  (0 −)) is an equilibrium, because no majority has a profitable deviation (this
follows from that this pair is a Condorcet winner). At the same time, if any other pair is elected
in equilibrium, then there is a majority willing to deviate and cast all its votes for (( )  (0 −)).
The proof of the latter fact is similar to the proof of Proposition 1 and is omitted. ¥

B-11

Appendix C: Additional Empirical Results
In Appendix C, we present some results on the eﬀect of election type on villagers’ satisfaction. This
Appendix also contains tables for auxiliary empirical results referred to in the main text.
Higher quality of politicians may improve voters’ attitudes toward local leaders and the electoral
process in general. We can test this prediction by looking at the attitudes of the villagers elicited
in the surveys conducted after the start of the program. Because of data limitations, however,
we cannot saparate satisfaction with the newly elected council from satisfaction with traditional
leaders, and satisfaction with the performance of NSP-related projects from satisfaction with other
activities of village leaders.
In particular, information on villagers’ attitudes comes from two follow-up surveys. The midline
survey was conducted in May—October 2009, at which point all complying villages had elected
councils and selected projects, but only 18 percent of projects had been completed. By the time
the endline survey was conducted in May—October 2011, virtually all projects were complete. The
survey was designed to be administered to ten randomly selected households surveyed at baseline,
with separate questionnaires for male household heads and a senior woman in the household. The
data provide information on 2,367 male respondents and 2,141 female respondents in the midline
survey and 2,130 male and 1,858 female respondents in the endline survey.34 To measure villagers’
satisfaction with local economic and governance outcomes, we use four perception-based binary
indicators from male and female household surveys at midline and endline: (i) whether respondent
thinks that village headman should be elected; (ii); whether the respondent attributes positive
economic changes to actions of the village leadership;35 (iii) whether the respondent is satisfied
with the work of the village leaders; and (iv) whether the respondent perceives that the household
is better oﬀ than it was last year.
34
Because of the deterioration in security conditions, we were not able to conduct surveys of male heads of household
in 11 villages and of female heads of household in 33 villages. Enumerators administering the male household
questionnaire were instructed to locate and interview the same households and, whenever possible, the same villagers
who participated in the baseline survey. Enumerators were able to successfully locate such respondents in 65 percent
of households in which male respondents were interviewed during the baseline survey. The predominant reason for
enumerators not being able to interview baseline respondents was that the person was away from home on the day
that the survey team visited the village, as it was the time of harvest. Diﬀerences between villages with diﬀerent
procedures of project selection in individual-level attrition are not statistically significant. We also check that the
eﬀect on attrition of such characteristics of respondents as age, income, assets, size of household, education, and
ethnicity are similar in villages with diﬀerent project selection rules.
35
This indicator is available only for the midline survey.

C-1

To test this prediction we estimate the following model:

 =  +  1 ·  ·  1 +  2 ·  ·  2 +  ·  1 +  ·  2 +  ,
where  is the outcome of interest. The results of the analysis of the eﬀect of electoral rules
on villagers’ attitudes toward local leaders and their perception of their economic situation are
presented in Table C5. They indicate that male villagers are more likely to support election of the
village headman in the midline survey, but this eﬀect decreases in magnitude and loses statistical
significance in the endline survey. Female villagers in the midline survey are more likely to attribute
positive economic changes to village leaders and to perceive an improvement in the economic
situation of their household in villages with at-large elections, although there is no significant
diﬀerence in their levels of satisfaction with the work of village leaders or in the instances of
disagreement with the decisions of village leaders. There is also no evidence that electoral rules
aﬀect attitudes of male or female respondents in the endline survey.
Overall, the results are weakly consistent with the model’s predictions, as there is some evidence
that attitudes of the villagers are more positive in villages with at-large elections in the midline
survey. We do not observe any eﬀect of electoral rules on villager’s satisfaction in the endline survey,
but this is not surprising, given the timing of the endline survey. The survey was conducted four
years after the selection of the councils and on average a year after all development projects were
finished, i.e., at the time where all activities for which the council was responsible were over, and
thus the quality of elected candidates is unlikely to aﬀect the satisfaction of the villagers at this
time.

C-2

Table С1. Effect of Electoral Rules on Council Members’ Educational Attainment
Council Member Finished Middle School
(1)
At-Large Election

(2)

(3)

3.43*

-2.48

0.6

-0.17

[1.93]

[2.76]

[1.98]

[2.55]

Fractionalized Project Preferences
* At-Large Elections

12.17***
[4.27]

-3.16

Fractionalized Project Preferences

[3.05]

Ethnically Mixed Village
* At-Large Elections

11.33**
[5.49]

-4.98

Ethnically Mixed Village

[4.26]

Geographically Large Village
* At-Large Elections

7.24*
[4.11]

-4.38

Geographically Large Village
Quadruple Fixed Effects

(4)

[2.80]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

2,016

2,016

2,016

2,016

R-squared

0.19

0.19

0.19

0.19

Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

C-3

Table С2. Council Members’ Educational Attainment and Project Implementation (IV results)
Panel A

Project Implementation Started Before:
October 2008

January 2009

April 2009

July 2009

October 2009

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.006

0.212

0.574**

0.312

0.388**

[0.265]

[0.291]

[0.262]

[0.195]

[0.151]

Quadruple Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

506

506

506

506

506

At Least One Council Member
Finished High school

Panel B

Project Implementation Completed Before:
January 2009
(1)

April 2009

July 2009

October 2009

(2)

(3)

(4)

January 2010
(5)

0.212

0.312

0.339**

0.125*

0.033

[0.291]

[0.195]

[0.145]

[0.067]

[0.033]

Project Type Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Quadruple Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

506

506

506

506

506

At Least One Council Member
Finished High school

Note: Results of the instrumental variables estimation in which the variable “At Least One Council Member Has
Finished High school” is instrumented with the dummy variable for at-large elections. F-statistics for the exclusion of
instrument from the first-stage regression is 10.95. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses.
*significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

C-4

Table С3. Effect of Electoral Rules on Council Members’ Educational Attainment
(Excluding Districts with More than One Member Elected)
Council Member Finished High school
(1)
At-Large Election

(2)

(3)

4.04***

0.36

2.46*

-1.60

[1.43]

[1.94]

[1.40]

[1.56]

Fractionalized Project Preferences
* At-Large Elections

7.75**
[3.51]

-2.58

Fractionalized Project Preferences

[2.02]

Ethnically Mixed Village
* At-Large Elections

6.11*
[3.21]

-2.06

Ethnically Mixed Village

[2.15]

Geographically Large Village
* At-Large Elections

11.98***
[3.15]

-3.25

Geographically Large Village
Quadruple Fixed Effects
Observations

(4)

[2.02]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,716

1,716

1,716

1,716

R-squared
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.21
Note: Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

C-5

Table С4. Electoral Rules and Incumbency Advantage
Percent of Male
Council who are PreExisting Elite

Percent of PreExisting Elite Elected
to Council

Mean in
District
Elections

Mean in
District
Elections

Difference

Difference

Definition of Elite
Member Of Baseline Focus Group
(including Non-Attendees)

31.9

Observations

1055

Decisions-Maker According To
Male Focus Group
Observations
Decisions-Maker According To
Male Head-of-Household Survey
Observations
Decisions-Maker According To
Female Individual Survey
Observations
Either Of The Four Above
Observations

13.2
1055
20.7
1055
14.9
1055
38.9

2.43
[2.23]

2058
-0.54
[1.27]

2058
3.24*
[1.86]

2058
-0.66
[1.53]

25.8
1,301
43.8
320
27.9
790
30.2

2058

526

3.20

19.3

[2.39]

1055

2058

1.55
[1.89]

2,594
-3.73
[3.81]

628
1.58
[2.25]

1,658
-2.05
[2.95]

1,027
1.25
[1.23]

2,761

5,530

Note: The difference between district and at-large elections estimated using the same model as in
regression (1). Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

C-6

Table С5: Effect of Electoral Rules on Voter Attitudes
Respondent Prefers to
Elect Village Head

At-Large Election
* Midline Survey
At-Large Election
* Endline Survey
Quadruple * Survey Fixed Effects

Respondent is Satisfied
with Village Leaders

Male

Female

Male

Female

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.05**

-0.01

-1.87

1.27**

[0.02]

[0.03]

[1.834]

[0.557]

0.02

-0.02

-0.83

[0.02]

[0.03]

[2.235]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

4,440

3,578

4,270

2,135

R-squared

0.23

0.12

0.15

0.04

Respondent Attributes
Positive Economic
Change to Village Leaders

At-Large Election
* Midline Survey

Male

Female

Male

Female

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.28

1.27**

-0.78

4.45*

[0.832]

[0.557]

[2.473]

[2.517]

-1.18

-1.59

[1.705]

[1.949]

At-Large Election
* Endline Survey
Quadruple * Survey Fixed Effects

Household's Economic
Situation Has Improved in
Past 12 Months

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

2,355

2,135

4,493

3,997

R-squared

0.08

0.04

0.19

0.15

Respondent Complains
About Project
Implementation
Male

Respondent Complains
About Corruption or
Nepotism in Project
Male

At-Large Election
* Midline Survey
At-Large Election
* Endline Survey

-2.26

-0.79

[3.115]

[1.758]

Yes

Yes

Observations

1,716

1,722

R-squared

0.21

0.16

Quadruple * Survey Fixed Effects

Note: Outcomes measured in percent. Standard errors clustered at the village level in
parentheses. *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

C-7

Figure C1. Effect of Electoral Rules on Distribution of Project Start

Note: Green/vertical lines show dates of points used to measure project starts in the empirical
analysis.

C-8

Figure C2. Effect of Electoral Rules on Distribution of Project Completion

Note: Green/vertical lines show dates of points used to measure project completion in the empirical
analysis.

C-9

