NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANSION TAX: THE EFFECT OF TRANSFER TAXES ON THE RESIDENTIAL
REAL ESTATE MARKET
Wojciech Kopczuk
David J. Munroe
Working Paper 20084
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20084
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We are grateful to Chris Mayer, the Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate and the Real Estate Board
of New York for the data. Gilles Duranton, Bill Gentry, Henrik Kleven, Randy Reback, Maya RossinSlater, Anindya Sen, and seminar participants at Columbia, Syracuse, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
Wharton, New York Fed, Toronto, New Economics School, Northwestern, 2013 IIPF meeting, the
2013 meeting of the CEA, 2014 meeting of the AEA and 2014 Utah Business Economics Conference
provided many helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Wojciech Kopczuk and David J. Munroe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Mansion Tax: The Effect of Transfer Taxes on the Residential Real Estate Market
Wojciech Kopczuk and David J. Munroe
NBER Working Paper No. 20084
May 2014
JEL No. H2,H7,R3
ABSTRACT
Houses and apartments sold in New York and New Jersey at prices above $1 million are subject to
the so-called 1% "mansion tax" imposed on the full value of the transaction. This policy generates
a discontinuity (a "notch") in the overall tax liability. We rely on this and other discontinuities to analyze
implications of transfer taxes in the real estate market. Using administrative records of property sales,
we find robust evidence of substantial bunching and show that the incidence of this tax for transactions
local to the discontinuity falls on sellers, may exceed the value of the tax, and is not explained by tax
evasion (although supply-side quality adjustments may play a role). Above the notch, the volume of
missing transactions exceeds those bunching below the notch. Interpreting our results in the context
of an equilibrium bargaining model, we conclude that the market unravels in the neighborhood of
the notch: its presence provides strong incentive for buyers and sellers in the proximity of the threshold
not to transact. This effect, the identification and recognition of which is novel to this paper, is above
and beyond the standard extensive margin response. When present, unraveling affects interpretation
and estimation of bunching estimates. Finally, we show that the presence of the tax affects how the
market operates away from the threshold---taxation increases price reductions during the search process
and in the bargaining stage and weakens the relationship between listing and sale prices. We interpret
these results as demonstrating that taxation affects the ultimate allocation in this search market.
Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
David J. Munroe
Columbia University, Department of Economics
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
djm2166@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Purchasing real estate is a time-consuming and complicated process with large financial stakes and
potentially important frictions. Beyond the price, a typical transaction involves many associated
costs, including broker’s fees, inspection costs, legal fees, title insurance, mortgage application and
insurance fees, and moving costs. In this paper, we rely on a particular type of cost—transfer taxes
that are imposed on the value of real estate transactions—to understand how frictions affect the
functioning of this market.
Our objective is fourfold. Real estate transfer taxation is common and given the importance of
this market it is of interest to understand the empirical implications of such taxes. Second, we take
advantage of variation in tax incentives and data on both transactions and listings in order to gain
better understanding of the importance of search and matching frictions in this market. Third,
we use this context to develop a framework for understanding tax incidence and efficiency costs of
transaction taxes in search and matching markets more generally. Other contexts where similar
issues arise are labor markets and financial transaction taxes. Fourth, our theory and empirics
allows for studying the impact of discontinuous incentives on the existence of the market itself.
Our empirical approach relies on variation generated by the discontinuous nature of the taxes
imposed in New York and New Jersey, which are levied as a function of the appropriately defined
purchase price. A prominent example is the so-called “mansion tax” in New York state (since 1989)
and New Jersey (since 2004) that applies to residential transactions of $1 million or more. The tax
rate is 1% and is imposed on the full value of the transaction so that a $1 million sale is subject to
a $10,000 tax liability, while a $999,999 transaction is not subject to the tax at all. In New York
City, all real estate transactions are also subject to the real property transfer tax (RPTT) and in
New Jersey they are subject to the Realty Transfer Fee (RTF)—both of these schedules happen to
have (smaller) discontinuities as well, as we discuss in Section 2. Hence, all of these taxes create
tax “notches” (see Slemrod, 2010), while the introduction of the tax in New Jersey also creates a
time discontinuity.1 Furthermore, the statutory incidence is different for the mansion tax (which is
the responsibility of the buyer) than for the New Jersey RTF and New York City RPTT (which are
the responsibility of sellers, with the exception of sales of new constructions in NYC). Interestingly,
such discontinuities are not uncommon—for example, they are also present in the UK (Besley et
al., 2013; Best and Kleven, 2013) and D.C. (Slemrod et al., 2012).
Our results allow us to reach three sets of conclusions. First, and perhaps least surprisingly,
we find that the tax distorts the price distribution resulting in significant bunching just below $1
million. This bunching is evident in the distribution of sales in New York displayed in Figures 1
and 2.2 A similar pattern appears in New Jersey after the introduction of the tax. Figures 3 and 4
demonstrate that the onset of this effect is immediate. The bunching we observe is substantial:
our estimates robustly indicate that about $20,000 worth of transactions shift to the threshold in
response to the $10,000 tax. The strength of this effect does not significantly vary with our proxies
1

There are also geographic discontinuities that we do not exploit: the RPTT changes at the New York City border,
and both RTF and the pre-2004 mansion tax change at the New Jersey-New York border.
2
Figure 1 corresponds to the whole state, while Figure 2 is for New York city itself. We present the two figures
with different binning and overlaying the fit on just one of them in order to present both the visual evidence of the
effects and illustrate salient features of the data (round number bunching) that we address in the empirical analysis.

1

for tax evasion and we show, using listings data, that a distortion of similar magnitude is already
present when properties are first advertised by sellers, which we interpret as inconsistent with tax
evasion. We find some evidence that the effect is weaker (but still strong) for newly built properties
that sell when already finished, suggesting that real adjustments to the characteristics of a property
may be part of the effect. Still, we conclude that real responses do not fully account for the extent
of bunching and the tax near the threshold imposes a substantial burden on sellers. Results from
smaller discontinuities that shift statutory incidence are consistent with this conclusion.
Second, we build a theoretical framework to illustrate and test for unraveling of the market
above the threshold—the possibility that the tax locally destroys trades of matches with remaining
positive surplus. Figures 1, 2 and 3 show that the distribution of prices features a large gap
above the threshold. If all transactions with positive surplus when taxed continue to transact in
the presence of the discontinuous tax, the gap is expected to reflect observations shifting from
just above the notch (in absence of the tax) to bunch below the threshold. In particular, the
gap above the notch is expected not to be bigger than the extent of bunching below. This is a
testable prediction. If it fails, it implies that some of the observations are not occurring over and
beyond the standard extensive margin response—the phenomenon that we refer to as “unraveling”:
transactions with positive surplus that could otherwise occur not far from the notch are not taking
place at all. Moreover, we show that the difference between the size of the gap and the extent
of bunching is a lower bound for the number of missing transactions. One explanation for such
unraveling is that sellers, who face a large burden from these sales, may instead opt out or continue
waiting (by foregoing selling altogether or renting, for example), or buyers may prefer to continue
searching in order to benefit from locally depressed prices.
The implementation of our test for unraveling is straightforward and illustrated in Figure 5 (that
we explain in more detail later in the paper). Conceptually, we estimate bunching at the threshold
by constructing the counterfactual distribution based on the data to the left of the threshold and
comparing this to the observed bunching at the notch. We estimate the gap by constructing the
counterfactual distribution based on the data well to the right of the threshold (i.e., affected by the
tax and, thus, accounting for the standard extensive-margin response) and comparing this to the
observed gap in sales above the notch.3 Intuitively, the after-tax counterfactual used to estimate the
size of the gap is, by construction, already net of the standard extensive margin response (matches
that have surplus lower than the tax) and thus the gap only reflects sales that have shifted to the
threshold or matches with continued positive surplus in the presence of the tax that do not sell.
We argue that these missing transactions would have sold if they were far from the threshold, but
are discouraged by the incentives presented by the notch to continue searching.
We indeed find that more transactions are missing from the gap than we can observe bunching at
the threshold, indicating that the market unravels locally. This effect is large: our baseline estimates
indicate that over $40,000 worth of transactions (i.e., equivalent to the mass of transactions that
would sell between $1,000,000 to $1,040,000 in absence of the tax) that would still yield positive
surplus even with the tax do not take place. This corresponds to 2,800 missing transactions in New
3
In practice, we usually simply allow for a shift in the distribution at the threshold to parsimoniously capture the
two different counterfactual distributions. We also report results that rely on separate estimation on both side.

2

York City, out of 380,000 that occurred over the whole period. Hence, by our estimates, this one
percent tax, applying at a relatively large threshold, managed to eliminate 0.7% of transactions due
to the unraveling effect. To reiterate, our interpretation of this response is conceptually different
from the standard demand response that is due to higher taxes discouraging transactions with low
surplus: unraveling corresponds to eliminating transactions with positive surplus in the presence of
the tax. This additional extensive-margin response indicates that the substantial friction introduced
by the transaction tax hampers functioning of the market in some region above the threshold. Given
our sources of variation, estimating the standard response would require making strong assumptions
about comparability of distributions with and without taxes, and we do not pursue it in this paper.
Recognition and empirical identification of the type of extensive margin response that we focus
on is a novel contribution. There are, of course, known examples of frictions eliminating particular
markets—most prominently, asymmetric information affecting the existence of insurance markets.
We find that the notched design of the tax can destroy a market for housing with values close to
the notch, which has not been previously recognized. We argue that such a response is present
because of the search frictions in the housing market and may apply in any situation where search
is present and the population affected by distortionary incentives is not fixed.4
Unraveling has important implications for empirical work that relies on notches. Much of
this literature focuses on contexts where only the intensive margin is of interest, such as income
taxation, and hence this point has not been recognized before. In particular, our results indicate
that in situations where the volume of taxable units is endogenous (as in housing, but perhaps
not under the income tax far from the filing threshold where non-filing may be negligible), exits
around kinks/notches cannot be assumed to be the standard extensive margin and hence such
responses cannot be generalized as reflecting the effect on behavior elsewhere. One must be careful
about separating unraveling from the standard effect—response to the tax in general may differ
substantially from behavior close to the notch.5 Similarly, estimation of the extent of optimization
frictions as in Kleven and Waseem (2013) relies on measuring the size of the gap, which would
partially reflect unraveling if present. Moreover, the possibility of unraveling complicates estimation
of a general (i.e., not specific to the notch) intensive-margin response to a notched policy, such as
the approach described by Kleven and Waseem (2013). We demonstrate how a general response
of price to the transfer tax, as determined by the relative bargaining power of buyers and sellers,
could be estimated by adjusting bunching by the size of the gap. This procedure eliminates the
part of the response that is driven by the discrete impact of the notch, leaving only the effect of a
continuous tax. However, such an estimate will be biased (perhaps substantially) in the presence
of unraveling.
Our third set of conclusions finds evidence indicating that the impact of the tax is not limited
to the proximity of the threshold, but extends much further. Both price reductions while properties
are listed and discounts (the difference between final advertised and sale price) increase permanently
above the threshold, indicating that the search and matching process is affected everywhere by the
4
More speculatively, we briefly comment in Section 6 on figures from our online appendix that indicate possible
changes in patterns of behavior during the search process.
5
In particular, extensive margin responses in other papers exploiting discontinuities in transaction taxes (Slemrod
et al., 2012; Best and Kleven, 2013; Besley et al., 2013) are subject to this critique.

3

tax. Furthermore, we find that in the presence of the tax listing prices are a weaker signal of the
final sale price of the property. Relying on our theoretical arguments, we interpret this greater
dispersion of sale price conditional on asking price as corresponding to increased deviation from the
efficiency-maximizing matching equilibrium and conclude that a general transaction tax increases
inefficiency in the search process.
A small literature focuses on the effect of transfer taxes on the functioning of the real estate
market (Benjamin et al., 1993; Van Ommeren and Van Leuvensteijn, 2005; Dachis et al., 2012).
Contemporaneously, three other papers (Slemrod et al., 2012; Best and Kleven, 2013; Besley et al.,
2013) look at similar distortions to the distribution of final prices (but not listings) in the United
Kingdom and Washington, D.C. These studies focus on the standard extensive margin response
(the general effect on sales) to policy changes, rather than incidence, listings and search frictions as
we do. We are also unique in showing evidence of unraveling—that the extensive margin effect of
the tax goes beyond eliminating transactions with negative net-of-tax surplus. Beyond offering the
first, to our knowledge, evidence of this type of an effect, these results cast doubt on generalizing
from responses around notches and kinks (where market can unravel) to elsewhere (where only
standard extensive margin response should be present) in the presence of matching frictions.
Another strand of literature to which we contribute analyzes the search and matching process
in the real estate market. Several studies focus on the role of listing prices and bargaining in
determining the final sale outcome (c.f. Han and Strange, 2012, 2013; Merlo and Ortalo-Magne,
2004; Haurin et al., 2010), while a few apply more general search models to real estate data (c.f.
Carrillo (2012); Genesove and Han (2012)). However, these studies do not explicitly identify the
effect of transaction costs, such as transfer taxes, on outcomes. A related line of study focuses on
the role of real estate agents, attempting to unbundle the effect of cost from information provision
(Levitt and Syverson, 2008; Jia and Pathak, 2010; Bernheim and Meer, 2013). Finally, a number of
empirical papers incorporate information available in real estate listings data to the study of seller
behavior in the housing market (Genesove and Mayer, 2001; Carrillo and Pope, 2012).
Our paper is also related to the broader body of work on behavioral responses to taxation.
As in the research on responses to income taxation, we are interested in separating real, timing,
avoidance, and evasion responses (Slemrod, 1990; Saez et al., 2012). Contrary to that strand of
work, our context requires considering both sides of the market. There has been a recent revival of
interest in estimating the incidence of specific taxes/transfers (e.g., Doyle Jr. and Samphantharak,
2008; Mishra et al., 2008; Hastings and Washington, 2010; Marion and Muehlegger, 2011). Real
estate tax is more complicated due to non-homogeneity of goods traded, and the closest analogue
is work on incidence of income/payroll taxes or credits (Rothstein, 2010; Saez et al., 2011).
The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next two sections, we discuss the institutional
and policy context and our data. In Section 4 we present our theoretical framework. We start by
introducing a bargaining framework that illustrates the effect of the tax for a particular match,
followed by discussion of frictionless equilibrium and predictions regarding the effect of the tax on
the price distribution. We then derive simple testable implications of the presence of frictions to
matching. In Section 5, we present empirical results about the distribution of prices, both graphical
evidence and local incidence estimates for various types of taxes, relying on price and listings data.

4

We also show evidence for various subsamples in order to shed a light on the role of evasion and real
adjustments. In Section 6, we focus on distortions to the matching process near the threshold and
present our results about the extent of unraveling. In Section 7 we demonstrate the global effect
of the tax on discounts and informational content of listings. Conclusions are in the final section.

2

Policy

Real estate transfer taxes are common across the U.S. These taxes are applied to the sale price
of real property, and range from as low as no tax in Texas to 2% in Delaware. In New York and
New Jersey, the tax rates change discontinuously with total consideration, creating corresponding
notches in total tax liability. Table 1 contains details of the relevant tax schedules. One notch
arising in both states is due to the mansion tax: a 1% tax on the total consideration for homes
costing $1,000,000 or more. Under the mansion taxes of both New York and New Jersey buyers’
total tax liability jumps by $10,000 when the sales price moves from $999,999 (where the tax does
not apply) to $1,000,000 (where the tax comes into effect). In New Jersey, the mansion tax was
introduced on August 1st, 2004, and covers all residential real-estate transactions. In New York
state, the mansion tax was introduced in 1989 and applies to the sale of individual coop and condo
units, and one-, two-, and three-family homes, with few exceptions.6
Real estate sales in New York City and New Jersey are subject to additional taxes with discontinuous average rates. In New York City, the Real Property Transfer Tax (RPTT) applies to
residential sales (as defined for the New York mansion tax) with a rate of 1% if the total consideration is $500,000 or less, and 1.425% above $500,000. Commercial sales are also subject to the
RPTT at a rate of 1.425% below $500,000 and 2.625% above. Unlike the mansion tax the statutory
incidence of the RPTT falls on the seller by law, however it is customary for the buyer to pay the
tax when purchasing directly from a sponsor (i.e., purchasing a newly developed condo or a newly
offered coop). Thus, the RPTT is a unique tax in that there is variation in the statutory incidence.
Residential sales in New Jersey are subject to the Realty Transfer Fee. This transfer fee (or
tax) has a non-linear schedule (see Table 1) that shifts when total consideration is greater than
$350,000. The marginal tax rate for consideration above $200,000 is 0.78% if the total price is less
than or equal to $350,000, while this tax rate jumps to 0.96% when the total price is greater than
$350,000. Moving from a price of $350,000 to $350,001 increases the buyer’s tax liability by $630.

3

Data

We study administrative records on real estate transactions in New York state and New Jersey as
well as historical real estate listings in New York City. Sales records, which cover the universe of
recorded real estate transactions in the given geography and time period, come from three sources:
6

Exceptions are as follows. If a residential unit is partially used for commerce, only the residential share of the
total consideration is subject to the tax (although the entire consideration is still used to determine if the tax applies).
Similarly, multiple parcels sold in the same transaction are taxed as one unit unless the parcels are evidently not used
in conjunction with one another. Vacant lots are exempt from the mansion tax, and, finally, any personal effects sold
with the home are deducted from the total consideration for tax purposes (but are subject to state sales taxes).

5

the New York City Department of Finance’s (NYCDOF) Annualized Rolling Sales files for 2003–
2011 (covering all of NYC), real property transfer reports compiled by the New York state Office of
Real Property Services (NYSORPS) for 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (all of NY State, excluding the
five counties of NYC), and SR1A property transfer forms collected in the New Jersey Treasury’s
SR1A file for 1996–2011 (all of NJ). These records contain details of each transaction, including the
date of sale, the total consideration paid by the buyer, the address of the property, the property
type (e.g., one-, two-, or three-family home, residential coop or condo, etc.), the year of construction
of the building (in NYC and NJ) or whether the property is newly constructed (in New York state),
and whether the sale is arms-length (NYSORPS only).7 We also use deeds records for 1996–2008
for NYC collected by an anonymous private data provider from the county records, which indicate
whether the buyer relied on a mortgage (see Appendix B for more information about data sources).8
We identify sales that are subject to each of the transfer taxes. Misclassification in taxable
status, if any, will introduce a bias against finding effects, however it is unlikely to be substantial:
our information comes from administrative records that contain sufficient information to classify,
even though an explicit taxability flag is not provided. In New Jersey, we consider all “residential”
sales to be taxable (mansion tax and Transfer Fee). For New York state, we define all single-parcel
residential sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes, condos, and seasonal properties as subject
to the mansion tax. Finally, in New York City we define all single-unit (non-commercial) sales of
one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos as taxable.9
We match the Rolling Sales data for Manhattan to a subset of historical real estate listings in
order to get a broader picture of the effect of the tax on the real-estate search process. Our listing
data comes from the Real Estate Board of New York’s (REBNY) electronic listing service and
covers all closed or off-market listings between 2003 and 2010. REBNY is a trade association of
about 300 realty firms operating in New York City and represents a substantial share of listings in
Manhattan and Brooklyn. Members are required to post all listings and updates to the electronic
listing service. We limit attention to the more complete Manhattan listings, which accounts for
approximately 45% of Manhattan sales in the Rolling Sales files.
From the REBNY listing service we observe details of all (REBNY-listed) closed or off market
listings since 2003. These data include initial asking price and date of each listing, all subsequent
price updates, and the date the property sells or is taken off the market. To acquire the final
sale price, we match these listings by precise address (including apartment number) and/or tax
lot to the NYCDOF data for Manhattan. We obtain approximately a 90% match rate for listings
identified as “closed” in the REBNY data.10
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics from the three sources of sales data. Overall, we have
records for 3,256,597 taxable sales (with non-zero sale price) spanning 1996–2011. The distribution
7

This definition excludes sales between current or former relatives, between related companies or partners
in business, sales where one of the buyers is also a seller, or sales with “other unusual factors affecting sale
price.” See Appendix B for more details.
8

We are grateful to Chris Mayer and the Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate for access to this data.
While multi-parcel sales in New York state are typically subject to the mansion tax, such a sale may be split
for tax purposes if structures on adjacent parcels are not used in conjunction with or clearly related to one-another.
Since we cannot identify such cases in the New York City and New York state data, we err on the side of caution
and exclude all multi-parcel and partially-commercial sales sales from taxable status.
10
The match-rate is continuous across the tax thresholds. See Appendix B for details on the matching process.
9

6

is skewed: mean sale price is higher than the median. Unsurprisingly, prices are highest in New
York City. Although median (and mean) sale price is well below the $1,000,000 threshold of the
mansion tax, there are still several thousand sales per geography within $50,000 of the mansion-tax
cutoff. Table 3 presents the count of taxable residential sales and median prices over time for the
three regions. The growth of housing sales and prices throughout the early 2000s is evident here,
as is the subsequent drop in total sales and median price at the onset of the recession in 2007/2008.
Table 4 presents statistics for the matched REBNY listings data. The sales covered by REBNY
have much higher prices, on average, than the general NYC rolling sales data ($1.24 million versus
$658,000). This is due to the REBNY data only covering sales in Manhattan, which is considerably
more expensive than the outer boroughs. About 64% of the homes in our sample end up closing
(rather than being taken off the market). At the same time, 8% of listings do not close but have
a corresponding sale in the rolling sales data, which we interpret as corresponding to either direct
sales by owner or sales with a non-REBNY agent. Homes that do not close spend more time on
the market (200.5 days vs. 146 for sold properties). These statistics suggest that search frictions
are non-negligible in the housing market—the process of finding a buyer for a home is lengthy and
sellers are often unable to find a match. There also appears to be bargaining between buyers and
sellers: for properties that close and are matched to the rolling sales data, the average discount
− sale
between the initial asking price and the sale price ( initial
) is 5.9%: 3.2% discount from initial
initial

asking to final asking price and a 2.8% discount from final asking price to sale price. However, the
median listing in our sample has no price updates between the initial and final asking prices.

4

Theoretical Framework

To interpret our empirical findings, we present a simple model of real-estate transactions. We first
discuss implications of taxation in a bargaining framework given a match between a buyer and
a seller. We then characterize the equilibrium and its responsiveness to taxation absent search
frictions. The equilibrium in this situation corresponds to assortative matching. We follow with
a discussion of how the price distribution might respond when individuals search and need not
transact conditional on matching. Finally, we elaborate on how the equilibrium price dispersion
(which is present when there are matching frictions) may respond to taxation, and how these effects
can be empirically characterized by relying on observable information (including listings data).

4.1

Bargaining

We start with a bargaining model that clarifies the nature of distortions to the price distribution
around the notch and relates tax incidence observed at the notch to the bargaining power that
determines incidence elsewhere. For now, we abstract from equilibrium considerations and instead
characterize pricing behavior given a match. This is a building block of the equilibrium analysis that
we come back to below. The Nash bargaining model itself is formally presented in the Appendix
A. Here, we introduce the intuition underlying the model and illustrate key results on Figure 6.
The figure corresponds to a lump-sum tax, but the main insights apply as well to the proportional
tax that we discuss in more details in the Appendix.
7

We assume that transaction prices are determined by Nash bargaining between the buyer and
seller. Consider a single match (b, s) between a buyer with a reservation value of b and a seller with
reservation value s. Given the price that a buyer and a seller negotiate, p, and a lump-sum tax
T imposed on the buyer (as in the case of the mansion tax), the parties end up with surpluses of
S B = b − T − p and S S = p − s, respectively. We assume Nash bargaining with seller’s weight β so
that the price maximizes β ln(p − s) + (1 − β) ln(b − T − p) and is, thus, set to p(b, s) − βT , where
p(b, s) ≡ βb + (1 − β)s is the price absent taxes. Consequently, the surplus of each side is equal to
S B = (1 − β)(b − T − s) and S S = β(b − T − s), which implies that the parameter β determines
how the total surplus b − T − s is split between the two parties.
Necessarily, the incidence of the tax is determined by the seller’s relative bargaining power, β,
as well. Although it follows automatically from this framework, it is worth highlighting that the
party with lower bargaining power bears a lower share of the tax. This party has a lower claim to
the surplus in the first place and, symmetrically, experiences a lower reduction in surplus when the
tax is imposed. At the extreme, when β = 0 or β = 1, one of the parties has no bargaining power
and no surplus, and thus is completely inelastic so that it cannot bear any burden of the tax.
Transaction taxes may also discourage sales. Transactions take place when the surplus is nonnegative (b − T − s ≥ 0). All matches (b, s) that satisfy βb + (1 − β)s = p, for some p, sell at exactly
the same price (equal to p − βT ) or do not sell at all if total surplus is negative. By reducing
the surplus, the uniform lump-sum levy discourages some sales (note that this is the “standard”
extensive margin response; we discuss unraveling in Section 4.3).
However, the lump-sum tax does not lead to re-ranking of transactions. All prices simply adjust
by βT , so that transactions that were occurring at the same price absent the tax continue to sell at
equal (although different from the original) prices. This lack of re-ranking is not general: it does
not survive considering proportional rather than lump-sum taxation, but it simplifies the following
discussion and provides a natural benchmark (and, as discussed in the appendix, the key qualitative
results generalize to the proportional tax case).
We illustrate our formal results regarding the price and sales responses to the tax graphically
on Figure 6. The figure shows reservation values of buyers and sellers on the two axes, and also
allows for tracing prices. The contract line (the relationship between prices of buyers and sellers) in
absence of the tax requires that the prices of buyers and sellers have to be the same: pB = pS ; while
in the presence of the tax above the notch it is given by pB = pS + T · (pS ≥ H), where H is the
notch (H = $1,000,000 for the mansion tax). The solid black line represents this pricing/budget
constraint below the notch, the dashed black line respresents the no-tax situation above the notch,
and the solid blue line represents the contract line in the presence of the tax (above the notch).
The straight green line and other lines parallel to it show the locus of matches with the same sale
price in absence of the tax—i.e., a constant value of p(b, s) (corresponding to the intersection of
the given parallel line with the black no-tax contract line). In the presence of the lump-sum tax all
matches on any of these lines sell at the same price, given by p(b, s) − βT , which corresponds to a
point where a given constant price line intersects with the contract line. Transactions in the gray
shaded area, marked “Z”, have positive surplus and would sell without the tax, but they do not
sell when the tax is present because the net-of-tax surplus turns negative. Matches in this region

8

reflect the standard extensive margin response.
Price adjustments are affected by the presence of the notch, resulting in some transactions
moving from above to just below the notch, and can be broken-down into four cases that depend
on the initial (absent-tax) price. Case 1 are transactions that originally occur below the price of H
and are not affected by the tax (buyer-seller matches in region “D”). Case 2 are transactions that,
in absence of the tax, sell at a price between H and H + βT and would sell below H if the tax
was uniform (i.e., not notched), but in the presence of the notch occur there. These transactions
are illustrated in Figure 6 by the yellow area marked “A” that is bounded by the p(b, s) schedules
corresponding to p(b, s) = H and p(b, s) = H + βT . Given the assumption of maximizing the
Nash-bargaining objective function, transactions that originally sell at a higher price than H + βT
may sell at the notch depending on whether total surplus at the notch or with the tax is higher.
We show that for some intermediate range of original (absent-tax) prices above the threshold (Case
3), some transactions will bunch at the notch (region “B”), while others will sell at a new price
above the notch (region “C”), depending on the relative size of the seller’s and buyer’s reservation
values for the property. However, when the original price is high enough (greater than some finite
pre-tax price corresponding to the solid green line) no transaction will bunch, constituting our final
case (region “E”). In the appendix we establish that the qualitative characterization of the effect
of taxation on prices described by Figure 6 is general.
The formal model delivers an additional result that is not a priori obvious: there exists a pre-tax
price above which the presence of the notch does not affect any transactions. Firstly, for any β
there exists a pre-tax price above which transactions are not affected by the notch—this boundary
is determined by considering matches involving a seller with reservation value of zero. Furthermore,
and less intuitively, there exists a single finite bound for such maximum pre-tax prices above which
transactions do not bunch that applies uniformly for any value of β. In the lump-sum tax case, the
tight bound (applying as β → 0) is the solution to ln(H) − ln(p) −

H−T
p

+ 1 = 0 and corresponds

to p ≈ $1, 144, 717 when H = $1, 000, 00 and T = $10, 000. In the case of the proportional tax,
the bound solves ln(H) − ln(p) −

H−p ln(1+t)
p

+ 1 = 0 (where t is the marginal tax rate, 1% in

the case of mansion tax) corresponding to p ≈ $1, 155, 422. While this precise characterization is
the consequence of functional form assumptions in the case of Nash bargaining, it does provide
a theoretical justification for the assumption that we make in our empirical analysis that only
matches in some finite omitted region around the notch might bunch. In our empirical analysis,
we use this theoretical bound for defining the omitted region in our baseline specification (but of
course we explore the sensitivity to this choice).

4.2

Equilibrium

The framework that we have introduced so far focuses on price determination given a match between
a buyer and seller. This is a component of the equilibrium description—given matches that lead to
sales, we assume Nash bargaining as the approach for determining the price. The missing component
of the model is a description of how matches form. Providing a complete search framework is beyond
the scope of this paper and, in fact, we are not aware of a framework in the literature that would
incorporate two-sided search in the real estate context (Carrillo, 2012, makes a step in this direction
9

by setting up, but not explicitly solving, a model of this kind). We make two arguments that we
then investigate empirically. First, we consider what the distribution of prices reveals about the
distribution of the underlying matches and efficiency of the equilibrium. Second, we consider which
of the matches are likely to be “stable” in the presence of the tax.
The simplest way to introduce equilibrium consideration in this framework is to assume random
matching followed by very large frictions (search costs) preventing both parties from further search
so that, conditional on a match, the only decision to make is whether to transact. Under this
assumption, there is a matching technology M (b, s) that results in some (smooth) distribution of
matches over (b, s) and Figure 6 reflects which of those matches correspond to transactions.
An alternative is to consider a situation with no search frictions. Suppose that we have an
equal number of buyers and sellers. Absent taxation, the overall surplus from a match in our
Nash bargaining model is strictly supermodular (it is given by ln(b − s) + constant). Hence, the
equilibrium and, simultaneously, the efficient allocation that maximizes the overall surplus involves
positive assortative matching. In the presence of taxation, the surplus for transactions not subject
to the tax and not at the threshold remains ln(b − s) + constant, while the surplus for transactions
subject to the tax is ln(b − s − T ) + constant (which is, naturally, also supermodular). Hence,
within each of these groups maximization of the overall surplus involves assortative matching.
The efficient allocation absent taxation corresponds to an increasing profile of matches (b, s).
This profile is illustrated on Figure 6 using a wiggly solid gray line. If these matches were to remain
when the tax is introduced, a match corresponding to point X on the figure would be the highest
priced one that is not subject to taxation, the match marked by Y would be the lowest priced one
that does not shift to the notch, and matches between X and Y would move to the notch.
Introduction of the tax may affect which matches take place in the equilibrium. The efficient
allocation will retain the main features visible on Figure 6, although the actual equilibrium profile
and points X and Y need not coincide with the allocation absent tax distortions. As argued above,
the equilibrium matches subject to the tax will continue to be assortatively matched—that is,
matches above point Y will lie on an increasing profile. Similarly, matches below point X will form
an upward-sloping profile. For matches that are priced at the threshold, the price is fixed at H
so that any permutation of residences between buyers would deliver exactly the same surplus (a
feature that is arguably peculiar to this model), so that the precise identity of matches between X
and Y is indeterminate.11
The equilibrium allocation in the presence of frictions will not be efficient, although efficiency
serves as a natural reference point. Trivially, our theoretical framework implies that under the
efficient allocation variance of the price (or, equivalently, buyer’s type) conditional on seller’s type
(and vice versa) is zero, because the efficient allocation corresponds to an upward sloping line.12
In the presence of frictions, matches would occur not just on the efficient allocation line as in
Figure 6, but rather could be spread over the rest of the region corresponding to surplus from
11
The location of X and Y may change because fewer transactions may take place in the presence of a tax. Figure
6 appears to preclude this possibility by using the efficient matching schedule that does not involve matches that are
crowded out by the tax, but it need not be so in general.
12
While the efficient allocation is not unique in the bunching region A and B on Figure 6, the price is constant and
equal to the threshold level in that region.

10

transacting. Intuitively, one might expect that an increase in dispersion of prices for a given type
of home corresponds to an allocation that is further from the efficient one. While we do not prove
this result, it has to be so at least when the frictions are small. To examine whether transaction
taxes affect the efficiency of the housing market allocation, we test whether there is an increased
dispersion of prices in the presence of the tax. Because matches are indeterminate in the bunching
region, this exercise is of interest for transactions that are not local to the threshold—i.e., those far
enough from the threshold in either direction. We discuss this further in Section 4.4.

4.3

Measuring the Impact on the Price Distribution

We expect that the tax affects the distribution of home sales by inducing both bunching of sales at
the notch and by creating a “gap” in the distribution above the notch, and we estimate both. Our
objectives are twofold. First, descriptively, these estimates allow us to quantify the magnitude of
distortions to the price distribution. Second, we use these estimates to back out values analogous to
the mass in regions A and B of Figure 6. Intuitively, extra transactions bunching at the threshold
correspond to regions A and B, while transactions that are missing from the distribution above
the threshold (relative to the distribution further to the right) reflect region B. In principle then,
these values may be used to recover the mass in region A that is tightly linked to the bargaining
parameter, β.
However, in what follows, we argue that the tax notch provides a strong incentive for neighboring
“productive” matches—those close to the boundary between regions B and C, which have positive
surplus in the presence of the tax—to break. Consequently, there may be more transactions missing
from the distribution above the notch than locate at the notch itself. We show that our estimates
can be used to test for and bound this local extensive-margin response: if such a response is not
present, the excess number of transactions at the notch must exceed the gap in the distribution.
We view this test as one of the central contributions of our paper, as it corresponds to testing for
unraveling of the market due to the presence of the notch. Equivalently, this is a test of whether the
extensive margin response is standard (the gray region in Figure 6)—a condition that is necessary to
generalize from estimates based on a notch to behavioral responses to a general tax (as done by Best
and Kleven (2013) and Slemrod et al. (2012)). Previewing our results, we find that overwhelmingly
the answer is that it is not. The rest of this section serves to define quantities that we estimate
and to formalize the test for the local unraveling of the market.
Observed and counterfactual distributions. We first consider how the distribution of sales
is distorted by the tax notch. The discussion is graphically illustrated on Figure 5, which is a
distribution analogue of Figure 6 (with corresponding region labels and coloring). We denote
by F (p) the “true” (population) price distribution in the presence of the actual (notched) tax
from which our observations are drawn. We denote by FT (·) the observed cumulative population
price distribution—a draw from F (p). In order to characterize and interpret distortions to the
distribution, we presume that there is a set of potential matches (from some matching technology)
that may result in transactions. We leave the origin of the set of matches unspecified, and simply
assume that there is some matching technology that we take as given. Matches are indexed by i and
11

have associated with them three prices (pi , p̌i , p̃i ): the actual price pi in the presence of a “notched”
tax, the shadow price p̌i that would prevail if the tax did not apply anywhere, and the shadow price
p̃i that would prevail for the same transaction if the tax was proportional everywhere (i.e., involved
no threshold). In the context of our model as illustrated on Figure 6, pi = p̌i for transactions taking
place in region D, pi = p̃i in regions C and E, and p̌i ≥ H > pi in regions A and B. Analogously,
this respectively corresponds to the transactions far below the notch, transactions above the notch,
and the bunching region on Figure 5. We assume that p̌i > p̃i , which excludes the polar case of
incidence fully borne by buyers, but allows for simplifying notation. We also allow for either of the
prices to be infinite, corresponding to the transaction not taking place in a given regime. We do
not rule out in general that the notched tax affects the equilibrium distribution everywhere (even
below the threshold): F (p) corresponds to the actual equilibrium outcome; however, p̌i and p̃i are
prices specific to matches that form in the observed equilibrium given a notched tax, so that their
marginal distributions do not reflect any changes regarding which matches would form if the the
tax was removed or replaced by one that is proportional everywhere.
We rely on two counterfactual distributions for our estimates: one that corresponds to the
non-taxable regime and another corresponding to the taxable one. F0 (p) = P (p̌i < p) is the
counterfactual distribution corresponding to the non-taxable regime. Below the taxable threshold,
H, F0 is the true distribution net of transactions that are affected by the presence of the tax
(p̌i ≥ H > pi ). We define a counterfactual distribution F1 (p) = P (p̃i < p) corresponding to the
region subject to the tax: it is the distribution under a proportional tax with no notch (in particular
it is accounting for the “standard” extensive margin response but, of course, without allowing for
equilibrium adjustment to the set of matches).
In the presence of the tax, the actual distribution will display an excess mass bunching below
the threshold (relative to F0 ) and a gap above the threshold (relative to F1 ). At some abuse of the
notation, we use the region descriptors from Figure 6 (e.g., A) to denote the set of matches and
the mass (probability) of transactions in the corresponding region. Transactions that are distorted
by the threshold have p̌i ≥ H > pi and come from a number of different sources: p̃i < H (region A
except for A′ ); p̃i = ∞ (region A′ ); and p̃i ≥ H (region B). We note that A + B = P (p̌i ≥ H > pi )
and B = P (pi < H ≤ p̌i ∧ p̃i ≥ H) = P (pi < H ≤ p̃i ). As discussed in Section 4.1, these
transactions move from above the threshold (in absence of the tax) to bunch just below the notch.
This movement of sales from above the threshold (and any additional extensive margin response
beyond the standard one already embedded in the adjustment to distribution F1 ) leaves a gap in
the observed distribution just above the notch.13
Crowd out of productive matches. One concern is that not every productive match corresponds to a transaction: i.e., that there may be transactions for which p̃i < p̌i < ∞ = pi —those
with sufficient surplus to survive the tax, but that do not occur in the presence of the notch. To see
why, recall that our basic framework assumed that equilibrium matches in the neighborhood of the
notch form in a way similar to those away from it, with only the outcome of the bargaining process
13

Transactions to the left of the threshold (region D) have pi = p̌i , and those with pi = p̃i correspond to regions C
and E. The gray region—transactions with surplus low enough that the tax crowds them out—have p̌i < ∞ = pi = p̃i .

12

affected. However, proximity to the threshold provides strong incentive for some buyers and sellers
in matches near the notch to continue or delay searching (and perhaps not transact in the end at
all). Firstly, consider buyer-seller pairs who would move to the threshold if a sale occurs (region B
of Figure 6). Sellers in this region—who face a substantial reduction in sale price in moving to the
notch—may prefer searching for a buyer with slightly higher reservation value who is, thus, willing
to buy above the notch. Secondly, buyers in the buyer-seller pairs that would transact in the gap
region above the notch (region C) may have an incentive to return to the market to find a seller
with slightly lower reservation value.
Whether this type of local extensive-margin response is present is of interest in its own right,
corresponding to both an efficiency loss due to a notched tax in markets with search frictions
(productive matches that do not transact) and the importance of search in the housing market. We
assume that such exits do not occur for transactions below the threshold (p̌i < H, region D) and
for transactions that have sufficiently high prices (region E, p̃i > P̄ for some sufficiently large price
P̄ ). We denote the mass of such exits that comes from matches that could otherwise sell above the
threshold in the presence of proportional taxation (regions B and C) by M ≡ P (H ≤ p̃i ≤ P̄ <
∞ = pi ).
Local incidence.

Using an estimate of the excess mass bunching at the threshold (I), we can

estimate a measure of the incidence of the tax. We define
I = F (H) − F0 (H) = P (pˇi ≥ H > pi ) = A + B
as the number of observations that shift below the threshold due to the tax. Given the observed
distribution FT and an empirical estimate of the counterfactual distribution F̂0 , we can construct
an empirical estimate of the volume of responsive sales making up I as Iˆ = FT (H) − F̂0 (H). In
practice, we construct the counterfactual price distribution of sales F̂0 by relying on the actual
distribution FT to the left of the notch, but omitting sales near it—the specifics are in Section 4.5.
ˆ is represented by the red/yellow area in the first panel of Figure 5.
The estimate of bunching, I,
Given an estimate of the counterfactual distribution F0 to the right of the threshold, we can
also define a dollar measure ĥ as
F0 (H + ĥ) − F0 (H) = Iˆ

(1)

to represent the magnitude of the shift to the threshold. In other words, ĥ is obtained by finding
the dollar value such that the integral under the counterfactual to the right of the notch is equal
to the excess mass (represented as the green area of the first panel of Figure 5). We refer to ĥ
as “local” or “reduced-form” incidence of the tax. Our preferred interpretation is that, as with
the “kinked” budget-set methodology outlined by Saez (2010), ĥ represents the average amount of
money that is lost (relative to their corresponding non-taxed sale price, p̌i ) by sellers participating
in the marginal transactions affected by the presence of the threshold. However, the value of ĥ does
not, on its own, inform us about the underlying bargaining power of the two sides of the market
and hence does not reflect incidence of the tax away from the threshold.

13

We construct and estimate ĥ throughout, but our interpretation of ĥ as local incidence depends
on assumptions about the nature of the counterfactual distribution. With the exception of our
data for New Jersey prior to implementation of the tax, we do not observe p̌i for values greater
than H at all. When we use data below the notch to project F0 above the notch, the interpretation
of ĥ requires additional assumptions. If Fτ (p) below the notch coincides with the distribution
absent taxation F0 (p) (i.e., pi = p̌i for p̌i < H), then the projected counterfactual above the
notch corresponds to the distribution absent taxation as well, so that ĥ can be thought of as a
reduced form dollar estimate of local incidence (this interpretation also applies when we build our
counterfactual using the non-distorted distribution in New Jersey before the tax was introduced).
However, if the untaxed part of the distribution (below the notch) is affected by the tax via general
equilibrium effects (and so Fτ (p) 6= F0 (p)), the projection of the counterfactual above the notch,
and the dollar value ĥ that relies upon this projection, do not have clear interpretations (although
ĥ remains a convenient way of standardizing mass of sales bunching below the notch). On the
other hand, even if Fτ (p) 6= F0 (p), our estimate of the excess mass Iˆ (and unraveling estimates that
depend on it) remains valid.
Gap.

We also construct a measure of the gap to the right of the notch by comparing an estimated

counterfactual above the threshold to the observed distribution. We presume that there is a known
value of P̄ such that F1 and F coincide for prices greater than H + P̄ (by Theorems A.3 and A.4,
this has to be so in our framework; also recall that we assumed away exit of productive matches
for high enough prices) and define the gap in the distribution as:
G = [F1 (P̄ ) − F1 (H)] − [F (P̄ ) − F (H)]
i.e., the difference between the number of transactions taking place in the presence of taxation with
and without the notched implementation of the tax. For the estimation, we replace F by FT , and
F1 by its empirical estimate F̂1 . The estimate of F̂1 (P̄ ) − F̂1 (H) reflects the expected number of
observations in regions B and C, while FT (P̄ ) − FT (H) is the actual number of observations in
region C. Using our definitions, we can show that
G = P (P̄ ≥ p̃i ≥ H ∧ (pi < H ∨ pi = ∞)) = P (pi < H ≤ p̃i ) + P (H ≤ p̃i ≤ P̄ < ∞ = pi ) = B + M
Recall that M represents the mass of transactions that would have taken place under a proportional
tax at prices exceeding the threshold, but do not take place in the presence of the notch. Thus, the
gap reflects two effects: exit from the market of productive matches and shift to the threshold.
To reiterate, the gap reflects transactions that are missing from the distribution to the right
of the threshold relative to the counterfactual with taxes. In particular, it does not include the
standard extensive margin response—matches with surplus small enough that they are no longer
economically viable in the presence of the tax (the gray region Z in Figures 5 and 6).
Testing for market unraveling.

The gap, G, and behavioral response, I, are related and can be

used to test for the presence of market unraveling and, in the absence of unraveling, to estimate β.
14

Both G and I partially reflect transactions in region B—those that would sell at prices higher than
the threshold in the presence of a continuous tax, but sell at the threshold when it is discontinuous.
Clearly,
G−I =M −A
We report an estimate of Ĝ − Iˆ converted to a dollar figure: Ẑ = ĥ ·



Ĝ
Iˆ


− 1 .14 If the market

does not unravel in the neighborhood of the notch (M = 0), then G − I = −A ≤ 0. Intuitively,
if all buyer-seller matches continue to transact in the presence of the notched tax, then the mass
bunching at the threshold should always be at least as large as the gap. Hence, given estimates of
I and G, we can then test whether the tax destroys productive matches.
Remark 1. Rejecting a testable hypothesis Ẑ ≤ 0 implies market unraveling (M > 0).
If the hypothesis of M = 0 cannot be rejected, one could construct a straightforward estimate
of β. With no missing sales, I − G = A, so that β̂ would solve F0 (H + β̂ · T ) − F0 (H) = Iˆ − Ĝ.15
Previewing our results, however, we find that Ẑ ≤ 0 is rejected or, put differently, we find that
the size of the gap is larger than the number of transactions that bunch. We conclude that there
are transactions that do not take place because of the proximity to the threshold so that the market
(partially) unravels in its neighborhood.16
One can bound local exit from the market (M ) by considering how much missing mass is
required to explain our estimates assuming different values of β. In particular, consider the two
extreme cases of β = 0 (buyer captures all surplus) and β = 1 (seller captures all surplus). In
the first case, A = 0, while in the second case A corresponds to the mass in the interval of prices
(H, H + T ). Noting that Ẑ is expressed in dollar terms, the dollar-valued mass in the second case
is, thus, T. Hence, the implied missing mass when Ẑ > 0 is between Ẑ (when β = 0) and Ẑ + T
(when β = 1). In our discussion of the results, we will refer to the lower bound Ẑ.
Finally, note that this discussion provides three qualifications of general interest when relying on
notches and kinks in tax schedules for identification. First, for a clean interpretation of our incidence
parameter ĥ (and, analogously, for estimating elasticities or other measures of behavioral response
based on bunching), the counterfactual distribution F0 needs to correspond to the situation absent
the tax—this is a strong assumption that is violated if there are spillover effects from the notch/kink
to the non-taxable region. However, our estimates of the number of observations bunching Iˆ and
missing mass Ẑ do not require such an assumption. Second, the presence of a notch may provide
incentives to exit, corresponding to local unraveling of the market. In this case, gap estimates
partially reflect such an exit and can be used to test for its presence when combined with the
14
ˆ The
Alternative definitions would be to define F1 (H + Ẑ) − F1 (H) = Ĝ − Iˆ or F0 (H + Ẑ) − F0 (H) = Ĝ − I.
choice we implement has two advantages. First, it is in terms of the distribution F0 so that it is directly comparable
to ĥ. Second, knowing ĥ (which we report as well) allows for directly recovering an alternative metric of the gap and
behavioral response, Ĝ
.
Iˆ
15
We treat T as a lump-sum tax here for simplicity of exposition; the effect of adjusting for the marginal tax of
1% is negligible for the purpose of this exercise.
16
Naturally, unraveling occurs here because the tax reduces incentives to transact, but in other contexts the
incentives may go the other way. Studying a time-notch affecting marriages in Sweden, Persson (2013) compares
bunching at the notch and the gap above the notch and finds that in that context discontinuous incentives may
encourage transactions at the (time) notch.

15

magnitude of the shift to the notch. Third, as a consequence, when there is such market unraveling,
extensive-margin responses estimated by studying local effects of notches/kinks do not generalize
to extensive response elsewhere.

4.4

Implications for Efficiency of the Equilibrium Allocation

In order to shed a light on how taxation interacts with search frictions away from the threshold
in this market, we proceed as follows. Recall that the equilibrium price for a given match (b, s) is
equal to βb + (1 − β)s − βT . Conditional on the seller’s type, var[p|s] = β 2 var[b|s]. If we could
directly observe s, the comparison of the variance of prices conditional on s with and without the
tax would constitute a test of the hypothesis that taxation affects price dispersion. Evidence of
this kind would suggest that the tax increases deviation from efficiency.
In practice, we are unable to observe the seller’s type and instead rely on a set of indicators,
X, that proxy for it. In that case,
var[p|X] = β 2 var[b|X] + (1 − β)2 var[s|X] + 2β(1 − β)cov[b, s|X]
When X contains s, the second and third term are zero. In order to understand how β 2 var[b|s]
varies with and without taxation, we consider expanding the set of indicators X—as they become
more informative about s, the influence of the last two terms declines and the first term should tend
towards var[b|s]. We test whether there is a difference between var[p|X] with and without taxes for
a large set of indicators X correlated with seller’s type.
One of the primary indicators of seller’s type that we consider is the seller’s asking price. It is
natural to think that this price is correlated with the seller’s type, but it may also be endogenous
to taxation. In that case, the alternative interpretation of the effect of taxation on var[p|X] is as a
test of whether taxation changes informativeness of this important signal available to buyers.

4.5

Econometric Implementation

We estimate the price distribution of sales by maximum likelihood as follows. We specify a parametric distribution of prices absent the tax:
ln f0 (p) = g(p) + αD(p)

(2)

and the distribution in the presence of the tax:
ln f (p) = ln f0 (p) + γ · I(p > H)

(3)

where the left-hand side is the log of the probability distribution function at price p, g() is a
parametric function (a polynomial—third degree in our baseline specification) and D is a set of
controls for round numbers. We allow for discontinuity of the density at the threshold (γ) to
account for the shift in sale price and global extensive-margin response (gray region Z of Figures
5 and 6) among transactions subject to the tax. We estimate this model using data that excludes
some region around the threshold (H − P, H + P̄ ) to ensure that our estimates are not biased by the
16

distortions to the distribution near the notch.17 Given the observed distribution of prices outside
of the omitted region, we estimate the distribution given by equation (3) by maximum likelihood.18
This procedure yields fˆ0 (p), our estimate of the counterfactual distribution function of prices absent
the tax and fˆ1 = eγ̂ fˆ0 , the counterfactual in the presence of the tax.19 Using these counterfactual
distributions, we estimate bunching and gap, local incidence, and bounds on attrition near the
threshold as outlined above. Specifically, we estimate the excess mass as the difference between
´H
the observed mass in the region (H − P, H) and the predicted mass ( H−P̄ fˆ0 (p)dp), and estimate
the gap as the difference between the predicted mass in the region (H, H + P ) allowing for a
´ H+P̄
discontinuity at H ( H
fˆ1 (p)dp) and the observed mass in (H, H + P̄ ).
While it is common in existing literature exploiting kinks and notches for identification to
include round-number dummies to control for bunching at these points, our implementation of the
round-number effects, D(p), is more involved. Our baseline approach is to rely on the maximum
likelihood estimation and hence specify the density at any point. In order to parsimoniously capture
various forms of bunching (in particular, there is bunching in listings data just under round numbers
— e.g., at $899,000), we introduce “bunching” regions for each round number R that extend from
R − b to R. Within the bunching regions, the distribution is specified as g(p) + DR + DR · p
where DR are the relevant round-number dummies, while it is g(p) otherwise. Interacting the
round-number dummies with price allows the extent of rounding to vary with price (perhaps $1.2
million is not equally as salient as $600,000). In practice, we allow for rounding at multiples of
$25,000, but allow for separate effects for multiples of $25,000 and $50,000. We set b = $1000,
which makes the bunching region extend from, for example, $899,000 to $900,000 allowing both for
bunching at the $900K level and just below it (e.g., $899,999). Since our objective is to estimate
the counterfactual in the omitted region (in particular, at $1 million), this approach amounts to
assuming that bunching at other round prices is a valid counterfactual for the magnitude of bunching
at the tax notch—this is not a directly testable assumption but, as discussed before, data in New
Jersey before the introduction of the mansion tax (Figure 3) provides support for this assumption.
Except for a gain in information by allowing for continuous prices, this approach is very close to
binning the data in $1000 bins (and we show the more restrictive “binned” specifications as one of
our robustness checks). Beyond that, using maximum likelihood instead of fitting a polynomial to
binned data replaces the arbitrary zero-mean restriction for the error terms by a natural restriction
that the estimated specification represents a distribution function—arguably, a much more natural
assumption than OLS.
All reported standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping the whole procedure 999 times. Note
that the estimates of incidence and gap may fall into one of the round-number bunching regions.
When this is the case, the estimates are not very sensitive—small changes in parameters correspond
to staying in the bunching region. In such cases reported standard errors for estimates of gap and
17

Our theoretical framework establishes that there is a value of P̄ above which the notch (although not the tax) is
irrelevant for the distribution.
18
Formula 3 is already the log-likelihood and implementation only requires imposing conditions guaranteeing that
f (p) is a probability distribution function, i.e., that it integrates to one over the considered interval.
19
We show as a robustness check an estimate of ĥ resulting from estimating f0 using only the data to the left of
the threshold. Moreover, we combine this with an estimate of f1 using only data on the right of the omitted region
to attain an estimate of Ẑ.

17

incidence are small, even though standard errors for parameters of the parametric density are not.

5

Distortion to the Price Distribution

We begin by demonstrating graphically that the tax has a causal effect on the distribution of prices
and timing of transactions. Response to the tax notch is evident in Figure 1, which shows the
empirical distribution of taxable sales in New York with sales grouped into $5,000 bins. There
is clear bunching in the sale price just below $1 million and a drop in the volume of sales just
above $1 million. These features, especially the gap above the notch, are obvious when looking
at the distribution in logarithmic scale (and $25,000 bins), as in Figure 2. Figure A.1 in the
Appendix shows analogous patterns at the smaller (0.425%) RPTT notch at $500,000, which also
demonstrates some evidence of a response.20
We can also verify explicitly that the tax induces bunching by comparing sales in New Jersey
before and after the introduction of the tax. Figure 3 presents plots of the (log-scaled) histogram
of sales in NJ before and after the tax is introduced in $25,000 bins, with the pre-tax distribution
adjusted to account for sales growth and inflation, as discussed in the Figure note (and corresponding to our later empirical implementation that compares NJ before and after the tax).21 We see
pronounced bunching after the tax is introduced in 2004 and minimal bunching prior to 2004. Data
prior to 2004 also shows that $1 million is no more salient than other multiples of $50,000 before
the tax arrives. Moreover, this figure displays clear visual evidence of the gap above the notch in
the post-tax distribution, a feature that is not shared with the pre-tax distribution.
As Figure 4 illustrates, the number of sales in NJ just below the threshold clearly increases
precisely at the time of the introduction of the tax and the number of sales above the threshold
falls. Focusing on the region within $10,000 of the threshold it is evident that the increase in
the mass below the threshold is larger than the shift from just above $1 million. This difference
provides the first clear indication that the local effect of the tax may extend beyond 100% of its
value ($10,000). Figure 4 in the Online Appendix demonstrates that retiming is strong for sales
well above the threshold, but that it is unlikely to have lasted for an extended period of time—the
excess sales just before the introduction of the tax do not correspond to more than a couple months
worth of sales. On the other hand, the pattern of sales in the combined $900,000–1,100,000 range
suggests that, despite pricing effects post-introduction of the tax, overall retiming of transactions
in the neighborhood of the threshold is not particularly strong.22
20

There is also significant bunching at other round price levels (at every $50,000 and, to a lesser extent, remaining
$25,000 multiples), which may confound our bunching analysis. Unlike the bunching at $1 million, this round-number
bunching occurs in the bin above rather than the one below the round number. A priori it is possible that, although
this observed bunching below $1 million is consistent with theoretical predictions, it may simply reflect adjustments
to the tax by very small amounts. However, aggregating the data to larger bins in Figure A.2 mostly eliminates
such round-number bunching, while continuing to indicate that the response covers more than just the immediate
neighborhood of the threshold.
21
We choose this larger bin size to smooth out the bunching at other multiples of $50,000. The conclusions are
the same using $5,000 bins—in the presence of the tax there is excess bunching just below $1,000,000 and a gap
just above that is not present when there is no tax. However, the bunching at multiples of $50,000 makes the figure
difficult to read when both distributions (pre and post tax) are overlaid.
22
Appendix Figure A.4, which shows the monthly distribution of sales in New Jersey between $900,000 to $1,100,000,
further demonstrates that responses extend well beyond the $10,000 value of the tax. There is no evidence of the

18

Our baseline estimates, presented in Table 5, demonstrate that the observed bunching translates
to a local incidence on sellers that exceeds the magnitude of the tax. The first row reports estimates
for New York City and corresponds to the specification shown on Figure 2. For our baseline, we use a
3rd order polynomial, while omitting data in the $990,000-$1,155,422 region (the upper bound is the
theoretical limit discussed in Section 4.1), and allowing for an additional constant shift above the tax
threshold. Our estimate of the local incidence parameter in the baseline specification is $21,542.098:
bunching at the threshold is equivalent to all transactions over the following $21,000 shifting to the
threshold. These estimates are consistent with impressions from the graphical evidence presented
above. Taken literally as an incidence estimate this corresponds to over 200% incidence of the tax
on sellers for the marginal transaction. The fourth column presents the corresponding estimates of
Ẑ: the positive value indicates that there has to be substantial unraveling due to the presence of the
threshold or, in other words, there is no β that can rationalize behavior if no such extensive-margin
response is present.
In Appendix C we discuss robustness of these results to reasonable modifications of our specification, including choice of polynomials, changes in the omitted region and estimating incidence by
OLS relying on binned data. We find that our baseline local incidence results are very robust. We
also consider “placebo” treatments at other round numbers that, as expected, show no effect.
Our estimate of about 200% reduced-form incidence local to the threshold is consistent across
geographies and data sets. In the top panel of Table 5, we report results for New York State
(excluding New York City) and New Jersey. Estimates for these regions are remarkably similar—
within $2,000—to those for New York City. In contrast, estimates for New Jersey before the
introduction of the tax show no evidence of bunching.
As an alternative to our maximum likelihood approach, we estimate incidence in New Jersey
using the pre-tax period as a counterfactual for the post-tax period and find similar results. We
implement this pre/post comparison as follows. We omit transactions within 90 days of the policy
change (to avoid the retiming response) and focus on the following year (Oct. 30, 2004–Oct. 29,
2005). We rescale the period before the tax (May 3, 2003 to May 2, 2004) to account for sales
growth over time. Specifically, we construct a counterfactual growth factor by taking the ratio of
the count of sales within $2500 of each price from May 3, 2002 to May 2, 2003 to the count of
sales from Nov. 5, 2000 through Nov. 4, 2001 (omitting sales between Nov. 2001 and May 2002
to mimic the 180 day gap around the introduction of the tax in August, 2004). Figure 3 shows the
corresponding distributions. We find excess sales at the mansion tax threshold as the difference
between total post-period sales and adjusted pre-period sales in the region $990,000–$999,999, and
estimate the incidence as the price, p∗ , at which the number of sales in the pre-period between the
threshold and p∗ is equal to the excess. We estimate the missing mass in the gap in the same way
by taking the difference between total sales in the range $1,000,000–$1,155,422 in the pre and post
periods. We find standard errors for these estimates by bootstrapping this procedure (including the
distribution being distorted below $975,000, and clear evidence of a shift of the mass of sales to just under $1 million
from as far above as the $1,025,000 to $1,050,000 range. Additionally, Figures 4 and A.4 show patterns that may be
consistent with anticipation effects—there is a spike in sales with prices over $1 million just before the introduction
of the tax. This is not surprising: the tax had been announced prior to coming into effect, and the lengthy process
of closing a real estate transaction may allow for the possibility to speed up the timing of final sale. This effect is not
long lasting and of no relevance for New York where the tax was introduced long before our data starts.

19

growth factor for the pre-period) 999 times. Our incidence estimate using the pre/post comparison
is slightly larger than the baseline estimate ($25,000 vs. $21,542).23
The similarity of our estimate of ĥ using cross-sectional data (our baseline specification) and
the pre/post comparison in New Jersey is reassuring, given that these sources of identification rely
on different assumptions about the counterfactual. In the cross-sectional case, the counterfactual
distribution is potentially distorted due to general equilibrium effects. In the pre/post comparison,
the counterfactual is the distribution absent taxation. Similarity of the estimates of ĥ suggests that
general equilibrium spillover to the distribution outside of the omitted region is not very important.
We find some heterogeneity by property vintage (years since construction) in estimates shown
in Table 5, suggesting that some of the local response to the tax may be due to supply-side quality
adjustments. We expect that negotiating a purchase of property before construction is finished allows for significant response in terms of the level of finish, appliances and other amenities, allowing
for price reductions driven by adjustments in property characteristics. Similarly, older properties
may require renovation and hence allow for quality to more readily respond to the tax. In contrast,
original sales of apartments or houses after they have been constructed and finished may have less
flexibility. Our data for New York City and New Jersey contain information about year of construction of the property. In particular, in New York City, which is dominated by large apartment
buildings, there is a non-trivial number of sales that occur before construction is finished. For New
York (but not New Jersey), we find that bunching is very large for sales before construction is
complete and for sales that occur three or more years after construction. In contrast, sales that
occur soon after construction—presumably original sales of already fully constructed and equipped
properties—show smaller, but still significant (exceeding $10,000 incidence estimate), bunching.
Recall though that the introduction of the tax in New Jersey induced bunching immediately (Figures 4 and A.4), so that investment-related adjustments are unlikely to explain the bulk of the
response. We interpret these results as evidence that supply-side response along the quality/finish
dimension is important: quality adjustments may perhaps explain around half of the price shift, still
leaving local incidence of over 100%. While we do not pursue full welfare analysis, note that such
a tax-motivated response corresponds to welfare loss by the same logic that implies that taxable
income response reflects the efficiency cost of income tax (Saez et al., 2012).
Our estimates for the NYC RPTT and NJ RTF, reported in the first and second panels of Table
6, are smaller, but still consistent, with the mansion tax results. We find no evidence of response to
the small ($600) New Jersey RTF threshold. For the $2125 RPTT notch that applies only in New
York City, we find a response for new sales, but not for old sales (and we find no effect in the rest of
New York State where the tax does not apply). The variability of these results coincides with shifts
in statutory incidence. Like the mansion tax, the RPTT on new sales is the responsibility of the
buyer and we find evidence of a response that is consistent with the mansion tax estimates, albeit
23

We find little change in local incidence over time. Figure A.5 in the appendix displays monthly incidence estimates
for NJ. Prior to the introduction of the mansion tax in August 2004 estimates show no response to the threshold.
Once the tax is introduced, prices quickly respond—incidence estimates reach the $20,000 level within four months.
We find no evidence that the response to the tax is changing with the housing boom and bust. We also see no obvious
relationship between incidence and the real estate market in New York. Table A.3 presents incidence estimates for
all three geographies over time. While the estimates vary somewhat from year to year and region to region, we see
no clear pattern over time and they all hover around our baseline estimates of $20,000.

20

somewhat smaller: $1758.225 represents an 82.7% local incidence on sellers of the $2125 increase
in tax liability. The RPTT on old sales and the NJ RTF schedule are the responsibility of the
seller, and in none of these cases do we find any evidence of response. Both of these results are
consistent with our reduced-form incidence estimates based on the mansion tax: a 100% burden of
the tax on sellers should correspond to no price change for the sellers when they are the party with
statutory incidence. Alternatively, switching incidence can correspond to changes in the salience
of the tax—perhaps a tax imposed on sellers is less salient than the one imposed on the buyers.24
One concern is that the response to the tax may be driven by tax evasion, which we investigate
by examining proxies for the availability of evasion opportunities. In the third panel of Table 6,
we split the NYC sample by coop vs. condo status. Coop transactions have to be approved by
coop boards that have the power to veto sales. In particular, there is anecdotal evidence that coop
boards disapprove transactions that occur below the expected (or, perhaps, desired) market price.
One might expect that if underreporting of the price is the important margin of response to the
tax, the extent of bunching in coop apartments should be smaller than otherwise. This is indeed
what we find, although the margin is small: $16,292.354 for coops vs. $23,292.602 for non-coops.
We also investigate a more direct proxy for evasion—the nature of the transaction—presented at
the bottom of Table 6. All-cash transactions involve fewer parties (in particular, no financing) and
more liquidity, which may increase the likelihood of side payments. We find the opposite: incidence
of $16,018 for cash transactions versus $20,676.666 when the sale has an associated mortgage. In
the context of real estate transactions, tax evasion is certainly possible, but one might expect that
it is not completely straightforward: both parties have to agree and money has to change hands at
some point during the long closing process. Evasion in this context likely requires an aspect of trust
between the two parties. Our New York State data contains a dummy for whether a transaction
is “arms-length” (i.e., between related parties). We find no evidence that arms-length transactions
involve more bunching ($23,169 for arms-length sales, $23,786 for non-arms-length).
Finally, examining listings data for Manhattan, we find comparable bunching in seller listing
prices, suggesting that evasion is not a driving force of the observed sale-price response. Figure 7
shows the smoothed distribution of listing prices around the mansion tax threshold for properties
sold and matched to the tax data.25 There are three prices shown for sold listings: the initial
asking price, the final price in the listing data, and the sale price. Among properties that sell,
bunching appears most prominent for the final asking price, followed by the sale price, and the
initial asking price. These visual perceptions are confirmed by our estimates in Table 7 that find
substantial bunching for both initial and final listing prices that actually exceed the response at the
24

For both the RTF and the RPTT there is a small dominated region where sellers would be better off accepting
a lower sale price below the threshold, which is offset by a lower tax bill. Thus, there should be a small amount of
bunching and a small gap at the RTF and RPTT thresholds when sellers remit. That we find no evidence of this is
potential support of these taxes’ limited salience. The dollar value of these discontinuities is small, however, so we
refrain from drawing sharp conclusions on this point.
25
Since bunching is more prominant in listings data, we adjust the distributions on the graphs to remove the
common round number bunching. Specifically, we regress the log of the per-$25,000-bin count on a cubic in price
and dummy variables for multiples of $50k and $100k interacted with the price. We then subtract the predicted
bunching effect from the actual counts. The remaining peaks in the data are the result of noise and do not necessarily
correspond with salient round numbers. Figure A.6 and Figure A.7 in the appendix show the unadjusted distribution
and the distribution of listing prices for all listed properties in Manhattan, respectively.

21

sale stage.26 The response of the listing prices indicates that sellers internalize the presence of the
tax (which is the responsibility of the buyer) even before meeting the buyer. Since these listings
responses occur before the seller identifies a buyer who would be willing to engage in tax evasion,
we find it unlikely that the ultimate sale price response is driven by such cheating.
The evidence so far shows clearly that notched transaction taxes distort the distribution of sale
prices. We find some evidence of supply-side response in quality adjustments, as well as differences
in estimates based on the side of the market responsible for the tax. Our tests of tax evasion
are weak, but do not suggest that this is the main force. These results reflect local reduced-form
incidence estimates—the adjustment of prices in response to the threshold. By themselves, they
do not reveal the strength of bargaining power and are not informative about the incidence of the
tax away from the threshold. As discussed in our theoretical section, understanding the bargaining
power and, relatedly, the possibility of unraveling in the market requires investigating the size of
the gap in the distribution as well (reflected by Ẑ).

6

Unraveling: Market Distortions Local to the Threshold

Our estimates of Ẑ imply that there is significant unraveling of the market local to the tax threshold.
In general, we find the number of sales bunching at the threshold to be smaller than the number of
sales missing from the gap, translating into a positive value of Ẑ, as reported in Table 5. As discussed
in Section 4.3, a positive sign on Ẑ cannot be reconciled with positive values of β (seller’s bargaining
power) and instead indicates unraveling of the market in the proximity of the threshold. Hence, our
results show that the threshold design of the tax discourages transactions that would have taken
place if the tax rate was the same but discontinuity was not present—even after controlling for the
usual extensive margin response (sales with positive surplus in absence of the tax, but negative
surplus when taxed) we find that there are sales that do not occur. Moreover, the presence of
unraveling suggests that the matching process is an important part of real estate sales and that
this process may be disrupted by the tax.
To be specific, our baseline estimate of Ẑ = $43, 861.766 implies that the tax eliminates
transactions that correspond to a range of original prices with a width between $43, 861.766 and
$43, 861.766 + tax ≈ $54, 000 above the threshold. For NYC, this corresponds to about 2,800 sales
over the 2003-2011 period. Altogether, we find that the tax induces a $20,000 price-range worth of
transactions from above the threshold to bunch at the threshold, and discourages another $50, 000
or so of sales from occurring at prices just above the threshold. The finding that Ẑ is substantial
and positive is robust. Firstly, as can be seen in Table 5, Ẑ ranges from 37,409.87 to 43,861.766
across the three geographic regions that we consider (NYC, NYS, and NJ). Secondly, Ẑ is small and
economically insignificant in NJ before the tax is introduced. Thirdly, as discussed in Appendix
C, the estimates of Ẑ are robust to the specification choices. Moreover, using data for NJ and
constructing our counterfactual distribution using data from before the tax is introduced gives an
26
We do not find conclusive evidence of a similar response of listings prices to the NYC RPTT. This is consistent
with the results that we discussed before: we find a response to the RPTT only for new sales where the tax applies
to buyers. However, the number of new sales in the listing data is very small and we run into power issues.

22

estimate of Ẑ somewhat smaller than the baseline maximum likelihood estimate and with large
standard errors, but with a point estimate that is still economically significant.
This extensive-margin response highlights an important margin of efficiency loss due to the
transaction tax notch. As discussed above, a positive estimate of Ẑ suggests a very specific
extensive-margin response, which we refer to as unraveling: some buyer-seller pairs who have a
positive joint surplus under the tax (regions B and C of Figure 6) are exiting the market. This
does not imply that these parties do not trade at all—buyers and sellers can continue to search and
some of them may ultimately transact at different prices away from the bunching/gap region—but
it provides evidence that the market in the region just above the threshold is unraveling. Note that
this is different from the usual extensive margin response in which buyer-seller pairs who would
transact in absence of the tax find that the tax reduces their joint surplus below zero and so the sale
does not occur. Our estimation procedure explicitly controls for this traditional extensive-margin
response by allowing for a level shift (discontinuity) in the distribution above the notch.
Examining real-estate listings data for New York City, we find suggestive evidence that the
tax further disrupts the search process in a region above the notch. We interpret the presence
of substantial bunching in the listings price (discussed above) as evidence that the tax influences
seller search behavior. We also find that those who list just above the notch (between $1M and
$1.075M) are still very likely to sell below one million (see the relationship between listing and sale
price in Figure A.8 in the Online Appendix), and are more likely to sell than those who list below
the notch or much higher above the notch (Figure A.9) despite spending more time on the market
(Figure A.10). Interestingly, those who list just above the notch are more likely to leave their
original REBNY realtor and sell with another realtor or on their own (Figure A.11), suggesting an
additional margin of adjustment to the tax—saving on realtor fees to compensate for a lower price.
The evidence thus far points to extensive distortions to price, unraveling of the market, and
some disruption of the matching process local to the transfer tax notch. However, many of these
responses occur because of how the tax is implemented—prices can adjust below the notch to avoid
the tax and the notch creates specific local incentives for buyers and sellers to break matches. In
what follows, we examine how the tax affects home sales more generally, away from the notch.

7

Global Market Distortions

In this section, we show evidence indicating that the transfer tax may distort the matching process
everywhere above the notch. Conditional on initial listing price, sellers are taking larger discounts
in the presence of the tax. While this higher discount could be explained by a shift in bargaining
power or by endogenous listing prices, we find evidence that the efficiency of matches themselves is
distorted by the tax. In particular, the variance of sale price conditional on property characteristics
increases with the tax. While these results are largely descriptive—we must rely on observations
below the threshold to form a counterfactual above—they do show sharp effects and, as discussed
in Section 4.4, we interpret this higher variance in selling price as a decrease in the efficiency of the
matching process.
Price discounts, which we define as the percent drop from listing to sale price, increase under

23

the transfer tax. Figure 8 shows that the discount from the initial price to the final advertised
price (i.e., before a buyer is identified) and to the final sale price increase as the initial listing
price moves above $1,000,000. We present the median and 75th percentiles of the distribution
of discounts (many listings are not revised) in the figures. The effect is not immediate at the
$1,000,000 threshold, because the tax applies to the sale price and not the initial price, and it is the
latter that constitutes the running variable here: close to $1 million a small discount is sufficient
to bring the sale price below the notch. Interestingly, the increase is persistent well above the
threshold—beyond $1.1M larger discounts persist, even though these discounts are generally not
large enough to move the transaction below the notch. We find analogous evidence for the discount
from final to sale price—see Appendix Figure A.12—suggesting that the price response is slowly
revealed and reinforced throughout the search process by distorting the initial prices, subsequent
revisions and, finally, during the bargaining stage.27
We investigate the relationship between transfer taxes and price discounts more formally and
find that the increase above the notch is significant and persistent. We regress the discount from
initial asking price to sale price on a linear spline in initial asking price, with nodes at every multiple
of $100,000 (restricting the sample to listings with initial prices between $500,000 and $1,500,000).
We follow the same procedure for the discount from initial asking price to final asking price. We
plot the difference between the predicted discount (first price and final price) at each node and the
predicted discount at $1,000,000 in Figure 9. These estimates show a significant jump in the price
discounts at the notch that shows no signs of reversing before reaching $1.5 million.28
There are several explanations for the increase in discounts. Firstly, it could be that sale prices
above the notch are not changing, but the response is driven by a change in asking prices (and
we know from Section 5 that asking prices respond to the tax). In this case, there could be little
efficiency loss due to the tax. Secondly, it could be that the tax increases buyers’ bargaining power.
This may not entail any welfare loss due to the tax, but rather a redistribution of surplus from
sellers to buyers. These two explanations still correspond to the tax affecting some aspects of
behavior, although not necessarily the final outcomes. Alternatively, as we argue next, it could be
that the tax disrupts the search process and reduces match quality with associated efficiency losses.
We find evidence consistent with transfer taxes disrupting the buyer-seller match process: conditional on seller characteristics, the tax increases the variance of sale prices. We investigate the
relationship between asking prices and the variance of sale-prices with a two-stage spline estimation
procedure. We first regress sale price on a linear spline in asking price (nodes at every $100,000
between $500,000 and $1,500,000). We then estimate by median regression the relationship between
the squared residuals from this first stage and a linear spline in asking price. We estimate standard
errors using a clustered bootstrap procedure.29
27

This can also be seen in Figure A.13, in which we focus on the mean discounts from the initial price that allow
us to decompose the response (but blur the response that is predominantly present at high quantiles). Roughly half
of the response is due to price revisions and half due to discounts at the bargaining stage.
28
The corresponding point estimates (and related slope estimates) are in Appendix Table A.4.
29
We use median regression in the second stage, because squaring the residuals makes these specifications sensitive
to outliers. The bootstrap is as follows: for each observation, we resample first-stage residuals from the 50 nearest
observations (by listing price). We use these residuals and the first-stage predicted values to construct a bootstrap
sample and re-estimate the two-step process. We iterate this process 999 to acquire the distribution of estimates.

24

We find a significant increase in the variance of sale price as (initial or final) asking price crosses
the $1,000,000 notch. In Figure 10 we plot the predicted dispersion at the given node (from the
two-stage spline procedure) relative to that at the notch.30 This increased dispersion is pronounced
and persistent well above the notch. The estimates show that, in general, the predicted variance
below the notch is very close to the predicted variance at $1,000,000, while the variance of sale price
conditional on asking price is significantly higher above the notch than below the notch. Even as
asking price rises to $1,500,000, the variance of sale price does not return to pre-notch levels. This
is inconsistent with asking prices and discounts simply scaling up without changes to other aspects
of the matching process. As with the price discount, these estimates suggest that the real estate
market is affected by the transfer tax even far above the notch—in the presence of the tax, asking
price is a noisier signal of final sale price.31
In Section 4.4 we argued that an increase in the dispersion in sale price conditional on seller
characteristics implies a movement further away from the optimal allocation of assortative matching.
An increase in the variance of sale price conditional on asking price is suggestive of such an efficiency
loss, but it is not conclusive: the ideal measure is the variance of price conditional on seller type.
Asking price is an imperfect proxy for seller type—if asking price is endogenous to the tax, the
increase in variance may be driven by a change in the composition of sellers who list at each price.
We repeat the two-step estimates of sale-price variance versus asking price including controls
for property characteristics, in order to better approximate the variance of sale price conditional on
seller type. In both stages we control for year-of-sale fixed effects, zip code fixed effects, building
type (single-family home, multi-family home, apartment in walkup, apartment in elevator building,
etc.), whether the sale is of a new unit, and the log of years since construction (plus an indicator for
missing years since construction). We plot the results from this procedure in Figure 10. Including
these controls somewhat reduces the effect of the tax on the variance of sale price, suggesting that
endogeneity of listing prices may have influenced the previous estimates, but the difference is not
large and generally not statistically significant. In particular, there is still a significant increase in
the dispersion of sale price above the notch. We interpret this increase as evidence that the transfer
tax reduces efficiency of the housing market by disrupting the matching process.

8

Conclusions

Our empirical analysis demonstrates how a notched transaction tax affects the distribution of
housing sales by creating bunching below the notch, a large gap in the distribution above the
notch, and distorts the relationship between asking price and sale price. The price responses that
we identify suggest that sellers local to the threshold take large price cuts—greater than the cost of
the tax—although this may partially be driven by quality adjustments. The finding of a gap above
the notch that is larger than the number of sales bunching at the threshold—even after controlling
30

We present the numerical estimates of the difference between the predicted value at each node and the predicted
value at $1,000,000 in Table A.5. The estimates are fairly consistent for both asking prices and are insensitive to the
choice of quantile or mean regression in the first stage—see also Figure 10.
31
This increase in dispersion is also confirmed in the raw data. In Figures A.14 and A.15 we plot the variance of
sale price conditional on initial asking price and final asking price, respectively. In both cases, the variance of sale
price increases above the notch.

25

for the usual extensive-margin effect—suggests that there are productive transactions that do not
occur because of the notched tax. We show that there is bunching in the distribution of residential
listing prices and an effect of the tax on discounts, both of which indicate that not just the final
price, but also some aspects of the search process, are affected by the tax. Finally, we find that
in the presence of transaction taxes the relationship between seller asking price and final sale price
weakens, and that this persists when we control for property characteristics. This effect extends
far above the threshold. We interpret this increase in price dispersion as a movement away from
the efficient allocation of positive assortative matching in the housing market and as revealing the
distortion due to taxation globally. Hence, we conclude that our analysis of real-estate transaction
tax notches reveals substantial price response local to tax thresholds, that a notched tax crowds
out productive transactions, and that transaction taxes may increase search-related inefficiencies.
That we find substantial distortions due to the design of the transaction taxes in NY and NJ
(0.7% of all transactions are eliminated due to the threshold) raises the question of why notched
taxes are present in the first place. One of the few general results of the optimal income tax
literature is that the marginal tax rate should be lower than 100% (no notches). Indeed, our
bunching estimates show that the transfer tax threshold leads to a substantial response and loss
of revenue. Moreover, unraveling adds efficiency and revenue costs. Phasing in the mansion tax,
which is likely administratively feasible, would eliminate these inefficiencies. Still, phasing in would
not eliminate all distortions: an extensive margin response may be present and one of our findings
is that search is affected even far from the threshold. One might ask, then, why have a progressive
transfer tax is in the first place. Public finance theory, going back to the Atkinson-Stiglitz result,
suggests that such an instrument is useful if it can push redistribution beyond what can be achieved
via an income tax (a tool which New York State, New York City, and New Jersey all have in place).
The real estate market raises an additional issue though: some investors may be non-residents, so
that resources invested in real estate need not be reachable by income taxes. Still, while a transfer
tax might indeed hit non-residents, the same would be true about general property taxes, which
avoid many of the inefficiencies we identify herein. One redeeming quality of the transaction tax is
that it will disproportionately affect more frequently traded properties. This feature is appealing
if frequency of trading varies for different groups of purchasers.
Our evidence of exit from markets near the tax threshold raises important issues for implementation and interpretation of studies relying on bunching at notches for identification. To date,
most of this literature has assumed one-sided markets and abstracted from extensive-margin responses. Our framework highlights that there are two different types of exit from markets. One
is standard—transactions with low surplus do not take place. In the income tax context, this is
akin to the labor force participation decision.32 The second type of exit, which has not been previously recognized in this literature, is unraveling of the market near the notch that corresponds
to destroying productive matches. Both of these responses imply that bunching does not fully
characterize the consequences of a notch. While in some contexts (e.g., an income tax notch at a
high value) it is reasonable to ignore the first type of extensive-margin response, the second type
of response is likely to be intrinsic to any matching context in which parties have an option to
32

See Marx, 2013 for explicit modeling of this decision to exit the market.

26

continue search (e.g., firms may continue searching for a worker willing to accept a wage below the
notch; employees may make different occupational choices). The possibility of this second type of
response undermines the assumption that the excess mass bunching at the threshold is identical to
the missing mass in the gap (as in Kleven and Waseem, 2013). Our empirical framework relaxes
this assumption and allows us to explicitly test for exit local to the notch.
More generally, our results suggest that taxes may introduce inefficiencies into other search
markets. Labor markets are, perhaps, the most obvious example of a market with non-trivial
search costs where matches are subject to taxation. Many labor-market regulations follow notched
designs, such as notched income and wage taxation or requirements to provide health insurance
or comply with Value Added Tax if the number of employees crosses a given threshold. That
firms might face such discrete costs to increasing scale may lead not simply to supply- or demandside adjustments, but perhaps to the destruction of equilibrium opportunities that require costly
search—in the same way that productive real-estate matches are discouraged near the transaction
tax notch. Moreover, our finding that transaction taxes increase search-related inefficiencies well
above the threshold suggests that even non-notched policies may lead to less efficient worker-firm
matches. Of course, the housing market differs from the labor market in ways that may make the
mechanisms we study particularly pronounced. Firstly, the availability of alternative margins of
adjustment affects the ease of moving below the tax threshold. Secondly, the housing market is a
“spot” market where the current price determines tax treatment; this is not necessarily the case
in labor markets, where contracts may be long lasting and as earnings adjust over time they move
further away from the notch. Nonetheless, our results underscore the importance of considering
how taxation affects search, especially in the context of policies that follow a threshold design.

References
Benjamin, John D., N. Edward Coulson, and Shiawee X. Yang, “Real estate transfer taxes and
property values: The Philadelphia story,” The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 1993, 7
(2), 151–157.
Bernheim, Douglas B. and Jonathan Meer, “Do Real Estate Brokers Add Value When Listing Services
Are Unbundled?,” Economic Inquiry, 2013. Forthcoming.
Besley, Timothy, Neil Meads, and Paolo Surico, “The Incidence of a Transactions Tax: Evidence
from a Stamp Duty Holiday,” 2013. London School of Economics, mimeo.
Best, Michael and Henrik Kleven, “Property Transaction Taxes and the Housing Market: Evidence
from Notches and Housing Stimulus in the UK,” April 2013. London School of Economics, mimeo.
Carrillo, Paul E., “An Empirical Stationary Equilibrium Search Model of the Housing Market,” International Economic Review, 2012, 53 (1), 203–234.
and Jaren C. Pope, “Are Homes Hot or Cold Potatoes? The Distribution of Marketing Time in the
Housing Market,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2012, 42 (1), 189–197.
Dachis, Ben, Gilles Duranton, and Matthew A. Turner, “The Effects of Land Transfer Taxes on
Real Estate Markets: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Toronto,” Journal of Economic Geography,
2012, 12 (2), 327–354.
Doyle Jr., Joseph J. and Krislert Samphantharak, “$2.00 Gas! Studying the Effects of a Gas Tax
Moratorium,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (3-4), 869–884.

27

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, “Loss Aversion and Seller behavior: Evidence from the
Housing Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1233–1260.
and Lu Han, “Search and Matching in the Market for Existing Homes,” Journal of Urban Economics,
2012, 72, 31–45.
Han, Lu and William Strange, “What is the Role of the Asking Price for a House?,” 2012. University
of Toronto, mimeo.
and , “Bidding Wars for Houses,” Real Estate Economics, 2013. Forthcoming.
Hastings, Justine and Ebonya Washington, “The First of the Month Effect: Consumer Behavior and
Store Responses,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (2), 142–162.
Haurin, Donald R., Jessica L. Haurin, Taylor Nadauld, and Anthony Sanders, “List Prices, Sale
Prices and Marketing Time: An Application to US Housing Markets,” Real Estate Economics, 2010, 38
(4), 659–685.
Jia, Panle and Parag A. Pathak, “The Impact of Commissions on Home Sales in Greater Boston,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2010.
Kleven, Henrik J. and Mazhar Waseem, “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2013, 128
(2), 669–723.
Levitt, Steven D. and Chad Syverson, “Market distortions when agents are better informed: The value
of information in real estate transactions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (4), 599–611.
Marion, Justin and Erich Muehlegger, “Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Conditions,” Journal of Public
Economics, October 2011, 95 (9-10), 1202–12.
Marx, Benjamin M., “Regulatory Hurdles and Growth of Charitable Organizations: Evidence from a
Dynamic Bunching Design,” 2013. Columbia University, mimeo.
Merlo, Antonio and Francois Ortalo-Magne, “Bargaining Over Residential Real Estate: Evidence from
England,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2004, 56, 192–216.
Mishra, Prachi, Arvind Subramanian, and Petia Topalova, “Policies, Enforcement, and Customs
Evasion: Evidence from India,” Journal of Public Economics, October 2008, 92 (10-11), 1907–1925.
Persson, Petra, “Social Insurance and the Marriage Market,” January 2013. Columbia University, mimeo.
Rothstein, Jesse, “Is the EITC as Good as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax Incidence,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (1), 177–208.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
2010, 2 (3), 180–212.
, Joel B. Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz, “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal
Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2012, 50 (1), 3–50.
, Manos Matsaganis, and Panos Tsakloglou, “Earnings Determination and Taxes: Evidence from a
Cohort Based Payroll Tax Reform in Greece,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2011, 127 (1),
493–533.
Slemrod, Joel B., “Optimal Taxation and Optimal Tax Systems,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Winter 1990, 4 (1), 157–78.
, “Buenas Notches: Lines and Notches in Tax System Design,” September 2010. University of Michigan,
mimeo.
, Caroline Weber, and Hui Shan, “The Lock-in Effect of Housing Transfer Taxes: Evidence from a
Notched Change in D.C. Policy,” 2012. University of Michigan, mimeo.
Van Ommeren, Jos and Michiel Van Leuvensteijn, “New Evidence of the Effect of Transaction Costs
on Residential Mobility,” Journal of Regional Science, 2005, 45 (4), 681–702.

28

Tax

Table 1: Real Estate Transfer Tax Schedules
Threshold ($) Rate Below Rate Above

Mansion Tax (NY & NJ)
RPTT (NYC, Residential)
RPTT (NYC, Commercial)
RTF (NJ)

$1,000,000
$500,000
$500,000
$350,000

0%
1%
1.425%
0.78%**

1%
1.425%
2.625%
0.96%

Jump
$10,000
$2,125
$6,000
$630

Statutory
Incidence
Buyer
Seller*
Seller
Seller

Notes: *Buyer remits tax if the sale is of newly developed property (otherwise Seller remits). **NJ RTF schedule
features non-linear tax schedule below $350,000, all of which changes when the sale price crosses the notch; 0.78%
and 0.96% are simply the marginal rates faced above and below the notch.

Table 2: Sample Statistics for Taxable Sales
NYC
NYS
(2003 – 2011) (2002 – 2010)
Number of Sales
380629
1172708
Sales ∈ ( $950K, $1.05M)
7932
6242
Median Price
405600
159900
Mean Price
660719
258363

NJ
(1996 – 2011)
1703260
7556
200000
262122

Notes: NYC data is from the Department of Finance Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011 (taxable sales defined as singleunit non-commercial sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos). Data for NYS from Office of Real
Property Service deeds records for 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (taxable defined as all single-parcel residential sales of
one-, two-, or three-family homes). Data for NJ from the State Treasury SR1A file for 1996–2011 (taxable defined as
any residential sale).

Table 3: Median Price of Taxable Sales Over Time
NYC
NYS
NJ
n
Price
n
Price
Year
n
Price
. 111759 127000
1996
.
.
1997
.
.
.
. 115470 130000
1998
.
.
.
. 131485 137500
1999
.
.
.
. 139167 143000
2000
.
.
.
. 136891 151000
2001
.
.
.
. 136733 169000
2002
.
. 163491 132000 145718 197000
2003 47679 293000 167709 149500 148906 235000
2004 53342 340000 175766 165000 159220 270155
2005 52310 395460 175873 184640 155340 315000
2006 47973 445000 152220 170000 127630 327000
2007 48552 480000
5934 287000 108790 321050
2008 40354 475000 117000 162500
86151 288000
2009 31368 420000 110408 155500
83407 257500
2010 27132 463000 104307 160666
80944 250000
2011 31919 456000
.
.
28766 250000
Notes: NYC data is from the Department of Finance Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011 (taxable sales defined as singleunit non-commercial sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos). Data for NYS from the Office
of Real Property Services deeds records for 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (taxable defined as all single-parcel residential
sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes). NYS observations in 2007 are from sales made in 2007, but recorded in
2008–2011 and omits sales recorded in 2007. Data for NJ from the State Treasury SR1A file for 1996–2011 (taxable
defined as any residential sale).

29

Matched,
but not Closed
0.103
0.000
71875

Mean
Median
n

Days on
Market
146.107
80.000
40680

Initial Asking
Price
1384028
825000
44320

30

Mean
Median
n

Sold
0.671
1.000
71875

Table 4: REBNY Listings Sample Statistics
All Listings
Days on
Initial Asking
Final Asking
Market
Price
Price
197.859
1604547
1602670
110.000
899000
875000
67550
71875
71875
Closed and Matched Listings
Final Asking
Sale
Discount
Price
Price
(First to Final)
1435747
1241209
0.032
799000
784052
0.000
44320
44193
43506

Discount
(First to Final)
0.019
0.000
71875
Discount
(First to Sale)
0.059
0.043
43309

Discount
(Final to Sale)
0.028
0.023
43309

Notes: Data from the Real Estate Board of New York’s listing service; represents all REBNY listings in Manhattan between 2003 and 2010 that are closed or off market.
Sold is an indicator equal to one if the final status of the listing is “Closed.” Days on the market is calculated as the number of days between the initial active listing
and the final status of “in contract” (if the property sells with REBNY) or “permanently off market” (otherwise). Initial asking price is the asking price on the listing
when first active; final asking price is the price listed immediately prior to the listing being “in contract” or being taken off the market (if unsold). Sale price is the price
reported in the NYC DOF data and is available only for REBNY listings that have a match in the DOF data (sale price of 0 is considered missing). Discount is defined
price
as 1 − ffinal
and is windsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. 5,940 listings have invalid listing and off-market dates (missing or obviously misreported), and are
irst price
omitted from days on market calculations. ”Matched, but not closed” is an indicator that a listing has a match in the NYC DOF data, but is never reported as “Closed”
by the REBNY agent.

Table 5: Response to Mansion Tax,
Sample
Incidence
NYC
21542.098
NYS (excl. NYC)
23227.515
NJ Post Tax
21477.388
NJ Pre Tax
-784.065
NJ Pre/Post Comparison† 25000.000
<0 37329.701
0
13759.258
NYC
1
11309.339
(Yrs. Since Contr.)
2
14118.294
3
24467.069
4–6 25586.634
7+ 22780.508
NYS (excl. NYC)
Old 22677.619
New 34254.287
0
24949.365
1
24684.039
NJ Post Tax
2
23730.361
(Yrs. Since Constr.)
3
24950.530
4–6 19718.802
7+ 19967.636
0
-351.083
1
-142.337
NJ Pre Tax
2
-798.644
(Yrs. Since Constr.)
3
-2121.267
4–6
-661.898
7+
-778.278

by Region and Years Since Construction
Std. Error
Ẑ
Std. Error
n
1150.878 43861.766
4142.953 102493
1084.482 41610.588
4334.170 108462
1474.300 37409.873
4310.896 111936
38.892
2958.261
285.872
57836
8515.132 14223.330
11628.94
2020
16009.929 -13709.572 42837.004
559
7671.441
-2451.076 27109.852
1048
3457.124 45053.550 15619.853
3422
3145.743 47311.896 15259.170
4388
5927.603 36654.826 26001.895
2253
6045.138 82880.894 29444.354
2433
1275.592 48877.574
5193.370
72128
1283.443 40945.774
4264.702 104576
8350.604 62173.984 25965.831
3886
10542.512 19598.806 33121.546
988
7485.882 55501.171 26732.423
1896
7183.484 54344.928 25413.421
1773
8043.393 25353.913 25917.361
1882
4392.694 41103.750 17066.774
6148
1633.977 40047.784
4989.520
85551
4149.632
1619.879 26316.982
723
6362.861
4103.325 71219.647
852
1743.317
3214.845 13783.929
1082
2519.545
8725.490 10998.073
1249
537.723
9250.812 18873.573
3335
46.481
3226.236
380.842
36530

Notes: Estimates from baseline procedure (3rd-order polynomial, omit $990k–$1,155,422). NYC data is from the
Department of Finance Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011 (taxable sales defined as single-unit non-commercial sales of
one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos). Data for NYS from the Office of Real Property Services deeds
records for 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (taxable defined as all single-parcel residential sales of one-, two-, or three-family
homes). Data for NJ from the State Treasury SR1A file for 1996–2011 (taxable defined as any residential sale). NJ
sample restricted to sales recorded between 1996 and 2003 for pre-tax estimates and after August, 2004 for estimates
in presence of the tax. Years since construction defined as the difference between the year the property was built and
the year of sale. New sales in New York state are defined as any being flagged as new construction.
†
Estimates for NJ Pre/Post comparison using NJ taxable sales omitting 90 days around the implementation of the
policy: from Oct. 30, 2004 to Oct. 29, 2005 (post-period) and May 3, 2003 to May 2, 2004 (pre-period). Incidence
estimate is the price at which the number of sales in the pre-period to the right of the threshold equal the difference
between the number of sales in the bunching region ($990,000–$999,999) in the post- and adjusted pre-periods—preperiod distribution is adjusted as described in text. Ẑ calculated as in the text, where the excess number of sales
bunching at the gap is the difference between the post- and adjusted pre-period distributions in the bunching region,
while the gap is calculated as the difference between the distributions above the notch ($1M–$1,155,422). Number of
observations listed for the pre/post comparison is the total count of taxable sales between $990,000 and $1,155,422
for these dates.

31

Geography

NYC
NYS

NJ

NYC

NYC Deeds
NYS

Table 6: Heterogeneity in Response by Notch and Sub-Sample
Sample
Incidence Std. Error
Ẑ
Std. Error
RPTT
New
751.923
3071.659
1975.290
1758.225
Old
-390.461
28.339
488.460
69.802
New
510.129
7.829
332.599
-679.032
Old
-889.542
18.945
1105.190
56.531
RTF
Post Aug. 2004
-699.552
15.333
-268.101
44.131
Pre Aug. 2004
-591.400
20.099
-300.348
68.344
Mansion Tax
16292.354
2184.555
58245.269
8590.430
All Coops
All Non-Coops
23292.602
1027.253
38817.535
4612.629
Old Non-Coops
24196.113
535.699
37340.124
5067.660
16018.361
2356.852
74976.653
8814.378
Cash Only
Mortgage
20676.666
2223.237 119838.215 11273.628
23168.557
1163.640
43274.495
4606.535
Arms-Length
Non-Arms-Length 23786.484
3149.902
24496.898 12693.600

n
21683
259840
19147
687807
546882
836832
26950
75543
63971
28339
49421
97936
10526

Notes: RPTT and RTF estimates based on 5th-order polynomial, omitting sales between $490,000 and $550,000 (for
NYC and NYS) and between $340,000 and $400,000 (for NJ), Mansion tax estimates as in the baseline specification.
NYC data is from the Department of Finance Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011. Data for NYS from the Office of
Real Property Services deeds records for 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (excluding NYC) restricted to all single-parcel
residential sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes. Sales in NYC are defined as single-unit non-commercial sales
of one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos. New sales are defined as any sale occurring within three
years of unit’s construction (in NYC) or any sale flagged as new construction (in NYS, excluding NYC). Data for
NJ from the State Treasury SR1A file for 1996–2011 (taxable defined as any residential sale). Coops are identified
in the rolling sales data as sales with associated building codes equal to “Coops - Walkup Apartments” or “Coops
- Elevator Apartments.”NYC Deeds Records data from deeds records collected by private data provider (taxable
defined as any residential sale). Non-arms-length sales in NYS defined by the Office of Real Property Services as a
sale of real property between relatives or former relatives, related companies or partners in business, where one of
the buyers is also a seller, or “other unusual factors affecting sale price” (ex. divorce or bankruptcy).

Sample
All

Sold

Unsold

Price
First
Final
First
Final
Sale
First
Final

Table 7: Mansion Tax: Listings
Incidence Std. Error
Ẑ
24443.666
166.150 101702.509
34992.894
3380.599
76606.311
24363.369
353.901
95113.750
38445.445
4289.510
68828.242
19148.096
2089.630
53521.404
24700.339
2638.516 113962.040
32926.816
6670.229
94839.590

Std. Error
10589.033
9122.157
12794.903
10640.681
8077.065
21381.710
19962.747

n
36232
35714
25112
24755
24474
7612
7539

Notes: Data from the Real Estate Board of New York’s listing service; represents all REBNY listings between 2003
and 2010 that are closed or off market. Unsold sample defined as all listings with final status not equal to “closed.”
Sold sample defined as all listings that match to a NYC Department of Finance sale record with final status equal
to “closed.” First price is the initial price posted on the listing. Final price is the last price posted while the listing
is active (prior to status being changed to “in contract” or “off market”). Sale price is the recorded price from the
NYC Department of Finance.

32

0

Number of Sales per $5000 bin
2000
4000

6000

Figure 1: Distribution of Taxable Sales in New York State

500000

750000

1000000
Sale Price

1250000

1500000

Notes: Plot of the number of mansion-tax eligible sales in each $5,000 price bin between $510,000 and $1,500,000. Data from the NYC Rolling
Sales file for 2003–2011 (taxable sales defined as single-unit non-commercial sales of one-, two-, or three-family properties) and from the N.Y.
State Office of Real Property Service deeds records for 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (taxable defined as single-parcel residential sales of one-, two-,
or three-family homes).

Figure 2: Distribution of Taxable Sales in New York City
10000

●

Excess Below Threshold =1194.1
Missing Above Threshold =3923.8
^
h = 23323.7
^
Z = 53320.2

●

7500

●
●
●
● ●

5000

●
●

Number of sales per $ bin
(Logarithmic Scale)

4000

●

●

3000
2500

●
●

●
● ●
●

2000

●

●

●

●

1500

●
●

●
●

1000

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

750
●

●
●

500
400
300
500000

750000

1000000

1250000

1500000

Sale price
Log of sales in $25K bins

Omitted from estimation

Counterfactual

Notes: Plot of the number of mansion-tax eligible sales in each $25,000 price bin between $510,000 and $1,500,000. Data from the NYC Rolling
Sales file for 2003–2011. Fit corresponds to the baseline specification in Table 5.

33

Count of Sales per Bin
(Log Scale)

Figure 3: Distribution of NJ Sales Pre- and Post-Mansion Tax
00
20
00
15 0
5
2
1
00
10
0
75
0
50
0
40
0
30
0
20
0
15
0
10
75
50
600000

800000

1000000
Sale Price
($25,000 Bins)

1200000

NJ Post Tax

1400000

NJ Pre Tax

Notes: Plot of the number of mansion-tax eligible sales in each $25,000 price bin between $510,000 and $1,500,000 before and after the introduction
of the tax. Data from NJ Treasury SR1A file for 1996–20011 (taxable defined as any residential sale). We implement this pre/post comparison
as follows. We omit transactions within 90 days of the policy change (to avoid the retiming response) and focus on the following year (Oct. 30,
2004–Oct. 29, 2005). We rescale the period before the tax (May 3, 2003 to May 2, 2004) to account for sales growth over time. Specifically, we
construct a counterfactual growth factor by taking the ratio of the count of sales within $2500 of each price from May 3, 2002 to May 2, 2003 to
the count of sales from Nov. 5, 2000 through Nov. 4, 2001 (omitting sales between Nov. 2001 and May 2002 to mimic the 180 day gap around the
introduction of the tax in August, 2004).

0

20

Number of Sales

40

60

Figure 4: New Jersey Monthly Sales Above $990,000

1998

2000

2002

2004
Month

$990,000 to $999,999

2006

2008

2010

$1,000,000 to $1,009,999

Notes: Total taxable NJ sales in given price range by month. Data from NJ Treasury SR1A file for 1998–2011 (taxable defined as any residential
sale). Mansion tax introduced in August, 2004 (denoted by gray dashed line).

34

Figure 5: Incidence and Gap Concepts
Threshold
Actual
distribution

Bunching
(A+B)

Counterfactual
distribution
Source of
bunchers

D

Omitted region
Incidence estimate

Actual
distribution

Counterfactual
distribution

Gap

Z
D

B+M

E

C

Figure 6: Bunching at the notch and efficient allocation

Z

Seller's reservation price

x(0) + βT

E

βb (β)
∗

H + βT
H

C

A'

A

B

D
X
00

H
H+T
Buyer's reservation value

35

b(s)
Y

0

.02

Share of Sales

.04

.06

Figure 7: Distribution of Real-Estate Listing Prices in NYC (Sold Properties Only)

500000

750000

1000000
Price
$25,000 Bins

Initial Asking Price

1250000

Final Asking Price

1500000

Sale Price

Notes: Data from REBNY listings matched to NYC Department of Finance sales records. Sample restricted to “sold” listings: last listing status
is “closed” and property can be matched to NYC sales data. Smoothed plot of the distribution that accounts for round-number bunching. The
log of the per-$25,000-bin counts are regressed on a cubic in price and dummy variables for multiples of $50,000 and $100,000 interacted with the
price. Predicted bunching for round-number bins are then subtracted from the corresponding counts.

0

.05

Median Discount
.1

.15

.2

Figure 8: Median & 75th Percentile Price Discounts by Initial Asking Price

500000

750000

1000000
Initial Asking Price
($25000 bins)

1250000

1500000

First Asking vs. Final Asking Price (P75)

First Asking vs. Sale Price (P75)

First Asking vs. Sale Price (Median)

First Asking vs. Final Asking Price (Median)

Note: Plot of the median and 75th percentile discount from initial asking to sale price ( = 1 - final/initial) and initial asking to final asking price
( = 1 - sale/initial) per $25,000 initial-asking-price bin. Data from REBNY listings—sample includes all closed REBNY-listed properties in the
range $500,000–1,500,000 that match to NYC DOF data.

36

-.02

Predicted Discount Relative to $999,999
0
.02

.04

Figure 9: Predicted Price Discounts by Initial Asking Price (Relative to $1,000,000)

500000

750000

1000000
Initial Asking Price

Initial Asking vs. Final Asking

1250000

1500000

Initial Asking vs. Sale Price

Note: Plot of difference between predicted discounts by initial asking price and prediction at $1,000,000 from regressions of discount (first to final
price or first to sale price) on a linear spline in initial asking price with $100K knots between $500,000 and $1,500,000. Dashed lines represent 95%
confidence intervals.

-.002

Variance Relative to $999,999
(median reg in 2nd stage, mean reg in 1st)
0
.002
.004
.006

Figure 10: Predicted Dispersion of Log of Sale Price by Initial Asking Price (Relative to $1,000,000)

500000

1000000
first asking price
No Controls

1500000

With Controls

Notes: Plots of the difference between predicted values at given initial asking price and predicted value at $1,000,000 from the following procedure.
The log of sale price is regressed on a linear spline in the log of initial asking price with $100,000 knots between $500,000 and $1,500,000. Squared
residuals from this first stage are then regressed on a linear spline in log of initial asking price (using median regression; results are sensitive to
outliers). Controls in the indicated results include year of sale, zipcode, building type, whether the sale is of a new unit, and the log of years
since construction. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals from 999 wild bootstrap replications of the two-stage procedure, resampling
residuals in the first stage by asking-price clusters.

37

APPENDIX

A

Bargaining model

To identify buyer-seller pairs that move to the notch, we compare maximized surplus above the notch to surplus
when price is at the notch. Surplus at the notch is given by β ln(H − s) + (1 − β) ln(b − H), while maximized surplus
when the tax is due is given by β ln(β(b − s − T )) + (1 − β) ln((1 − β)(b − s − T )). Transactions in this category that
sell at the threshold satisfy:
f (b, s; β) ≡ β ln(H − s) + (1 − β) ln(b − H) − β ln(β) − (1 − β) ln(1 − β) − ln(b − s − T ) ≥ 0
(1 − β)s + βb ≥ H + βT and b − T − s ≥ 0, b ≥ H + T, s ≤ H
at the notch. That is, the surplus at the threshold has to be higher than under the alternative of selling with the tax,
and the non-trivial case corresponds to transactions with positive surplus that could otherwise sell at a price higher
than the threshold. We show the following results:

Lemma A.1. Fix 0 < β < 1 and consider matches (b, s) that satisfy p(b, s) ≥ H + βT, b − T − s ≥ 0, b ≥ H + T,
and 0 ≤ s ≤ H
(a) For any value of 0 ≤ s ≤ H there exists b(s) > − (1−β)
s + H+βT
such that f (b(s), s; β) = 0
β i
β
h
(1−β)
H+βT
(b) Matches (b, s) that satisfy b ∈ − β s + β , b(s) locate at the notch and those with b > b(s) sell with the
tax at p(b, s) − βT
(c) Matches (b′ , s′ ) that would otherwise sell at the same price as (b(s), s) (i.e., p(b′ , s′ ) = p(b(s), s)) sell at the notch
when s′ ≤ s and sell with the tax otherwise
(d) b(0) is finite, and matches (b, s) that absent the tax would sell at prices higher than the corresponding price
p(b(0), 0) = βb(0) will never bunch.

Proof. For part (a) and (b) note that for a transaction that would otherwise sell exactly at H + βT the notch
is preferred so that f − (1−β)
s+
β

−(βb+(1−β)s)−T
< 0 because
= − H+βT
(b−H)(b−s−T )


b−H
(1−β)s+βb ≥ H +βT ; and finally that lim f (b, s; β) = β ln(H −s)−β ln(β)−(1−β) ln(1−β)+(1−β) ln b−s−T
−
H+βT
β

, s; β

≥ 0; that

∂f
∂b

=

1−β
b−H

−

1
b−s−T

b→∞

β ln(b − s − T ) = −∞ because all but last term converge to finite values as b increases. Hence, for each 0 ≤ s ≤ H,
there is b(s) that solves f (b(s), s; β) = 0, and b(s) separates positive from negative values of f (b, s; β).
Part (c): to evaluate the effect of a change in s holding p(b, s) constant, substitute b′ = − 1−β
s′ + p(b(s),s)
into f (b, s; β)
β

 β
2
(1−β)
df
1−β
β
β
1
1
1
1
.
and totally differentiate with respect to s to obtain ds = − H−s − β(b−H) + β b−s−T = β b−s−T − (H−s)/β − (b−H)/(1−β)
β
1−β
1
1
1
+ (b−H)/(1−β)
≤ β(H−s)/β+(1−β)(b−H)/(1−β)
= b−s
and since b−s
<
Note that convexity of x1 implies that (H−s)/β
df
1
have
we
>
0.
b−s−T
ds
Part (d): finiteness of b(0) follows from part (a). When p(b, s) > βb(0), then there is b′ < b such that p(b′ , s) =
βb(0) = p(b(0), 0). Part (c) implies that (b′ , s) sells with the tax because s ≥ 0. Because b > b′ , ∂f
< 0 then implies
∂b
that (b, s) also does not locate at the notch.

The lemma establishes the existence and shape of the schedule b(s), which is marked by a solid red line in Figure
6. Given the seller reservation value, matches with buyers to the left of this schedule bunch at the notch, while those
above it sell with the tax. Parts (a) and (b) of the lemma establish that b(s) exists and is unique for any s lower than
the threshold. Part (c) shows that the slope of b(s) is flatter than that of the constant-price schedules, and Part (d)
shows that the schedule b(s) intersects the horizontal axis at some finite value so that for sufficiently high original
prices transactions will never bunch. We re-state this last observation in the following corollary:

Corollary A.2. Transactions at the notch satisfy H ≤ p(b, s) ≤ βb∗ (β) < ∞ where b∗ (β) is defined as
f (b∗ (β), 0; β) = 0 or, explicitly, it solves β ln(H) + (1 − β) ln(b − H) − β ln(β) − (1 − β) ln(1 − β) − ln(b − T ) = 0.
The corollary follows from part (d) of the lemma. As the original price increases, the attractiveness of the notch
declines so that only transactions with sufficiently high overall surplus (sufficiently low reservation price of the seller)
continue to bunch. For some price, even the seller with zero reservation value will no longer agree to bunch at the
notch and hence no matches corresponding to higher p(b, s) will bunch either. The bound in the Corollary depends
on β. Interestingly, one can show that there is a uniform and finite bound for all β, so that transactions above some
finite price are never induced to bunch, regardless of the value of β.

38

APPENDIX
Theorem A.3. For any β > 0, transactions at the notch satisfy H ≤ p(b, s) ≤ βb∗ (β) < x(0) < ∞, where
f (b∗ (β), 0; β) = 0 and x(β) ≡ β(b∗ (β) − T ) for any β ∈ (0, 1) , x(0) = lim x(β) and the value of x(0) is the solution
β→0

to ln(H) − ln(x) −

H−T
x

+ 1 = 0.

Proof. In what follows we change variables as x = β(b − T ) (because it turns out that lim b∗ (β) = ∞). Note also
β→0

that part (a) of the Lemma applied to (b∗ (β), 0) implies that x(β) = β(b∗ (β) − T ) > H so that we don’t need to
consider x ≤ H. Define the net benefit of locating at the notch for a given x as g(x, β) ≡ f ( βx + T, 0; β) or more
explicitly
 


x − β(H − T )
x
g(x, β) ≡ β ln(H) + (1 − β) ln
− ln
− β ln(β) − (1 − β) ln(1 − β)
β
β
= β ln(H) − ln(x) + (1 − β) [ln(x − β(H − T )) − ln(1 − β)]
We are interested in properties of x(β) that solves g(x(β), β) = 0.
Denote by x∗ the solution of ln(H) − ln(x) − H−T
of β and finite. Note that g(x, β)
+ 1 =h 0. x∗ is independent
x
i
∗
is continuous in x on [H, x ] and that g(H, β) = (1 − β) ln (1−β)H+βT
and
g(x∗ , β) = β ln(H) − β ln(x∗ ) +
>
0
(1−β)H
h ∗
h ∗
i
i


−β(H−T )
−β(H−T )
(1 − β) ln x (1−β)x
< β ln(H) − β ln(x∗ ) + (1 − β) x (1−β)x
− 1 = β ln(H) − ln(x∗ ) − H−T
+ 1 = 0 (using
∗
∗
x∗
ln(x) < x − 1 and the definition of x∗ ). Hence, for every β, g(x, β) = 0 has a solution on (H, x∗ ) and, in particular,
lim x(β) has to be finite.
β→0

For all β ∈ (0, 1), x(β) solves g(x(β), β) = 0 so that gx x′ (β) + gβ = 0. Note that gx =
β(x+H−T )
.
− x(x−β(H−T
))

1−β
x−β(H−T )

−

1
x

=

Clearly, for any x > H − T we have lim gx = 0. Because lim x(β) > H − T and is finite, we
β→0

β→0

also have lim gx (x(β), β) = 0 and lim | x′ (β) |< ∞. Consequently, 0 = lim gx x′ (β) + gβ = lim gβ (x(β), β) =
β→0
β→0
β→0
β→0
n
o
(1−β)(H−T )
H−T
lim ln(H) − ln(x(β) − β(H − T )) + ln(1 − β) − x(β)−β(H−T ) + 1 = ln(H)−ln(x(0))− x(0) +1 as in the statement

β→0

of the proposition.

Example. When H = 1, 000, 000, T = 10, 000, and x(0) ≈ $1, 144, 717, transactions that absent the tax would sell
above this value will not bunch regardless of the value of β.
The gray dashed line on Figure 6 illustrates the bound, which corresponds to the price x(0). As β changes, the
slope of the corresponding line will change but it will always correspond to the price of x(0). The sharp bound for
a given β (the solid green line) always lies to the left of this uniform bound and converges to it as β tends to zero.
While this bound is irrelevant given β, it is of natural interest when β is unknown.

A.1

Proportional tax

While considering a lump-sum tax simplifies the analysis, transaction taxes, including the mansion tax, are typically
proportional. However, the results are only slightly affected when the tax is proportional. Intuitively, incentives for
bunching at the notch are always determined by the level of the loss due to taxation (both due to the tax itself and
any distortionary impact it might cause), rather than the rate of the tax (this is standard intensive/extensive margin
distinction). The proportional tax induces re-ranking, but retains qualitative features of the solution described above.
b
+ (1 − β)s,
In the presence of the proportional tax the Nash bargaining outcome is given by ps = q(b, s; t) ≡ β 1+t
b
s
where q(b, s, t) denotes the seller’s given types and the marginal tax rate, and p = (1 + t)p = βb + (1 − β)s(1 + t)
so that the overall surplus from the transaction is equal to
β ln(β) + (1 − β) ln(1 − β) + ln(b − s(1 + t)) − β ln(1 + t)
As in the case of the lump-sum tax, the price q(b, s; t) is linear in types so that the locus of matches with constant
price remains linear (although the slope is affected by the tax rate), as in Figure 6.
It is also straightforward to show an analogous result to Lemma A.1 for the proportional case. Holding s
constant, the net benefit to locate at the notch declines with b and becomes negative for sufficiently high b (because
(1 − β) ln(b − H) − ln(b − s(1 + t)) declines in b). Thus, a schedule analogous to b(s) also exists in the proportional

39

APPENDIX
case. Similarly to part (c) of the Lemma, the net surplus from switching to the notch declines in s holding q(b, s; t)
constant, so that the price corresponding to b(0) has to constitute the upper bound of the region affected by the
presence of the tax.
Finally, there is a straightforward relationship between the bounds corresponding to the lump-sum and proportional tax. To see it, note that for a given match (b, s) the value of locating at the notch is the same regardless of
whether the tax is proportional or lump-sum because that allocation does not involve any tax. Consider s = 0, and
the value of b, b∗ (β; T ), that as before represents a match that is indifferent between locating at the notch given the
value of T . Simple inspection of the surplus for the lump-sum and proportional tax cases shows that the indifference
will hold for the proportional tax as well (because the surplus will be the same as under the lump-sum tax) when the
∗
(β;T )
. Thus, given
marginal tax rate is such that ln(b∗ (β; T )) − β ln(1 + t) = ln(b∗ (β; T ) − T ) so that (1 + t)β = b∗b(β;T
)−T
β, the bounds for T map into the bounds for t by this relationship.
Theorem A.3 describes a uniform bound for prices corresponding to transactions that might be affected by the
lump-sum tax of T . Because bounds for proportional and lump-sum taxes are related for any β, that Theorem can
be adapted to identify the corresponding bound in the proportional tax case.

Theorem A.4. Given marginal tax rate t, define x∗ as the solution to ln(H) − ln(x) −

H−x ln(1+t)
x

+ 1 = 0. For
any β > 0, transactions at the notch need to satisfy H ≤ q(b, s; t) ≤ x /(1 + t) < ∞, and x is the lowest such bound.
∗

∗

Proof. To obtain the analogue of Theorem A.3, recall that given T the Theorem established the existence of the
upper bound of undistorted prices below which transactions (might) relocate to the notch. Denote by x(T ) the
uniform bound for βb identified in Theorem A.3 for a given value of T . For any β and tax rate t that satisfy
ln(x(T )/β) − β ln(1 + t) ≥ ln(x(T )/β − T ), x(T ) would equal or exceed the undistorted price bound for transactions
relocating to the notch under proportional tax. We will find the value of t for which x(T ) is the smallest such a
bound for any positive β. Rewrite this inequality as ln(x(T )) − β ln(1 + t) ≥ ln(x(T ) − βT ). Note that it holds
T
with equality when β = 0. Taking derivatives of both sides with respect to β,we obtain − ln(1 + t) and − x(T )−βT
T
respectively. In order for the inequality to hold in the neighborhood of β = 0, we need to have ln(1 + t) ≤ x(T )−βT
for small β and when that’s the case the inequality will hold for any value of β because the left-hand side is constant
while the right-hand side is increasing in β. The bound will be tight when we do in fact have equality at β = 0 so
T
. Accordingly, when this relationship holds, substituting x ln(1 + t) for T in the equation defining
that ln(1 + t) = x(T
)
x(0) in Theorem A.3 (which leads to the formula in the statement of the proposition) and solving for x will yield
exactly the same solution x∗ (t). Finally, this procedure shows that when s = 0, only matches with b ≤ x∗ (t)/β may
bunch. Correspondingly, only transactions that satisfy q(b, s; t) ≤ q(x∗ (t)/β, 0; t) = x∗ (t)/(1 + t) might bunch.
Clearly, the value x∗ that solves this formula is also the solution to the equation in Theorem A.3 when T =
x ln(1 + t), and the proof makes it clear that this is the right “conversion” between the proportional and lumpsum tax cases. The theorem provides a bound in terms of prices distorted by the tax q(b, s, t). However, because
q(b, s, t)(1 + t) ≥ q(b, s, 0) it also provides a (weaker) bound in terms of prices that are not distorted (t = 0):
transactions that bunch need to satisfy H ≤ q(b, s; 0) ≤ x∗ < ∞.
∗

Example. For the New York and New Jersey mansion tax, H = 1, 000, 000, t = 0.01, x∗ ≈ $1, 155, 422. Hence,
regardless of the value of β, transactions that absent the tax would occur at prices above $1,155,422 will never bunch,
while those that would occur below might bunch. Transactions that do bunch, would otherwise sell (in the presence
of the tax) at no more than x∗ /(1 + t) = $1, 143, 982. This is the same bound as the one corresponding to the
lump-sum tax of 1, 155, 422 · ln(1 + .01) ≡ 11496.83

40

APPENDIX

B

Data Appendix

New York City Department of Finance Annualized Rolling Sales. The New York City Department of
Finance (NYCDOF) Annualized Rolling Sales files contain details on real-property transactions for the five boroughs
from 2003 to the present (we use the data through 2011). The data are realized by the NYCDOF on a quarterly
basis and are derived from the universe of transfer-tax filings (which are mandatory for all residential and commercial
sales). Geographic detail for each sale includes the street address (and zip code), the tax lot (borough-block-lot
number), and the neighborhood (Chelsea, Tribeca, Upper West Side, etc.). The Rolling Sales files contain limited
details about the properties themselves, including square footage, number of units (residential and commercial), tax
class (residential, owned by utility co., or all other property), and building class category (a more detailed property
code—for example, one-family homes, two-family homes, residential vacant land, walk-up condo, etc.). Transaction
details in the data include the sale price and date. A sale price of $0 indicates a transfer of ownership without cash
consideration (ex. from parents to children).
New York City properties are subject to the mansion tax if they are single-, double-, or triple-family homes, or
individual condo or co-op units. We define taxable sales as those transactions of a single residential unit (and no
commercial units) with a building classification of “one family homes,” “two family homes,” “three family homes,”
“tax class 1 condos,” “coops - walkup apartments,” “coops - elevator apartments,” “special condo billing lots/condorental,” “condos - walkup apartments,” “condos - elevator apartments,” “condos - 2–10 unit residential,” “condos 2–10 unit with commercial use,” or “condo coops/condops.” We define co-ops as a building code of “coops - walkup
apartments,” or “coops - elevator apartments.” We define a commercial sale to be a transaction with at least one
commercial unit (and no residential units) or a tax class of 3 or 4.
New York State Office of Real Property Service SalesWeb. The New York State Office of Real Property
Service (NYSORPS) publishes sales records for all real-property transactions (excluding New York City) recorded
between 2002–2006 and 2008–2010 available through the “SalesWeb” database. Since deeds are recorded after the
sale, this data includes a small number of sales from 2007. The database is compiled by ORPS from filings of the
State of New York Property Transfer Report (form RP-5217).
The NYS deeds records indicate several details about each transaction and property. Transaction-specifc details
include the sale price and date, the date the deed was recorded (and recording details such as book and page
number), the buyer’s, seller’s, and attorney’s name and address (often missing), the number of parcels included in the
transaction, and details about the relationship between the buyer and the seller (whether the sale is between relatives,
whether the buyer is also a seller, whether one party is a business or the government, etc.). Of particular interest to
us is whether the sale is defined by the state as arms-length. The data dictionary defines an arms-length sale as “a
sale of real property in the open market, between an informed and willing buyer and seller where neither is under any
compulsion to participate in the transaction, unaffected by any unusual conditions indicating a reasonable possibility
that the full sales price is not equal to the fair market value of the property assuming fee ownership”, which excludes
sales between current or former relatives, related companies or partners in business, sales where one of the buyers
is also a seller, or sales with “other unusual factors affecting sale price.”Property details include the square footage,
assessed value (for property-tax purposes), address (including street address, county, zip code, school district), and
the property class (one-family home, condo, etc.). We consider as subject to the mansion tax all single-unit sales
with property class equal to one-, two-, or three-family residence, residential condo, or a seasonal residence.
New Jersey Treasury SR1A File. We make use of sales records from the New Jersey Treasury’s SR1A file for
1996–2011, which contains records of all SR1A forms filed at the time of sale (the form is mandatory in the state
for all residential sales). Each record includes the sale price and date the deed was drawn, buyer and seller name
and address (often missing), deed recording details (date submitted, date recorded, document number), and whether
there are additional lots associated with the sale. Property details include land value, tax lot, square footage, and
property class. We define taxable sales as those with a residential property class.
New York City County Register Deeds Records. These data are collected from the county registers for the
five counties in New York City: Bronx County, Kings County, New York County, Queen’s County, and Richmond
County. The records were collected by an anonymous private firm and made available to us by the Paul Millstein
Center for Real Estate at the Columbia Graduate School of Business.
These data include additional detail as compared to the Rolling Sales files, although at the expense of precision.

41

APPENDIX
Prices in this data set are rounded to the nearest $100, which leads to misallocation of sales to one side of a tax
notch. Transaction details include the sale price and date, an indicator for whether the unit is newly constructed,
the number of parcels being sold, whether the purchase was made in cash (i.e. whether a mortgage is associated with
the sale), and indicators for private lenders and within-family sales. Property details are limited to address, zip code,
and county.
Data Cleaning. We begin by dropping all transactions with a price below $100 (1,658,639 in NY State, 954,241
in NJ, and 274,118). The bulk of these transactions have a zero price, representing transfers of property between
parties not associated with a proper sale (e.g., a gift or inheritance). This restriction is relatively innocuous, as our
analysis focuses on sales around each tax notch (although this choice does affect the descriptive statistics). More
importantly, we attempt to identify and discard all duplicate records. In New York State, we identify duplicates as
sales that occur within 90 days of one another at the same street number in the same grid number (a unique tax
lot id). Of these 48,073 duplicates, we always keep the later sale (in case duplicates are representative of updates
to the records). For New Jersey, since we do not observe tax lots, we identify all duplicate sales that occur at the
same standardized address within 90 days of one another and drop all but the final duplicate (343,221). Finally, for
NYC we identify duplicates as properties in the same borough at the same standardized address that sell within 90
days of one another (20,420). While these duplicates represent a large number of sales, and there are several ways
one could define duplicates, our estimates are insensitive to whether and how we clean duplicates (e.g., cleaning NY
state based on address or NYC based on tax lot).
Real Estate Board of New York Listings Service. We have collected residential real-estate listings from the
Real Estate Board of New York’s (REBNY) electronic listing service. REBNY is a trade association of about 300
realty firms operating in Manhattan and Brooklyn. REBNY accounts for about 50% of all residential real-estate
listings in these boroughs. A condition of REBNY membership is that realtors are required to post all listings and
updates to the listing service within 24 hours.
Using the REBNY listing service, we have collected all “closed” (i.e. sold) or “permanently off market” residential
listings posted between 2003 (when the electronic listings are first available) and 2010. REBNY listings include the
typical details available on a real-estate listing: asking price, address, date on the market and a description of the
property. Additionally, we observe all updates to each listing (and the dates of each update), which lets us see how
asking prices evolve and determine the length of time a property is on the market. Finally, we observe the final
outcome of the listing: whether the property is sold or taken off the market.
We create several variables for each REBNY listing. We define the initial asking price as the first posted price
on the listing, and the final asking price as the last posted price while the listing is “active.” We identify the length
of time that a listing spends on the market as the number of days between the initial posting and the date that the
1
,
listing is updated as “in contract.” We define the discount between two prices as the percent drop in price— p0p−p
0
where p0 and p1 are prices and p0 is posted before p1 .
One caveat to the REBNY listings is that the price is often not updated at the time of sale. To overcome this,
we match REBNY listings to the NYCDOF data by address and date. Of the 48,220 closed REBNY listings for
Manhattan, we achieve a match rate of 92%. Non-matches fall in a number of categories. Sales in some condop
buildings are missing from the DOF data due to a clerical error at the NYC DOF. Some transactions contain only
street address or a non-standard way of specifying the apartment number (in particular, commercial units and unusual
properties such as storage units fall in this category). Occasionally, the same building may have two different street
addresses and a unit may be listed differently in the two databases.At the same time, of the 23,655 Manhattan listings
that are not reported as closed in the REBNY listings database, we find 7,425 corresponding sales in the NYCDOF
data. We treat such matches as an indication that the property was sold without the REBNY realtor (either sold by
the owner or using another realtor).

C

Robustness of incidence estimates

Table A.1 demonstrates that our estimates are quite robust to variety of estimation approaches. Incidence estimates
are very consistent, and gap estimates vary somewhat but remain positive and large in most specification checks that

42

APPENDIX
we consider. Intuitively, there are good reasons for why results may vary as one adjusts the order of polynomials
and the omitted region. Both incidence and gap estimated using cross-sectional data (the only exception to it our
estimates for NJ that rely on pre/post comparison) involve prediction out of sample (into the omitted region). As
the size of the omitted region increases, one has to predict far out of sample so that the “forecast” error is bound to
increase. Furthermore, very flexible polynomials that can fit data in sample well are not restricted in their behavior in
the omitted region and in some cases may generate non-monotonicity or explosive behavior within the omitted region
— overfitting is not the right approach for predicting out of sample. On the other hand, the omitted region that is
too small generates bias in the estimates of the counterfactual. Nevertheless, our results are robust to reasonable
modifications of our baseline specification as discussed below.
While our preferred specification uses a third-order polynomial, our incidence estimates are not too sensitive to
this choice. The second through fifth rows of Table A.1 present estimates that we obtain using different orders—the
results are similar, although inspection of the fit of the data suggests that very low-order polynomials cannot capture
properly the shape of the distribution, while very high-order polynomials (not reported) introduce very unrealistic
behavior in the omitted region. As the result, there is a bit of sensitivity to the order of polynomials in the gap
estimates, which are positive and significant for all specifications up to the fifth order polynomial, but shrink somewhat
for higher orders.
The results are only somewhat sensitive to selecting a narrow omitted region. The estimates in the sixth through
eighth rows of Table A.1 illustrate that a smaller omitted region leads to smaller incidence estimate ($3000 to $5000
less than the baseline). We do not estimate Ẑ for the narrowest specifications since it does not make sense to restrict
the gap to be so small, especially given the visual evidence of the width of the gap. Relatedly, the estimate of Ẑ
using the omitted regions through $1.1M are smaller than the baseline — understandable, given the visual evidence
in Figures 1, 2 and 3 indicating that the gap extends further than that (consistently with the theoretical argument
as well), and the fact that the counterfactual is bound to be biased downward when part of the “true” gap is relied
on in estimation.
On the other hand, our results are robust to extending the omitted region beyond the baseline, as is seen in Rows
10 through 12. The estimates of Ẑ are consistently large, positive, and significant, although less precise as we use
less and less data (and need to predict the counterfactual over a larger range). Reassuringly, the incidence estimates
change little as we vary the upper bound of the omitted region. Similarly, none of the estimates are too sensitive to
expanding the omitted region below the threshold. The results in rows twelve through fourteen of Table A.1 show
that both the incidence and gap estimates grow as the bunching region is expanded below the threshold, however
differences in estimates are economically small and not statistically distinguishable from the baseline. Naturally, the
standard errors also grow as the omitted region is expanded.
We also estimate our counterfactuals for bunching and gap separately using only data below and above the omitted
region (respectively). We present in Row 16 our estimate using a 3rd order polynomial and data below the omittted
region for the bunching/incidence counterfactual and a 1st order polynomial using data above the omitted region for
the missing mass, and a 2nd order above the omitted region in Row 17. Again, incidence and Ẑ are comparable with
our baseline. Furthermore, bootstrapped standard errors increase significantly as the order of polynomial increases,
underscoring our earlier point that allowing for overfitting by estimating high order polynomials that are then used
to project into the omitted region is a questionable approach. This observation (and visual inspection of the fit)
justified our choice of the baseline specification that relies on the 3rd order polynomial and only a level shift at the
threshold.
Our baseline estimate is also not sensitive to allowing for a discontinuity at the threshold. The baseline specification relies on the data both below and above the omitted region. Since the latter is distorted by the tax we
rudimentarily control for it by allowing for a level shift in the distribution. The estimate in row 18 of Table A.1
demonstrates that incidence and gap increase slightly when we do not allow for this discontinuity.
For completeness, we also estimate analogous specification by OLS—this is the standard approach in the recent
public finance work on notches and kinks—but we note that any of these methods involves specifying the parametric
density function and the maximum likelihood estimation is a natural choice that guarantees that the estimates satisfy
the law of probability rather than the hard-to-interpret mean zero residual restriction. Additionally, by requiring the
data to be binned, OLS will throw out information. We report the OLS results obtained by binning into $5000 and
$10,000 bins in rows 17 and 18 and conclude that they are quantitatively similar to the baseline.

43

APPENDIX
The placebo estimates in Table A.2 show that our estimates for NYC are not spurious. Using the same procedure,
we estimate the incidence and gap for all commercial sales (which are not subject to the mansion tax) and for
residential sales at other multiples of $100,000. In all cases, we find small negative incidence estimates and relatively
small gap estimates.

44

APPENDIX

0

2000

Number of Sales per $5000 bin
4000
6000
8000

10000

Figure A.1: Distribution of Sales in New York City around the $500,000 RPTT tax notch

350000

400000

450000

500000
Sales Price

550000

600000

650000

Notes: Plot of the number of sales in each $5,000 price bin between $350,000 and $650,000. Data from the NYC
Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011. Both commercial and non-commercial sales are subject to the NYC RPTT.

0

Number of Sales per $25000 bin
5000
10000
15000

20000

Figure A.2: Distribution of Taxable Sales in New York State

500000

750000

1000000
Sale Price

1250000

1500000

Notes: Plot of the number of mansion-tax eligible sales in each $25,000 price bin between $510,000 and $1,500,000.
Data from the NYC Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011 (taxable sales defined as single-unit non-commercial sales of one-,
two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos) and from N.Y. State Office of Real Property Service deeds records for
2002–2006 and 2008–2010 (taxable defined as all single-parcel residential sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes).

45

APPENDIX

0

200

Sales

400

600

Figure A.3: New Jersey Monthly Sales Above $990,000

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004
Date

# Sales >= $1100k

2006

2008

2010

2012

# Sales $900k--$1100k

Notes: Total taxable NJ sales in given price range by month. Data from NJ Treasury SR1A file for 1996–2011
(taxable defined as any residential sale). Mansion tax introduced in August, 2004 (indicated by dashed gray line).

0

.2

Share of sales $900k -- $1.1M
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure A.4: Distribution of Monthly Sales in New Jersey ($900k – $1M)

1998

2000

2002

2004
Date

2006

2008

2010

< 925k

< 950k

< 975k

< 1M

< 1.025M

< 1.05M

< 1.075M

< 1.1M

Notes: Number of taxable sales in given range as a share of total sales between $900,000 and $1,100,000 by month.
Data from NJ Treasury SR1A file for 1998–2011 (taxable defined as any residential sale). Mansion tax introduced in
August, 2004 (denoted by gray dashed line).

46

APPENDIX

980000

Incidence
1000000 1020000 1040000 1060000 1080000

Figure A.5: NJ Local Incidence Over Time

1999

2001

2003

2005
Date

2007

Incidence

2009

2011

95% CI

Notes: Monthly baseline local incidence estimates and 95% confidence intervals for NJ. Data from NJ Treasury SR1A
file.

0

.02

Share of Sales
.04

.06

.08

Figure A.6: Distribution of Real-Estate Listing Prices in NYC (Sold Properties Only)

500000

750000

Initial Asking Price

1000000
Price
$25,000 Bins
Final Asking Price

1250000

1500000

Sale Price

Notes: Data from REBNY listings matched to NYC Department of Finance sales records. Sample restricted to “sold”
listings: last listing status is “closed” and property can be matched to NYC sales data. Plot of the number of listings
per $25,000 bin as a share of all sales between $500,000 and $1,500,000 (bins centered so that the threshold bin spans
$975,001–$1,000,000).

47

APPENDIX

0

.02

Share of Sales
.04

.06

Figure A.7: Distribution of Real-Estate Listing Prices in NYC (All REBNY-Listed Properties)

750000

1000000
Price
$25,000 Bins

Initial Asking Price

1250000

1500000

Final Asking Price

0

.02

Share of Sales

.04

.06

500000

500000

750000

1000000
Price
$25,000 Bins

Initial Asking Price

1250000

1500000

Final Asking Price

Notes: Data from REBNY listings. Sample includes all REBNY-listed sales in the given range. Panel (a) presents
a plot of the number of listings per $25,000 bin as a share of all listings between $500,000 and $1,500,000 (bins
centered so that the threshold bin spans $975,001–$1,000,000). Panel (b) presents a smoothed plot of the distribution
that accounts for round-number bunching: the log of the per-bin counts from panel (a) are regressed on a cubic in
price and dummy variables for multiples of $50,000 and $100,000 interacted with the price. Predicted bunching for
round-number bins are then subtracted from the corresponding counts.

48

APPENDIX

800000

Sale Price
1000000

1200000

Figure A.8: Distribution of Sale Price by Initial Asking Price (with Quantile Regression)

800000

900000

1000000
Initial Asking Price

10th - 90th Percentile

1100000

25th - 75th Percentile

1200000

Median

Notes: Plot of the median, 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of sale price per $25,000 initial-asking-price bin.
Data from REBNY listings—sample includes all sold REBNY-listed properties (matched to NYC DOF) in the range
$800,000–1,200,000. Lines represent quantile regressions for the given range ($800k–$990k and $1M – $1.2M).

.74

Probability of Sale (with or without Realtor)
.76
.78
.8
.82

.84

Figure A.9: Probability that Listed Property Sells by Initial Asking Price

500000

750000

1000000
Initial Asking Price
($25000 bins)

1250000

1500000

Notes: Plot of the share of REBNY-listed properties that close or are matched to a NYC DOF sale per $25,000 bin.
Data from REBNY listings—sample includes all listed properties in the range $500,000–1,500,000. “Sold” defined as
any property with a final listing status of “closed” or any listing that matches to NYC DOF sales.

49

APPENDIX

0

100

Days on Market
200

300

400

Figure A.10: Median Days to Sale by Initial Asking Price

500000

1000000
Initial Asking Price
($25000 bins)
25th Percentile

1500000

Median

Notes: Plot of the median and 25th percentile of days to sale per $25,000 initial-asking-price bin. Data from REBNY
listings—sample includes all REBNY-listed properties in the range $500,000–1,500,000. Days to sale defined as the
number of days between initial listing of the property and buyer and seller entering into contract (defined as final
status = “in contract”). Unsold properties are assigned a value of 999 days.

.05

Prob. of Leaving Realtor
.1
.15

.2

Figure A.11: Probability of Selling Without REBNY by Initial Asking Price

500000

750000

1000000
Initial Asking Price
($25000 bins)

1250000

1500000

Notes: Plot of the share of REBNY listed properties that are sold in NYC DOF data, but are not listed as closed in the
REBNY listing per $25,000 initial-asking-price bin. Data from REBNY listings—sample includes all REBNY-listed
properties in the range $500,000–1,500,000.

50

APPENDIX

0

Median Discount
Final Asking vs. Sale Price
.02
.04
.06
.08

.1

Figure A.12: Median Price Discount by Final Asking Price

500000

750000

1000000
Final Asking Price
($25000 bins)
75th Percentile

1250000

1500000

Median Discount

Notes: Plot of the median and 25th percentile discount from final asking price to sale price ( = 1 - sale/final) per
$25,000 final-asking-price bin. Data from REBNY listings—sample includes all closed REBNY-listed properties in
the range $500,000–1,500,000 that match to NYC DOF data.

51

APPENDIX

0

.02

Mean Discount
.04

.06

.08

Figure A.13: Decomposition of Mean Price Discounts by Initial Asking Price

500000

750000

First Asking vs. Sale Price

1000000
Initial Asking Price
($25000 bins)
First Asking vs. Final Asking Price

1250000

1500000

Final Asking vs. Sale Price

Notes: Plot of the average discount from initial asking to sale price ( = 1 - sale/initial), initial asking to final asking
price ( = 1 - final/initial), and final asking price to sale price relative to initial asking price ( = (final - sale)/initial)
per $25,000 initial-asking-price bin. Data from REBNY listings—sample includes all closed REBNY-listed properties
in the range $500,000–1,500,000 that match to NYC DOF data.

.006

.008

Variance of Log(Sale Price)
.01
.012

.014

Figure A.14: Dispersion of Sale Price, Conditional on First Asking Price

500000

750000

1000000
First Asking Price
($25000 bins)

1250000

1500000

Notes: Plot of the variance of the log of sale price by $25,000 inital asking price bin. Data from REBNY listings—
sample includes all sold REBNY-listed properties (matched to NYC DOF) in the range $500,000–1,500,000. Observations with price discounts (first asking price to sale price) in the 1st or 99th percentile are omitted.

52

APPENDIX

.002

Variance of Log(Sale Price)
.003
.004

.005

Figure A.15: Dispersion of Sale Price, Conditional on Last Asking Price

500000

750000

1000000
Final Asking Price
($ bins)

1250000

1500000

Notes: Plot of the variance of the log of sale price by $25,000 final price bin. Data from REBNY listings—sample
includes all sold REBNY-listed properties (matched to NYC DOF) in the range $500,000–1,500,000. Observations
with price discounts (first asking price to sale price) in the 1st or 99th percentile are omitted.

-.002

Variance Relative to $999,999
(median reg in both stages)
0
.002
.004

.006

Figure A.16: Predicted Dispersion of Log of Sale Price (Median Regression in First Stage)

500000

1000000
first asking price
No Controls

1500000

With Controls

Notes: Plots of the difference between predicted values at given initial asking price and predicted value at $1,000,000
from the following procedure. The log of sale price is regressed (median regression) on a linear spline in the log of
initial asking price with $100,000 knots between $500,000 and $1,500,000. Squared residuals from this first stage
are then regressed on a linear spline in log of initial asking price (using median regression; results are sensitive to
outliers). Controls in the indicated results include year of sale, zipcode, building type, whether the sale is of a new
unit, and the log of years since construction. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals from 999 wild bootstrap
replications of the two-stage procedure, resampling residuals in the first stage by asking-price clusters.

53

Ẑ

Std. Error

n

54

1.

Baseline: 3rd Order, Omit $990k – $1.155M

21542.098

1124.005

43861.766

3990.977

102493

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

1st Order
2nd Order
4th Order
5th Order
Omit $990k – $1.01M
Omit $990k – $1.025M
Omit $990k – $1.050M
Omit $990k – $1.1M
Omit $990k – $1.2M
Omit $990k – $1.255M
Omit $990k – $1.3M
Omit $980k – $1.155M
Omit $970k – $1.155M
Omit $960k – $1.155M
3rd Order for LHS, 1st Order for RHS
3rd Order for LHS, 2nd Order for RHS
No Discontinuity at Threshold
OLS, $5000 Bins
OLS, $10000 Bins

24095.152
22910.857
21115.344
18444.127
16308.129
16676.799
18168.244
20163.154
21978.363
22122.063
21917.696
24980.343
26742.767
37687.334
20034.887
20034.887
21601.728
19539.143
20956.556

475.318
965.353
1160.988
1490.541
974.380
967.177
1062.597
1134.501
1079.676
1127.693
1119.279
957.747
1634.857
2374.628
1372.811
1372.811
1048.292
2093.029
1539.757

106372.697
46988.518
37069.861
33652.867
.
.
2311.782
15145.428
51725.536
53596.361
25178.003
43954.765
44726.198
49452.601
32006.872
37243.921
44349.086
.
.

4807.543
4118.622
5734.794
5868.148
.
.
1280.552
2117.299
5165.912
8617.068
10285.031
4051.863
3810.847
4938.454
3891.654
9670.122
2316.284
.
.

102493
102493
102493
102493
108766
108378
107635
105549
100846
97673
96094
100706
99741
98915
102493
102493
102493
102493
102493

Notes: Estimates by MLE as described in text (or OLS with binned data where indicated) using data from NYC Department of Finance Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011.
Sample is restricted to all taxable sales (single-unit non-commercial sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos) with prices between $510,000 and
$1,500,000. We do not estimate Ẑ for specifications 6 and 7 since our method mechanically restricts the missing mass/gap to the range between $1M and the top of
the omitted region. Since the omitted regions above the notch for these two specifications are small, the estimates of the missing mass in the gap are artificially small.
Specification 15 estimates the counterfactual separately using data below the omitted region of $990k–$1,155,422 to estimate bunching and incidence, and data above
the omitted region to estimate the gap and Ẑ.

APPENDIX

Specification

Table A.1: Mansion Tax, NYC
Incidence Std. Error

APPENDIX

Cutoff
Commercial
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
1,100,000
1,200,000

Table A.2: NYC Mansion Tax: Placebos
Incidence Std. Error
Ẑ
Std. Error
-634.223
69.369 2203.190
512.087
-689.324
32.958 2430.942
386.221
-708.755
30.548 1257.927
258.632
-787.246
29.686
360.535
280.648
-732.660
32.098 -985.343
197.414
-937.686
141.524 3457.587
559.861
-669.331
42.662 1346.163
591.304

n
5616
74477
86026
93148
98003
106344
103660

Notes: Data from NYC Department of Finance Rolling Sales file for 2003–2011. Commercial sales are defined as any
transaction of at least one commercial unit and no residential units or a NYC tax class of 3 (utility properties) or 4
(commercial or industrial properties) and are not subject to the mansion tax. Placebo estimates are found using the
baseline MLE procedure around the given cutoff.

55

APPENDIX

NYC

Table A.3: Local Incidence Over Time
NYS

NJ

56

Year Incidence Std. Error
Ẑ Std. Error n Incidence Std. Error
Ẑ Std. Error n Incidence Std. Error
Ẑ Std. Error n
1996
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. -832.902 2010.303 591.586 4577.626 1929
1997
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. -846.881
892.57 4672.449 3965.021 2308
1998
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. -516.749
325.587
-7.224 2278.698 3176
1999
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. -1651.362 1641.192 5799.470 5644.423 4193
2000
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. -855.516
219.819 1610.774
751.773 5402
2001
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. -890.483
362.37 4516.891
1772.83 6461
2002
.
.
.
.
. 22203.323 3459.236 54264.664 14737.658 9596 -739.276
105.021 2921.912
818.467 9606
2003 14624.035 4208.772 40388.150 15073.276 7310 19003.617 3607.358 63687.589 12761.623 12462 -636.847
95.723 2995.208
668.838 12953
2004 23429.529 2510.092 19803.960 10841.689 10451 22087.229 2651.167 63869.400 11328.725 17389 -785.303
94.236 3425.059
736.190 10800
2004
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 5996.987 4145.917 38365.000 16506.710 8442
(post)
2005 32614.473 4526.286 64561.575 12876.311 13554 24014.876 1833.177 47688.156 10156.431 21765 24229.456 1233.458 55087.717 10767.801 24921
2006 21603.437 2520.204 47836.366 11784.422 14728 24217.067 1562.105 28400.202 10617.074 17958 22080.594 2567.267 34109.311 9633.650 21963
2007 17487.074 2388.516 42113.910 8840.712 16477 22673.583 10770.933 16409.173 38609.604 948 24119.928 2025.234 27611.911 10546.270 18921
2008 17685.933 2587.644 34771.013 9461.669 12911 23867.938 2571.473 14847.095 11051.018 11143 19047.947 3479.866 31128.821 10877.795 12913
2009 20449.578 3434.685 1338.866 10748.730 8682 23930.513 3294.993 24523.627 14400.244 8370 20673.616 3852.975 24910.197 13266.069 10039
2010 17125.476 3781.441 74753.214 15731.867 8534 22620.920 3170.810 21216.032 12132.485 8831 19520.012 3566.167 37097.427 13552.642 10948
2011 21739.302 2853.967 70566.195 15725.257 9846
.
.
.
.
. 22460.739 5574.445 27266.456 21619.086 3789
Notes: Baseline local incidence estimates by year for given geography. Data for NYC from Department of Finance Rolling Sales files, restricted to taxable sales (single-unit
non-commercial sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes, coops, and condos) in the given year. Data for NYS from the Office of Real Property Services deeds records,
restricted to taxable sales (all single-parcel residential sales of one-, two-, or three-family homes) in the given year. NYS ORPS data covers 2002–2007 and 2009–2010;
observations in 2007 are from sales made in 2007, but recorded in 2008–2010. Data for NJ from NJ Treasury SR1A file.

600000 to 700000
700000 to 800000
800000 to 900000
900000 to 1000000
57

1000000 to 1100000
1100000 to 1200000
1200000 to 1300000
1300000 to 1400000
1400000 to 1500000
1500000
Prediction at $1,500,000

Notes: Data from REBNY listings matched to NYC DOF sales records. Estimates from regression of given discount on linear spline in initial asking price ($100k knots
between $500k and $1.5M). Slope estimates are for the given interval; predicted values are the difference between the predicted discount at the lower knot of the given
interval and the predicted value at $1,000,000.

APPENDIX

Prediction at $1,000,000
500000 to 600000

Table A.4: Predicted Price Discounts
Discount: Initial Asking to Sale Price
Discount: Initial Asking to Final Asking
Slope
Value at Lower Knot
Slope
Value at Lower Knot
relative to $1,000,000
relative to $1,000,000
0.05117
0.02464
0.12785
-0.00279
0.71910
-0.00355
(0.6455)
(0.00579)
(0.44164)
(0.00410)
0.25113
-0.00151
-0.02462
0.00364
(0.40788)
(0.00441)
(0.24894)
(0.00270)
0.12379
0.00100
0.13650
0.00340
(0.37161)
(0.00416)
(0.26585)
(0.00266)
0.07008
0.00224
0.18161
0.00476
(0.39359)
(0.00419)
(0.29979)
(0.00282)*
-0.29398
0.00294
-0.65794
0.00658
(0.46877)
(0.00469)
(0.33941)
(0.00339)*
1.95390
0
1.02142
0
(0.57745)***
0
(0.39059)***
0
0.38174
0.01954
0.77419
0.01021
(0.68556)
(0.00577)***
(0.47691)
(0.00391)***
0.29954
0.02336
-0.49885
0.01796
(0.65681)
(0.00550)***
(0.45059)
(0.00375)***
-0.58272
0.02635
0.14506
0.01297
(0.65944)
(0.00536)***
(0.43487)
(0.00350)***
0.72161
0.02052
0.44734
0.01442
(0.74929)
(0.00565)***
(0.52392)
(0.00367)***
0.02774
0.01889
(0.00626)***
(0.00431)***
0.07892
0.04354

600000
700000
800000
900000
1000000
1100000
58

1200000
1300000
1400000
1500000
Prediction at
$1,500,000
First-Stage
R2 /Pseudo R2
Median Reg.
in 1st Stage
Property
Controls

0.00333

0.00220

0.00099

0.00061

0.00646

-0.00017

Final Asking
0.00004

-0.00115

-0.00023
-0.00052
0.00009
-0.00019
0.00018
0.00004
-0.00002
0.00001
(0.00065)
(0.00035)
(0.00022)
(0.00010)
(0.00032)
(0.00022)
(0.00010)
(0.00006)
0.00038
-0.00033
0.00006
-0.00005
0.00041
0.00004
0.00002
0.00003
(0.00056)
(0.00026)
(0.00020)
(0.00007)
(0.00028)
(0.00018)
(0.00007)
(0.00004)
0.00012
-0.00025
0.00008
-0.00015
0.00032
0.00016
0.00008
0.00002
(0.00050)
(0.00027)
(0.00023)
(0.00007)** (0.00025)
(0.00018)
(0.00013)
(0.00004)
0.00051
0.00003
0.00015
-0.00015
0.00042
0.00034
0.00010
0.00002
(0.00046)
(0.00029)
(0.00025)
(0.00008)* (0.00023)* (0.00018)* (0.00015)
(0.00005)
0.00084
0.00010
-0.00021
0.00013
0.00083
0.00025
0.00002
0.00010
(0.00071)
(0.00034)
(0.00021)
(0.00011)
(0.00039)** (0.00022)
(0.00009)
(0.00006)*
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00324
0.00360
0.00184
0.00143
0.00186
0.00177
0.00111
0.00095
(0.00079)*** (0.00079)*** (0.00067)*** (0.00023)*** (0.00033)*** (0.00030)*** (0.00033)*** (0.00012)***
0.00478
0.00352
0.00139
0.00083
0.00276
0.00256
0.00065
0.00069
(0.00058)*** (0.00075)*** (0.00030)*** (0.00016)*** (0.00040)*** (0.00033)*** (0.00016)*** (0.00010)***
0.00417
0.00110
0.00101
0.00014
0.00292
0.00164
0.00089
0.00027
(0.00137)*** (0.00041)*** (0.00061)* (0.00013)
(0.00081)*** (0.00028)*** (0.00049)* (0.00008)***
0.00235
0.00191
0.00114
0.00058
0.00201
0.00161
0.00049
0.00056
(0.00082)*** (0.00052)*** (0.00038)
(0.00013)*** (0.00044)*** (0.00034)*** (0.00015)*** (0.00009)***
0.00217
0.00287
0.00109
0.00056
0.00236
0.00217
0.00055
0.00049
(0.00098)** (0.00046)*** (0.00048)*** (0.00012)*** (0.00045)*** (0.00040)*** (0.00016)*** (0.00012)***
0.00550

0.00508

0.00208

0.00117

0.00882

0.00200

0.00060

-0.00066

0.55660

0.68100

0.59190

0.80230

0.61540

0.71750

0.64260

0.82020

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

Notes: Data from REBNY listings matched to NYC DOF sales records. The log of sale price is regressed on a linear spline in the log of initial asking price with
$100,000 knots between $500,000 and $1,500,000 and a set of controls for property characteristics where indicated (property zipcode, year of sale, property type, and
years since construction). Squared residuals from this first stage are then regressed on a linear spline in log of initial asking price and controls where applicable (using
median regression; results are sensitive to outliers). Estimates are the difference between the predicted discount at the given knot and the predicted value at $1,000,000.
Standard errors found by 999 bootstraps of the two-stage procedure, resampling first-stage residuals, drawing from a moving block of 50 observations.

APPENDIX

Initial Asking
Prediction at
$1,000,000
500000

Table A.5: Predicted Price Dispersion
Final Asking
Initial Asking

