                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INDIRECT RULE AND STATE WEAKNESS IN AFRICA:
                    SIERRA LEONE IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE

                                         Daron Acemoglu
                                         Isaías N. Chaves
                                       Philip Osafo-Kwaako
                                        James A. Robinson

                                       Working Paper 20092
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20092


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




This paper was prepared as part of the NBER Africa Project. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daron Acemoglu, Isaías N. Chaves, Philip Osafo-Kwaako, and James A. Robinson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Indirect Rule and State Weakness in Africa: Sierra Leone in Comparative Perspective
Daron Acemoglu, Isaías N. Chaves, Philip Osafo-Kwaako, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 20092
May 2014
JEL No. D7,H11

                                               ABSTRACT

A fundamental problem for economic development is that most poor countries have ‘weak state’ which
are incapable or unwilling to provide basic public goods such as law enforcement, order, education
and infrastructure. In Africa this is often attributed to the persistence of ‘indirect rule’ from the colonial
period. In this paper we discuss the ways in which a state constructed on the basis of indirect rule is
weak and the mechanisms via which this has persisted since independence in Sierra Leone. We also
present a hypothesis as to why the extent to which indirect rule has persisted varies greatly within
Africa, linking it to the presence or the absence of large centralized pre-colonial polities within modern
countries. Countries which had such a polity, such as Ghana and Uganda, tended to abolish indirect
rule since it excessively empowered traditional rulers at the expense of post-colonial elites. Our argument
provides a new mechanism which can explain the positive correlation between pre-colonial political
centralization and modern public goods and development outcomes.


Daron Acemoglu                                        Philip Osafo-Kwaako
Department of Economics, E18-269D                     Harvard University
MIT                                                   John F. Kennedy School of Government
77 Massachusetts Avenue                               79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02139                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
and CIFAR                                             osafo@alum.mit.edu
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu                                         James A. Robinson
                                                      Harvard University
Isaías N. Chaves                                      Department of Government
Stanford University                                   N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Department of Economics                               Cambridge, MA 02138
579 Serra Mall                                        and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305                                    jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
ichaves@stanford.edu
1        Introduction

It is now widely recognized that the ‘weakness’or lack of ‘capacity’of states in poor countries is
a fundamental barrier to their development prospects. Most poor countries have states which
are incapable or unwilling to provide basic public goods such as the enforcement of law, order,
education and infrastructure. Di¤erent scholars use di¤erent terminology for this. Acemoglu
and Robinson (2012), following the work of political anthropologists such as Evans-Pritchard
and Fortes (1940) refer to the lack of ‘political centralization,’indicating that centralized states
do not exist and that political power is wielded by other entities.1 Others, like Migdal (1988),
use the word ‘weak’ to refer to states that lack capacity. Mann (1986, 1993) instead broke
down the concept into two dimensions distinguishing between infrastructural power which is
“institutional capacity of a central state to penetrate its territories and logistically implement
decisions”and despotic power which refers to (1986, p. 59) “the distributive power of state elites
over civil society. It derives from the range of actions that state elites can undertake without
routine negotiation with civil society.” O’Donnell’s (1993) and Acemoglu, García-Jimeno and
Robinson’s (2014) conceptualize state weakness in a related way as the physical absence of
state institutions and functionaries. Others use terminology which is based more closely on
particular practices which characterize di¤erent types of states. For example, Bratton and
van de Walle (1997) and Herbst (2000), following Weber’s (1978) classi…cation of di¤erent
types of authority, call weak states in Africa neopatrimonial, which stresses their patrimonial
or clientelistic organization that precludes the provision of public goods. Evans (1995) argues
that strong states exhibit the property of ‘embedded autonomy’having bureaucracies which are
both embedded in society, understanding its needs, but also autonomous from it and therefore
beyond capture. More recent analytical work by Acemoglu (2005) and Besley and Persson
(2011) focuses on the idea that a weak state is one that cannot raise taxes. Finally, Acemoglu,
Robinson and Santos (2013), once again building on Weber, emphasize the issue that a weak
state lacks the monopoly of violence.
        There is as yet little agreement in this literature as to why poor countries do not make their
states stronger when there appears to be such obvious bene…ts from doing so. Nevertheless,
several lines of work emphasize certain bene…ts to those currently holding political power from
the continued weakness of the state. The research on neopatrimonialism, for example, sees
this as a result of a political strategy used to buy support and control power, and this strategy
    1
    This partially follows the classi…cation scheme suggested by anthropologists distinguishing between band,
tribe, chiefdom, and state (e.g., Service, 1962).



                                                     1
naturally becomes a fundamental impediment to making the state stronger. For instance,
appointments in the bureaucracy are made on the basis of political criteria, as rewards for
support, rather than on the grounds of competence for the job.2 This makes for a weak state,
but it is politically attractive. Making the state stronger entails a change in the nature of
politics, and Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) argue that this creates the “fear of losing political
power” which impedes the creation of a stronger state.
       What could explain variation in the intensity of the “fear of losing political power”? Herbst
(2000) emphasizes the role of Africa’s geography and ecology, which led to very low population
densities and discouraged state building.3 From this perspective the bene…ts of state building in
Africa are intrinsically low. For Evans (1995), the di¤erential incidence of embedded autonomy
is related to idiosyncratic historical processes (such as Confucian bureaucratic legacy in East
Asia). Acemoglu, Robinson and Santos (2013) develop a di¤erent argument and suggest that
in situations where national elections are important for the allocation of political power, state
elites may not wish to establish a monopoly of violence of the state and make it stronger in
peripheral areas because this may reduce the support they receive from local elites controlling
society and politics. Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2010), relatedly, suggest that national
elites may refrain from establishing the monopoly of violence in certain parts of the national
territory because this would empower the military or other armed branches of the government
as potential rivals to them.
       One of the most important ideas about the origins of modern weak states in Africa is
that rather than re‡ecting some deep fundamental di¤erence between Africa and the rest of
the world, they are a path-dependent outcome of the nature of colonial governance.4 There
are many di¤erent versions of this argument. Young (1994) argued that the authoritarianism
of the colonial states set role models and political practices which transferred themselves to
post-colonial politicians. Cooper (2002) proposed that the typical colonial state was a “gate-
keeper state” which sat on the coast and was only interested in ruling and extracting natural
resources, not building the institutions required to develop the colony. Such states persisted
after independence when they were taken over by Africans.
       Perhaps the most prominent version of a path-dependent thesis in the context of African
politics is that modern state weakness is a legacy of the type of ‘indirect rule’ particularly
   2
      Robinson and Verdier (2013) provide a theory of why such patronage would take the form of employment.
   3
      Though Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson (2013) point out that pre-colonial political centralization and popu-
lation density in Africa are in fact uncorrelated in the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample.
    4
      See Acemoglu and Robinson (2010) present a general path-dependent explanation of African institutions.




                                                     2
practiced in English colonies. Indirect rule was a system where colonial powers used traditional
rulers (‘chiefs’) as the local level of government, empowering them to tax, dispense law and
maintain order. Chiefs often maintained police forces, prisons and were in charge of providing
public goods like roads and garnering the resources and manpower necessary to build them.
Even during the colonial period there was unease about the impact this system was having on
African society. Mamdani’s important work (1996) built on this earlier literature (for example,
the essays in Crowder and Ikime eds., 1970) to emphasize that indirect rule had serious negative
e¤ects on the nature of political institutions in Africa. Mamdani’s argument was that indirect
rule, by making chiefs accountable to the colonial power, rather than local people, made them
much more despotic. This despotism persisted after independence, in‡uencing both local and
national governance. It also played a signi…cant role in the collapse of democracy in post-
colonial Africa. There is a mounting body of empirical evidence which indeed suggests that
the persistence of indirect rule institutions does have adverse e¤ects on contemporary African
development (e.g. Goldstein and Udry, 2008, Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson, 2014).
   Nevertheless, Mamdani’s argument leaves open a great many issues. For one, it does
not make precise the mechanisms via which indirect rule persisted and why post-independence
African leaders continued to rely on it in some places but not in others. In Guinea, for example,
the …rst government of Sékou Touré completely abolished traditional rulers and traditional
mechanisms of social control (McGovern, 2013). Similar moves against previous indirect rulers
took place against Mossi chiefs in Burkina Faso, the Buganda chiefs in Uganda, and the Asante
chiefs in Ghana (Rathbone, 2000a,b). Yet in Sierra Leone something quite di¤erent happened.
Chiefs were not abolished and their powers not attacked. Rather, the powers they had acquired
during the colonial period were further institutionalized (e.g., as recently as 2009, the passing
of a national Chieftaincy Act froze the institution in the form it had existed at the end of the
colonial period). Mamdani’s thesis does recognize this variation, positing a distinction between
radical reactions such as in Uganda, and conservative ones such as Sierra Leone, but he also
argues that this was relatively inconsequential for the main dependent variables of interest,
particularly the extent to post-colonial democracy. Just as important, he does not advance
an explanation for the variation between radical and conservative reactions. Mamdani’s book
also does not make precise in what sense a state governed indirectly is weak or lacks capacity.
Indeed, in more recent work (2012), Mamdani denies that indirect rule created weak states
because it so powerfully shaped identities.
   In this paper we use a detailed study of the Sierra Leonean case to examine the speci…c



                                               3
mechanisms via which indirect rule persisted in Sierra Leone and the sense in which it created
or contributed to the weakness of the post-colonial state. We also propose a new explanation
for the variation in the extent to which the institution of indirect rule persisted in post-colonial
Africa.
   We argue that indirect rule persisted in Sierra Leone because the post-colonial state was
the “bottom up” creation of the traditional rulers who ran the indirect rule system. They
formed the …rst political party and dominated late colonial and post colonial politics. Thus
in Sierra Leone, the institutions of indirect rule created a political movement that captured
the central state at independence in 1961. The system persisted, however, because even when
the central state was captured by new movements after 1967, indirect rule mutated into a
generalized form of incumbency bias.
   The state that indirect rule created was weak in several well de…ned ways. First, indirect
rule by traditional (and gerontocratic) rulers has made it di¢ cult for the state to establish a
monopoly of violence both because it had created an underclass of ‘lumpen youths’alienated
from the society and because it mitigated against the construction of a national identity so
that politics stayed local and parochial. Second, as emphasized by Mamdani (1996), traditional
rulers were relatively unaccountable and thus able to extract rents and under-provide public
goods. This feature was not compensated for by other types of accountability, for example via
a representative national parliament, in large part because of the role chiefs played in managing
these higher level elections. Third, the fact that the local state was based on lineages and ruling
families made it an intrinsically patrimonial and non-bureaucratized structure— a de…ning
property of weakness. These factors interacted with others to create huge negative economic
consequences from state weakness. For example, the nature of the traditional instruments of
control, such as the role of chiefs as ‘custodians of the land,’led to large economic distortions.
Finally, though this is harder to measure, logically the model of indirect rule implies that
externalities across local areas in the construction of the state or the provision of services will
not be properly internalized (Acemoglu, García-Jimeno and Robinson, 2014).
   But this did not happen everywhere in Africa. A key di¤erence between a colony like Sierra
Leone and one like Uganda was that in the latter there were several large, indeed one dominant,
pre-colonial state— Buganda. This meant that the distribution of power within the system of
indirect rule was very di¤erent than in Sierra Leone. As Reid (2002) shows, British colonialism
in Uganda even allowed the kingdom of Buganda to expand, and British forces helped it defeat
its long-term rival, Bunyoro, and annex land from that and other kingdoms. At independence



                                                 4
the King of Buganda, the Kabaka, became the President of Uganda, a country named by
the British after the pre-colonial state. Yet the drive towards independence was typically not
led by such traditional elites, but rather by more educated, urban and professional groups.
In Uganda the …rst Prime Minister Milton Obote was not a Ganda (from Buganda), but a
Langi from the north of the country. Ruling indirectly via the Buganda chiefs was infeasible or
unattractive for him because the Kabaka was too powerful. So when he had the opportunity,
he forced the Kabaka into exile in 1966 and changed the constitution to strip him of his powers.
It was only in 1986 that a new Kabaka was allowed to return from exile and was much less
powerful thereafter. Thus the greater power of traditional elites in Uganda, perhaps at …rst
paradoxically, led to their sidelining and to the weakening of the vestiges of indirect rule after
independence. The situation was similar in Ghana.
       This contrasts with post-independence dynamics in Sierra Leone. There were no large
powerful pre-colonial states, and though some of the chieftaincies that the British created
were directly linked to pre-colonial polities (such as Banta, Kpa-Mende or Tikonko), unlike
Buganda these got smaller rather than larger and there was little continuity in their political
institutions (see Abraham, 2003, for Mendeland, or Wylie, 1977, for Temneland). This enabled
post-independence leaders, even those like Siaka Stevens who had no connection to traditional
rulers, to control the traditional rulers.
       This theory can help explain the …ndings of Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) and Michalopoulos
and Papaioannou (2013). In their work, the extent of pre-colonial centralization is positively
correlated with current development outcomes today, such as light intensity at night and various
measures of public good provision. Phillips (2011) and Bandyopadhyay and Green (2012) …nd
similar things using di¤erent data within Nigeria and Uganda. However, it is not clear why
pre-colonial centralization leads to greater state capacity today. Our argument suggests one
potential mechanism: where there were important pre-colonial centralized states, indirect rule
tended to be overthrown after independence and its negative legacies ameliorated, making it
less likely that the modern state would be dysfunctionally weak, and there would be endemic
under-provision of public goods. Our argument can also explain the within-country variation,
since it is likely that post-independence states would have intervened and administered more
intensely in precisely those parts of the country where the pre-colonial states were located.5
       Though Ghana, Uganda and several other African countries abandoned indirect rule, this
   5
     There could also be elements of selection here in the sense that if one considers both Uganda and Ghana, it
is clear that the states formed in the ecologically more attractive parts of the country, and may have intrinsically
higher agricultural productivity today.



                                                         5
does not imply they became development miracles or in fact developed strong e¤ective states.
In both countries the abandonment of indirect rule set o¤ other dynamics with other adverse
e¤ects. In both cases, in the absence of traditional authority, the state had to rely more on the
military, and in both countries the military then overthrew the civilian governments, leading
to cycles of violence, predatory rule and economic decline under Ignatius Kutu Acheampong in
Ghana and Idi Amin in Uganda. In Sierra Leone, the persistence of the institutions of indirect
rule had di¤erent implications for post-war political dynamics and ones which turned out to
be perhaps even more violent. For instance, as Richards (1996) argues, the civil war in Sierra
Leone can be interpreted as a reaction by alienated youth against the institutions of indirect
rule, while neither Ghana nor Uganda have experienced this type of con‡ict.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we place the institution of indirect
rule within the broader literature on state formation and the forces that make states weak or
strong. We discuss what the literature says about the types of incentives and forces which
make indirect rule persist and the mechanisms which lead it to be the basis of a weak and
ine¤ective state. In section 3 we describe the history of indirect rule in Sierra Leone, and how
it persisted after independence in 1961 and the reasons why it has lasted until today despite
many challenges. Section 4 examines in more detail the sense in which the post-independence
state in Sierra Leone is weak. Section 5 examines the two contrasting cases of Uganda and
Ghana, arguing that the very di¤erent dynamics they experienced at independence was due
to the fact that both countries were potentially dominated by a very large pre-colonial polity.
Section 6 concludes.


2    Weak and Strong States

Though analysis of the importance of the state in providing public goods might be traced
back to Hobbes, the most important root of its modern academic study is Weber. A state is
obviously made up of many institutions and practices. Weber pointed to several key dimensions
of states which he thought were critical. His most basic de…nition of a state emphasized the
monopoly of violence:

         “A state is a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the
      legitimate use of physical force within a given territory” (1946, p. 78).

    Weber also pointed to the emergence of rational bureaucracy as another de…ning process
in state formation, noting that

                                               6
         “In the pure type of traditional rule, the following features of a bureaucratic
     administrative sta¤ are absent: a) a clearly de…ned sphere of competence subject
     to impersonal rules, b) a rationally established hierarchy, c) a regular system of
     appointment on the basis of free contract, and orderly promotion, d) technical
     training as a regular requirement, e) (frequently) …xed salaries, in the typical case
     paid in money” (1978, p. 229).

   Of these two key features of the state, Weber’s emphasis on bureaucratization has received
the most attention by scholars, particularly in Africa. Many scholars see what Weber described
as the transition from a state based on patrimonial lines to a ‘rational-legal’ one to be the
de…ning moment in state formation (e.g. Silberman, 1993). Evans’s (1995) work is squarely
in this tradition and the empirical work of Evans and Rauch (1999, 2000) suggests that states
with ‘Weberian’characteristics, e.g. a non-patrimonial organization, have better public policies
and higher rates of economic growth. Africa has yet to undergo this transition.
   The issue of the monopoly of violence, or perhaps more generally territorial control, has
also been studied in this context. Implicitly, much of the literature on civil war is concerned
with this topic. Fearon and Laitin (2003), for example, interpret their …nding that income per
capita is the dominant determinant of civil war incidence in terms of state capacity (though
they do not measure this directly). A more recent literature in political science has considered
what it calls ‘subnational authoritarianism,’meaning the presence of regions that the central
state does not rule and are instead controlled by local power-holders (e.g. Gibson, 2005, for
examples from Argentina and Mexico).
   Other elements of the state that have received recent attention, especially from economists,
include the development of a …scal system, for example, in Acemoglu (2005) and Besley and
Persson (2011).
   Bearing in mind these di¤erent dimensions, we could say that a weak state is one which
does not possess a monopoly of violence, does not have a modern bureaucracy and is unable
to raise taxes, particularly direct taxes. In principle, states may be strong in some dimensions
and weak in others. However, in reality these three things do seem to co-vary quite positively,
suggesting that the type of forces that keep a state weak make it weak in all three dimensions.
For example, if a state lacks a monopoly of violence, it seems likely that it will have a hard
time collecting taxes, at least from areas it does not control. Further, we would expect a
patrimonial bureaucracy to be very bad at collecting taxes or providing public goods.



                                               7
   There is much less consensus, however, about why all states do not become rational-legal,
particularly when there appears to be such large advantages to becoming so. Weber saw
the development of such states in Western Europe as deeply bound up with and co-evolving
with the processes of capitalist modernization driven by, amongst other things, the Protestant
reformation. To the extent that other parts of the world did not undergo similar processes,
one would not expect such states to emerge. More recent research has stressed a plethora of
mechanisms which may prevent the development of Weberian rational-legal states. They have
also stressed other senses in which a state may be weak. The most dominant idea, due originally
to Hintze (1975) and developed more fully by Tilly (1975), is that strong states emerge as a
consequence of inter-state warfare. In other parts of the world, where there has been less inter-
state warfare, such as Africa (Herbst, 2000), rational-legal states have not emerged. Tilly’s
idea is widely accepted in social science, and even in the recent work by economists on this
topic (Besley and Persson, 2011, Gennaioli and Voth, 2012).
   Other scholars have suggested very di¤erent mechanisms. Migdal (1988) and Scott (2009),
for example, develop the idea that the state may be weak because society is highly organized
and refuses to concede authority to a state. This could be for various reasons. For instance
Lebanon does not have an income tax because it is divided into powerfully organized commu-
nities, the Sunnis, Shias, Maronites, Druze and Orthodox, and all are worried that any state
might be controlled by another of the groups and such things as tax policy used against their
interests. Similarly Lebanon has not had a census since 1932. Collecting data on its population
might be regarded as a basic function of the state, but in Lebanon each community fears that
changes in the relative population shares will destabilize the equilibrium between them (for ex-
ample through the intricate electoral system). Hence nobody dares to collect such information.
In Scott’s view the mechanism is that people simply do not want to subject themselves to the
coercion of the state and the reduction in autonomy involved with having a strong state. But
it might also be local elites vigorously resisting the authority of the central state to protect
their own privileges.
   The work on patrimonialism and why it does not transition to a rational-legal state focuses
on the idea that patrimonialism is, at root, a method of organizing power and exercising control
over society. In any society, some rule and some are ruled, but the practice and methods of rule
can take many forms, as can the extent of autonomy of the rulers and the extent to which the
ruled can participate in decision-making. These forms have huge consequences for economic
development. If society is organized in a patrimonial way, then the rulers become patrons and



                                               8
the ruled become the clients of the patrons. Patrons typically control scarce resources that
they allocate at their discretion to clients in exchange for services and particularly loyalty and
support. If a client gets access to resources, such as a job, a school place for their children or
essential medical treatment, this does not happen on the basis of some well de…ned criteria.
Rather, it comes because one’s patron has access to the resources. It comes as a reward for
loyalty.
   As an example of why states become organized in a patrimonial way, consider the political
problem facing Joseph Mobutu when he took over the Congolese state in 1965. His …rst
objective was to consolidate his power. He was confronted by a factious “nation”with powerful
independence movements bubbling in Katanga and Kasai. The Simba Revolt had already taken
over the Kivus and most of the eastern half of the country in 1964-65. The state was not only
short on legitimacy, it was woefully short of human capital and experience. The top echelon of
the civil service had been sta¤ed by Belgians who left in 1960 and the …rst Congolese university
graduate arrived only four years before that in 1956.
   In 1965 Mobutu therefore faced a di¢ cult political problem: how to control the society he
had taken over and how to organize political institutions to ensure this. He had a bureaucracy
and army of sorts, but he could not rely on anybody’s loyalty and he was short of resources.
Most of the vast mineral wealth of the country was still controlled by foreigners. Mobutu saw
the key to establishing his control as creating a vast web of informal patron-client relationships.
Dispensing resources and favors to people who in turn dispensed them to others below them,
creating a vast pyramid of favors and obligations ultimately ‡owing from his o¢ ce and covering
the entire state. Such a strategy for consolidating power would work only up to the point where
clients couldn’t coordinate on a new patron so Mobutu also brilliantly sidelined any such
candidates. Ministers and political elites were “shu- ed”from one position to another, thrown
into prison, rehabilitated, and cast into exile, only to be rehabilitated again. Particularly
distinctive about the organization of the Mobutu state was, as he himself put it

           “In a word, everything is for sale, anything can be bought in our country. And
      in this ‡ow, he who holds the slightest cover of public authority uses it illegally to
      acquire money, goods, prestige, or to avoid obligations. The right to be recognized
      by a public servant, to have one’s children enrolled in school, to obtain medical care,
      etc. ... are all subject to this tax which, though invisible, is known and expected
      by all” (Gould, 1980, p. 485).



                                                9
    Not only was corruption acceptable, within limits, so was preying on society. This ap-
parently perverse organization of the state was actually a brilliant way of allowing Mobutu
to extend his vast patronage machine to incorporate far more people than his public …nances
would otherwise have permitted. A key tool of patronage was employment in the govern-
ment. People could be hired by the state without payment because just working for the state
came with the “option value” of being able to predate on the rest of society. So what looked
like— and was of course— corruption was the usual way the politics of the state operated. Nat-
urally, this organization of the state came at huge costs in terms of social welfare and economic
development.
    The more analytical work in this area also proposes various mechanisms that can account
for why weak states persist. For example, in Besley and Persson’s (2011) canonical model, it is
more attractive to build state strength in the …scal and legal spheres when the incumbent does
not fear losing power (as this makes it less likely that state capacity can be used against itself
in the future); when society is more cohesive, so that losing power is not so bad; and when the
value of public goods is high (perhaps because of external warfare). In Acemoglu, Ticchi and
Vindigni (2011) an initial political elite facing the threat of democratization creates a weak
patrimonial state where bureaucrats extract rents to create a coalition against redistribution,
which would entail state reform and a reduction of rents for bureaucrats. Here a weak state
is speci…cally a method of controlling political power and forging a particular coalition. In
Acemoglu, Robinson and Santos (2013), the central state decides not to create a monopoly of
violence because warlords provide votes at a lower price than political elites would otherwise
have to pay. In Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2010), a state without the monopoly of
violence and endemic civil wars persists because the elite controlling the central state are
afraid of strengthening the military that can compete against them in the future.
    None of the analytical work on state weakness has focused on the idea that indirect rule
creates weak states, though both Lange (2004, 2009) and Iyer (2010) present empirical evidence
of the impact of indirect rule.


3     The Creation, Persistence and Consequences of Indirect Rule
      in Sierra Leone
3.1   History of the Institution

The Sierra Leonean state is built around the system of indirect rule created by the British
in 1896, which is based on a symbiotic relationship between national politicians and local


                                               10
‘traditional’ (though the tradition is to a large extent invented— see Hobsbawn and Ranger
eds. 1986) rulers. This system has lasted 118 years, though with some notable adaptations
after independence in 1961. It may even have in some sense become stronger after the civil
war ended in 2002, when real political competition emerged for the …rst time since the 1960s.
The longevity of the system and the way it was re-created after the civil war suggests that it
has quite robust features— even if it leads to a severe underprovision of public goods.
   To understand the nature of the current state in Sierra Leone and why it is weak, it is
critical to understand the history of how the state was created during the colonial period and
what kind of institutional architecture was imposed at the time. In 1896, when the British
established a protectorate over what would be the modern territory of Sierra Leone, they
set up a canonical version of indirect rule. Local government was to be delegated to the
Paramount Chiefs (PCs) who collected poll taxes and administered justice. PCs are elected
for life and to be a candidate one must come from a ruling family or ruling house. Chieftaincies,
of which there are currently 149, have anywhere between 1 ruling house (around 10%) to a
maximum of 12. The ruling houses are roughly the elites which were recognized by the British
in the 19th century, possibly descendents of those who signed treaties with the British. In
practice, establishing today that a particular family is a ruling house is done by showing that
an ancestor of the house was allowed by the British to contest to be PC during the colonial
period. There is no formal or written list of ruling houses— the set of acceptable lineages is
entirely ‘local knowledge,’and this aspect of the system has never really been institutionalized
(Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson, 2014, constructed the list of ruling families by administering
a national survey). PCs are elected from eligible candidates by a secret ballot, where the
electorate are the members of the chieftaincy council (formally, the Tribal Authority). Today
there is one member of this council for every 20 taxpayers in the chieftaincy, but the members
are selected— not chosen by the taxpayers, let alone ordinary citizens— and are essentially
composed of local elites. Underneath the PC is a whole structure of subordinate chiefs, village
chiefs, and section chiefs, all of which are automatically members of the council, along with a
member of parliament who comes from the chieftaincy and other elites.
   This system evolved during the colonial period (Abraham, 1978, is the best treatment of the
system in action prior to independence). It is in operation today and is still the main way that
the national government in Freetown governs the countryside. There are several reasons for this
longevity. First, PCs were given disproportionate in‡uence in early representative institutions
during the late colonial period. In 1924 the British decided to allow African representation



                                               11
on the Legislative Council. The Protectorate could elect three representatives on a franchise
restricted to wealthy adult males (consisting of around 5% of adult males, Kilson, 1966, p. 125)
which ended in the election of three paramount chiefs. In 1951 the British promulgated a new
constitution which opened up the Legislative Council further. In consequence the …rst national
political party, the Sierra Leone People’s Party (SLPP), formed around Dr. Milton Margai, the
Protectorate’s …rst doctor and longstanding adviser to the paramount chiefs. Of the 14 elected
representatives, 8 were themselves paramount chiefs, the other six included Milton Margai, his
brother Albert, and Siaka Stevens who later formed the opposition All People’s Congress party
(APC). Margai was a scion of a ‘ruling family’which had controlled the paramount chieftaincy
of Lower Banta since the creation of indirect rule in 1896 and his brother George was the PC
of this chiefdom in the 1950s. Apart from Stevens, all of the non-paramount chiefs came from
ruling families. As Cartwright puts it (1970, p. 56)

         “Dr. Margai’s wide range of acquaintances enabled him to go to leading men in
     most towns of the Protectorate and enlist them as the local leaders of the SLPP.
     But beyond enlisting a few “big men”in each locality ... the SLPP undertook little
     political activity.”

   They controlled elections and got themselves elected to the legislative council and formed
the SLPP, which elected the …rst prime minister at independence, Milton Margai, whose power
base rested almost entirely on the paramount chieftaincy. Legislative electoral districts, for
example, coincided almost precisely with chieftaincy boundaries. One chief, one member of
parliament (Cartwright, 1970, p. 141).
   The SLPP then entered into a symbiotic relationship with the chiefs in rather the same
way as the British colonial state had done. Cartwright (1970, p. 88) explains thus:

         “While the SLPP leaders negotiated with the British new constitutional arrange-
     ments which protected the interests of the chiefs as a class, but at the same time
     retained for themselves the ability to impose sanctions on any individual chief, the
     chiefs ensured that their people supported the SLPP.”

   The local control of PCs over land, the justice system, and forced labor was used to deliver
votes in elections. The ability of PCs to use selective punishments and rewards at the local
level and their control over resources gave huge political leverage to the SLPP, who had no
interest in constructing a national state that might have interfered with this political resource.


                                               12
For the 1957 elections, the last before independence in 1961, there were further changes in the
Legislative Assembly with a broadened franchise. Of the 50 elected members (7 others were
nominated by the governor) 12 seats were guaranteed to PCs (one per district) and of the
remaining MPs, 6 were the sons of PCs and of the other 32 members, 64% were from ruling
houses. Forty four out of 50 supported the SLPP including all of the PCs.
       Therefore, at independence the SLPP created a political strategy deeply rooted in the
colonial institutions. Though the national state constructed by the British was a bureaucratic
one, it was primarily sta¤ed by Krios, the Creole people of Freetown who lost out politically as
the majority of the electorate was in the interior (see Clapham, 1976, on the failed attempt by
Krio elites to maintain their power). After independence, the Krios were replaced by supporters
of the SLPP from the interior and the national state was ‘patrimonialized’.
       It was a liability for the SLPP, however, that all its elites such as the Margais hailed from
the south of the country. The APC, formed by Siaka Stevens of Limba ethnicity from the
north of the country, to contest the 1962 election, took advantage of this liability. Once in
power Stevens reconstructed and operated the same model (Reno, 1995, is the best study of
the Stevens regime). The APC won the 1967 general election, largely because the SLPP split
over whether or not to form a one-party state. Stevens then took over the institutions of
indirect rule and continued to use them in the same way, including using the PCs as a way of
governing the countryside and mobilizing political support. Stevens even strengthened their
powers by abolishing in 1972 the District Councils that the British had set up in 1945. At the
same time, he aggressively intervened to remove chiefs he did not like (recall the Cartwright
quote above on how the SLPP worked), and moulded them to be an electoral arm for the APC.
With Stevens, and ever since, it is customary for the paramount chiefs to declare loyalty to
the government in power and that government expects the PCs to deliver electoral support.
       This strategy is still in use today.6        Chiefs also still appear to be heavily involved in
politics. Wyrod (2008, p. 79) notes that in the 2007 elections when the SLPP was once again
the incumbent, “paramount chiefs tried to deliver votes for the SLPP.”7
       The resilience of indirect rule in Sierra Leone has had both ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’
roots. If at the national level a political equilibrium emerged where the central state had no
   6
      Though there is controversy today about the extent to which PCs can control elections, everyone claims
they have a major impact. One PC in Kono district, when asked by us whether he was able to in‡uence the
way people voted replied “if I say left they go left, if I say right they go right.” A senior member of the SLPP
party told us that PCs could control between 20-30% of the votes in an election. In our …eldwork we found all
rural people willing to talk about how the PCs attempt to sway voting and elections.
    7
      See Baldwin, 2013, one of the very few real studies of the electoral impact of African chiefs. Burrows, 1976,
is a valuable study which covers some of this ground for Kenema district.


                                                        13
incentive to invest in making itself stronger (since this might have jeopardized the incumbency
advantage delivered by chiefs), the equilibrium also featured local support for the institution.
The issue of local attitudes towards chiefs is a complex one because there is a long history
of resentment over abuses by chiefs. In 1955-56 there were extensive riots across the country,
fueled by complaints about extortionate taxation and the arbitrary use of powers by paramount
chiefs and local authorities. More recently, grievances against the chiefs have been seen by some
as crucial to both the start of the civil war and the popularity of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) with youths (Richards, 1996, Mokuwa, Voors, Bulte and Richards, 2011). Barrows
(1976) and Tangri (1976), however, have shown that the rural riots in the mid-1950s were not,
in large part, popular revolts against the institution of Paramount Chieftaincy itself, but were
rather mobilizations by elite opponents against incumbent chiefs. Tangri, for instance, writes
that

       “Ruling house competition, amalgamation di¤erences, ethnic antagonisms, personal
       enmities, and other con‡icting interests, all involving men of in‡uence, constituted
       the underlying causes of the various chiefdom riots of 1955-6. And these divi-
       sions among ‘big men’ were expressed within the context of a popular malaise
       arising from the corrupt, extortionist, and authoritarian behaviour of [incumbent]
       chiefdom rulers. A symbiotic relationship emerged between opponents of the local
       establishment, who wanted to further their own interests, and discontented ‘young-
       men’, who demanded an end to the abuse of power by the ruling elite. For the
       ‘youngmen’[violence] was a means of ending misrule by a particular ‘ruling’family,
       while for the elders it was an instrument for unseating and replacing opponents in
       order to obtain a more equitable share of chiefdom o¢ ces and resources between
       personal rivals, di¤erent areas, and various ethnic groups.” (Tangri, 1976, p. 318).

   As for the arguments about acute current resentment against paramount chiefs, there is
the overwhelming …nding from recent surveys that chiefs retain legitimacy at the local level.
Fanthorpe (2004, pp. 6-7) sums up a large amount of research he conducted for DFID after
the end of the civil war on the topic by arguing that

          “Long experience of state corruption has left many Sierra Leoneans extremely
       distrustful of bureaucracy ... In an environment where ruthless pursuit of self-
       interest among the comparative wealthy and well educated is perceived to be the
       norm, chiefs continue to be seen as a lesser evil: there is at least some chance that

                                                14
         rulers with the appropriate hereditary credentials can be prevailed upon to protect
         the hereditary rights of the rural populace.”

       Indeed, while certain reforms of the chieftaincy have had some degree of popular support
(for example, the introduction of universal su¤rage in elections for PC), other reforms, such
as getting rid of the ruling houses, have not. Rural people in Sierra Leone have tended to
be suspicious of reforms that might lead to ‘natives’ losing control of the chieftaincy and
local institutions.8 Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson (2014) argue that this also likely re‡ects
the speci…c investments that local people make in the patronage networks which have the
paramount chief at the apex. It may also be the case that there are local institutions, such as
secret societies like the Poro, that act as constraints on PCs (see Little, 1965, 1966); moreover,
rural Sierra Leoneans see themselves as having far more in‡uence over these local institutions
than they do over the central state.
       This perspective shows us something interesting about the demand side for state building
in Sierra Leone. It is not just that national elites not consider it to be in their best interest to
construct a more e¤ective and stronger central state, but also that rural dwellers feel threatened
by the central state. This is reminiscent of Scott’s (2009) thesis that state formation is a
fundamentally coercive process, which is strongly resisted. Such arguments resonate with a
wide swath of the literature in African studies (see MacIntosh, 1999), even if in some cases the
resistance comes not from the regular rural dwellers but the local elites.

3.2      Indirect Rule and State Weakness

Does this system of governance necessarily make the state in Sierra Leone weak, and if so in
what ways? For the British, indirect rule was a low cost method for pacifying the periphery of
Sierra Leone. The colonial state had little interest in providing public goods or developing the
country (particularly after the Hut Tax rebellion, when initial ideas about British settlement
were abandoned, see Lange, 2009). However, it did need a way of guaranteeing order and
stability, and of collecting enough taxes for the state to be self-…nancing (recall, for example,
Cooper’s, 2002, ‘gatekeeper state’). The institution of the PC achieved this without entailing
any investment in the construction of a national state.
       We have already emphasized several ways that a state could be weak: it could lack a
monopoly of violence, a modern bureaucracy and a modern …scal system. Sierra Leone is weak
   8
    In …eld work in Kenema, we were forcefully told that it could never be allowed for a stranger to become PC
because then strangers could get control over the land - the PC being traditionally the ‘custodian of the land’.



                                                      15
in all these senses today. The most obvious evidence that it lacks a monopoly of violence is the
civil war, initiated by the RUF, that ravaged the country between 1991 and 2002 and which
the national army was incapable of …ghting. Keen (2005, p. 34) reproduces a quote from Abu
Turay, capturing the extent to which central authority had collapsed in the early 1990s:

      “by the end of Momoh’s rule he had stopped paying civil servants, teachers and even
      Paramount Chiefs. Central government had collapsed, and then of course we had
      border incursions, ‘rebels’and all the automatic weapons pouring over the border
      from Liberia. The NPRC, the ‘rebels’ and the ‘sobels’ [soldiers-turned rebels] all
      amount to the chaos one expects when government disappears. None of them are
      the causes of our problems, but they are symptoms.”

    The outbreak of the civil war was the outcome of a long process. Stevens, not trusting the
national army which had initially stopped him becoming Prime Minister in 1967 by mounting
a coup to keep the SLPP in power, privatized violence. He created a private security force
initially named the Internal Security Unit (the ISU— which was apparently referred to by his
long-su¤ering people as ‘I Shoot U’) and afterwards the Special Security Division (SSD— or
‘Siaka Stevens’Dogs’, see Jackson, 2004, p. 63, Keen, 2005, p. 17 on these acronyms). The
APC also recruited marginalized (mostly urban) youth as professional thugs. Kandeh (1998),
for instance, has noted how political elites before the war had taken advantage (and fostered
the growth) of a class of urban “lumpen youth” as a cheap source of coercive power :

      “APC violence and thuggery relied almost exclusively on the recruitment of urban
      thugs and rural drifters. As Ismail Rashid (1997) points out, most of the thugs
      recruited by APC patrons in the 1960s and 70s came from peri-urban enclaves like
      Sawpit, Magazine and Kannikay - all in Freetown” (p. 359).

    These lumpen youth were “specialists in political violence”— readily called upon by patrons
to intimidate (or eliminate) opponents, raze uncooperative villages, and cow voters during
elections (pp. 359-362).9
    This lack of the monopoly of violence is indirectly linked to the nature of indirect rule
in two ways. PCs had the responsibility for local order and maintaining police, and yet the
   9
     These lumpen youth formed the bulk of RUF recruits after the initial phase of the war, and specialists
believe that the bloody, highly predatory Armed Forces Revolutionary Council regime (an RUF-lower army
ranks alliance) was essentially the result of these professional, lower class thugs becoming independent from
their elite patrons. See Kandeh (1998, pp.361-362) and Abdullah (1998).



                                                     16
way that they achieved this and the nature of traditional institutions played an important
part in marginalizing youths. As argued in Fanthorpe (2001, p. 385), this system— whereby
rural dwellers depend on a highly exclusionary set of traditional institutions if they want
to access property and gain political rights— has historically created a large class of people
(mostly young, low-status men) who are practically obligated to become rural drifters or join
marginalized populations in the cities. That is, they cannot access political rights by appealing
to the modern state, for it is nearly non-existent in rural areas. But for all intents and purposes,
they also cannot do so by appealing to traditional authorities if they lack patronage by those
higher up in the chiefdom hierarchy. For example, in many chiefdoms, only those who can
validly claim native status are allowed to plant long-term crops. Fanthorpe cites research on a
chiefdom in a diamond-mining area, where

      “Farmland was allocated according to age and pedigree, forcing newcomers to make
      farms at a considerable distance from the main settlement. Young people who
      lacked patronage often faced the prospect of a lifetime’s hard labour on a relative’s
      behalf. Yet independent initiatives in wealth-creating among women and low-status
      men elicited strong disapproval, and were sometimes ruthlessly suppressed” (p.
      384).

   Moreover, Fanthorpe notes

      “In recent times the population obliged to attach itself to a rural settlement in
      order to obtain a tax receipt, a vote, and other privileges of citizenship has often
      far exceeded that which is actually resident, and economically supportable, at any
      given time. The young and those of low inherited status inevitably …nd themselves
      in attenuating orders of precedence in access to these privileges. Sierra Leone may
      therefore represent a case in which alarming numbers of people have become neither
      ‘citizen’nor ‘subject’.” (p. 385)

   For this population of young men, being recruited as the brawn behind a political entre-
preneur has o¤ered a much easier, readily accessible route to patronage.
   The other obvious implication of this system is that it made it very di¢ cult for a national
identity to emerge. As Fanthorpe puts it (2005, p. 4)

         “even today, the vast majority of rural Sierra Leoneans obtain primary rights
      of residence, land use, and political/legal representation as ‘natives’ of chiefdoms

                                                17
     rather than as citizens of the state. It is the prerogative of the chief to recognize
     and guarantee ‘native’status. While ‘native’identities are rooted in history, they
     have been reshaped by regimes of colonial governance, notably the registration of
     villages for annual poll tax. In practice ‘native’ status is a privilege conferred by
     membership of land and title holding groups and attached to villages in which chiefs
     reside.”

   Being a native of a chieftaincy, as opposed to a non-native, referred to as a ‘stranger’by
the locals, confers many bene…ts. As we noted, typically only natives can grow permanent
crops such as cocoa, palm or co¤ee. Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson (2014) show that strangers
have weaker property rights than natives. This institution has clearly in‡uenced the extent to
which a national identity can emerge and can help explain why voting patterns in elections are
still rooted in region and ethnicity and why soldiers in the army identify with their region or
ethnicity, not with Sierra Leone. The only option to really establish civilian control over the
military is to keep it weak and risk giving up on the monopoly of violence.
   Indirect rule does seem to have made the state weak in other well de…ned ways as well,
which we mentioned in the introduction. As emphasized by Mamdani (1996), traditional rulers
were and still are relatively unaccountable. They are able to extract rents and under-provide
public goods. Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson (2014) argue that PCs in Sierra Leone are more
powerful in situations where they face less competition and this occurs when there are fewer
ruling families. They show, for example, that in chieftaincies with fewer ruling families the
paramount chieftaincy is indeed concentrated in fewer families. Using this idea, they then
show that in places with fewer ruling families and more powerful paramount chiefs, a whole
series of development outcomes are signi…cantly lower. This includes all levels of educational
attainment, the proportion of people working outside agriculture, child health and di¤erent
measures of asset ownership. The likely mechanism is indeed that more powerful chiefs can
extract more rents to the detriment of public good provision. Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson
(2014) present evidence that a potential channel is through the extra ability of powerful chiefs
to control people’s access to land. This feature was not compensated for by other types of
accountability, for example via members of the national parliament, because of the role chiefs
played in managing these higher level elections.
   Moreover, the fact that the local state is based on lineages and ruling families made it
intrinsically patrimonial and non-bureaucratized. This patrimonial nature …ltered up to the
national state after independence and is evident in many dimensions. For example, when

                                              18
the APC returned to power in December 2007, they systematically removed from the civil
service over 200 people from the south and east (Africa Con…dential 2009, p. 5). Some of
these people were certainly closely connected with the outgoing SLPP government, but others
were just competent and dedicated Mende who had to make way for northerners. They were
often replaced by people who were not competent, but to whom political favors were owed.
For example, an Anti-Corruption Commission was formed in 2000 with a great deal of donor
support and pressure and the post war SLPP government launched its Anti-Corruption strategy
in February 2005. However, when the head of the commission, Val Collier, attempted to do
his job too vigorously, he was replaced by Henry Joko-Smart, the brother-in-law of the then
President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. The International Crisis Group (2007, p. 9) notes

        “While Collier brought charges against ministers, an Appeals court judge and sev-
        eral senior civil servants, Joko-Smart has focused almost exclusively on junior and
        mid-level o¢ cials.”

      Many appointments in the bureaucracy appear to have been made on the basis of dispensing
patronage and they often feature the relatives of powerful people. The new Human Resources
Management O¢ ce found in 2007 that there were no records for 60% of civil servants (9,300
of 16,000) and that there was a huge problem of ghost workers. For example, salaries were
paid to 236 people of the senior civil service list but only 125 were found to actually be at
their posts (International Crisis Group, 2008). The patrimonial nature of the state extends to
the military. Evidence for this surfaced in the anonymous ‘Dream Team’ letter to president
Koroma on January 1, 2009.10 The Dream Team is the “Detective Reconnaissance Emergency
Action Mission Team ... is a network of over 850 o¢ cers and men in all bases of the Sierra
Leone Armed Forces cutting across tribal and political party lines.”This report made a series
of claims about inappropriate political interventions in the military. For example it starts by
demanding that “the decision to handpick [some named] cadet o¢ cers ... to go to Uganda
for training be reversed with immediate e¤ect. Eighty percent of these o¢ cers are from the
Limba ethnic group, the ethnic group of the Minister of Defence.” It next demands that the
“Government reverses the commissioning of the following [named] o¢ cers ... Again majority
of these o¢ cers are Limbas, the Minister of Defence’s and the President’s tribesmen, many
of whom could not read or write. Commissioning these o¢ cers ‡outed all requirements and
acceptable procedures of the RSLAF. Their commissioning was done because they were trained
 10
      Available at http://www.sierraherald.com/dream-team-letter.htm



                                                     19
in alongside the Minister of Defence in 1977.”The report contains a very worrying threat “As
these injustices persist and our DREAM Team grows in numbers day by day this pregnant
moment in Sierra Leone’s history might lead to a tragic birth of something else.” Just as in
the past, the loyalty of the army could not be assured and the current strategy of the regime
is a patrimonial one of …lling it with people from the ethnicity of president Ernest Koroma.


4         The Diverging Paths of Ghana and Uganda

The particular path of persistence and institutionalization of indirect rule in Sierra Leone has
not been the norm even in British Africa. Sierra Leone …rmly deviated from other British
colonies, most notably from the Gold Coast (Ghana) and Uganda. In both cases, attempts
by the British to set up legislative councils which were dominated by traditional elites had to
be withdrawn because of strong opposition from urban and middle class groups.11 In Uganda,
however, the Buganda monarchy was so powerful that they were able to have a large initial
impact on post-independence political institutions. However, in both Ghana and Uganda, this
made post-independence leaders even more unwilling to rule via traditional chiefs or work with
traditional elites, ultimately leading to the sidelining of the traditional elites. We now provide
a brief account of these political paths.

4.1         Ghana

In Ghana, as the British colonial o¢ ce began moving the country towards independence,12
the opposition to chiefs and indirect rule was led by Kwame Nkrumah’s Convention People’s
Party (CPP). Rathbone (2000a,b) (see also Crook, 1986) documents in great detail how the
pre-colonial governments led by Nkrumah between 1951 and 1966 attempted

               “to break, co-opt and coerce chieftaincy” (2000b, p. ix).

         The CPP, founded in June 1949, was formed of people lacking membership in ruling families,
so-called ‘verandah boys’. In this they were quite like large segments of Siaka Stevens’s APC
in Sierra Leone. Stevens was mayor of Freetown in the 1960s when he was building his political
machine and a trade unionist, not a traditional elite. But in Ghana, the power of Asante Chiefs
and particularly of the king of Asante, the Asantehene, created a context very di¤erent from
the one that Stevens faced. These chiefs had very powerful bases of support in the Asante
    11
         Austin (1964) pp. 49-152 discusses this process in the Gold Coast, Coleman (1958) pp. 271-318 on Nigeria.
    12
         See Crook (1986) for di¤erent views of the British with respect to the chieftaincy in late colonial Ghana.



                                                          20
country and were much less dependent on the central state than the chiefs of Sierra Leone. As
Dunn and Robertson (1973, p. 93) put it

           “[chieftaincy] neither behaved as an instrument in the hands ... of the colonial
        rulers nor ... drew its political power solely from its capacity to elicit the support
        of the colonial regime”.

      Krono Edusei, Nkrumah’s lieutenant in the Asante region, had led the Ashanti Youth As-
sociation in vehement opposition to the traditional authorities, and he had been …ned and
imprisoned many times by chie‡y courts. Rathbone notes “the CPP’s struggle against chief-
taincy in southern Ghana was, by its own reckoning, at least as important as its dramatic,
much better known and ultimately much more successful combat with the British” (2000b, p.
7).
      By January 1950 Nkrumah himself was on the o¤ensive, writing that “Chiefs in league with
imperialists who obstruct our path ... will one day run away and leave their stools”(Rathbone,
2000b, p. 23) (a stool being the symbol of royal o¢ ce in Asante). The newspaper of the party,
the Accra Evening News, began to adopt a Marxist language to talk about the chiefs, referring
to their “oppression of the masses”and their “collaboration with the imperialists”(Rathbone,
2000b, p. 22). In particular and very interesting for the comparison with Sierra Leone, the
CPP focused on the mobilization of ‘youths’or ‘youngmen’. These words are translations of
the Twi words ‘nkwankwaa’and ‘mmerante,’which also have the connotation of a commoner,
someone outside the traditional royal lineages.
      These were not just idle words. Rathbone (2000a, p. 54 ) argues that

           “There is little doubt that the CPP’s Central Committee had every intention
        to scrap chieftaincy as soon as possible. Several prominent members of the Party
        were widely reported as having made just that commitment before the …rst general
        election of 1951”.

      Rathbone documents how the CPP intervened to take judicial powers away from chiefs (p.
56)

           “The substitution of dependable party [in place of] discarded court panel mem-
        bers who were demonstrably royal or clients of chiefs is consistent throughout this
        long trail of evidence.”


                                                 21
Rather than solidifying the judicial powers of chiefs, as happened in Sierra Leone, in Ghana
they were stripped away.
       Though the CPP dominated the …rst elections to the legislative council in 1951, its op-
ponents coalesced around a new political party, the National Liberation Movement (NLM),
formed in central Asante. Rathbone (2000a, p. 58) argues

            “the NLM was, at heart, an Asante party. It made a patriotic case and under-
         lined it by making common cause with the beleaguered Asante chiefs.”

The response by the CPP was to aggressively go after the chiefs and create all sorts of pretexts
for removing ones who did not cooperate from o¢ ce. Rathbone writes of this

            “The lists of ‘destooled’and then de-recognised chiefs, and government-preferred
         and thus recognised substitutes for the latter part of 1957 and 1958, quite literally
         involve hundreds of people” (2000a, p. 62).

       Compared with this, the few instances when Stevens’s parachuted illegitimate chiefs into
power was of marginal importance.13 Brempong (2006, p. 30) sums the situation up by noting
that

            “The Nkrumah government ... minimized the political and judicial roles of tra-
         ditional rulers, broke their …nancial backbone and made them passive appendages
         to the central government.”

       After Nkrumah was thrown from power by the military in 1966, there was some change in
this. Nevertheless, chiefs have never re-gained the roles or powers that they had in the colonial
period. For example, (Rathbone, 2000a, pp. 62-63) concludes that

            “After its fall in 1966, the military government dismissed all of those chiefs
         installed or promoted by the CPP ... and it re-installed the deposed. But it and its
         successor governments were never to return to chiefs the access to resources which
         had allowed them to exercise such authority in the later colonial period.”

       Chiefs did gradually regain more status in the 1969, 1979 and 1992 constitutions but
even this was hedged around with restrictions. For instance, the 1992 Constitution (276.1)
  13
     Interestingly, as Reed and Robinson (2012) document, in no case was Stevens able to actually create a
legitimate new ruling family using this tactic. Since 2002, the legacies of this period have been completely
eradicated.


                                                    22
bans chiefs from taking part in “active” party politics and stipulates that those who wish
to do so should abdicate. There are both regional and national houses of chiefs but their
mandate is restricted to overseeing elections for chiefs and making sure they follow the correct
traditional procedures. The 1992 Constitution did allow for the representation of chiefs on
local government bodies but only with limited powers. Brempong (2006, p. 35) sums it up as

         “In e¤ect, the clause meant no consultations with the chiefs or at most only
      with respect to chiefs supposed to be favorable to the party in power.”

   A long cry from the situation in Sierra Leone.

4.2   Uganda

In the British protectorate of Uganda, the role of the Buganda state was even more institution-
alized than the Asante state was in Ghana (see Fallers, 1964). Not only was the protectorate
named after the state, but the state had expanded with British help to annex surrounding
territories, particularly the so-called ‘lost counties’ of Bunyoro, and during the protectorate
Ganda governors were appointed by the British in some of the contiguous, previously stateless,
societies, for example Tesoland.
   After World War II, Britain began to move its African colonies towards independence (see
Mutibwa, 1992, and Mwakikagile, 2012, for overviews of the relevant history). The new gover-
nor of Uganda, Andrew Cohen (appointed in 1952) had the job of opening up the legislative
council to elections for Africans. This prospect was seen by the Kabaka of Buganda, Frederick
Walugembe Mutesa II, as seriously diluting the power of Buganda, since its population was in a
minority in the entire protectorate. In response he demanded that Buganda be separated from
the protectorate. Cohen exiled the Kabaka to London. But his rising popularity in Uganda
led to his re-instatement, and in exchange for agreeing not to oppose the creation of a uni…ed
Uganda as a state, he was to become the president at independence. The 1950s saw the emer-
gence of a string of new political parties, the most signi…cant being Milton Obote’s Uganda
People’s Congress (UPC). As the 1961 legislative elections approached, the Kabaka became
more discontented from the institutional arrangements which the British were proposing for an
independent Uganda. He then instructed his people to boycott the election. This strategy not
only failed to de-legitimize the election but had the perverse result of allowing the Democratic
Party (DP), which had formed in the 1950s to oppose Buganda dominance, to dominate the
Buganda homeland on the basis of non-Ganda votes. In response the Kabaka helped to found


                                              23
a new party, the Kabaka Yekka (‘king only’) party which went into a coalition with Obote’s
UPC party at independence. The deal they made included autonomy for Buganda, the right
of the Kabaka to nominate the members of the national assembly from Buganda, and assured
his position as head of state of Uganda.
    However, Obote had no intention of allowing the Kabaka to be either the head of state
or to maintain the autonomy of Buganda. He immediately started to strengthen the army
and undermine the coalition, which culminated in the 1962 referendum on returning the lost
countries to Bunyoro, using it as a way to induce Bunyoro members of the DP to join the UPC.
In response the Kabaka tried to create disunity within the UPC, promoting Obote’s rivals
who on February 4, 1966, passed a “no con…dence” vote against Obote’s leadership. Obote’s
response was to turn to Idi Amin, the young military commander he had been promoting,
who helped him to mount a coup d’état and suspend the constitution. The Kabaka ordered
that the government quit Buganda territory, but instead Obote ordered Amin to attack the
Kabaka’s palace on Mengo Hill, forcing him into exile. The new constitution that Obote then
introduced in 1967 abolished the autonomy enjoyed by Buganda and the Kabaka’s position as
head of state.
    As in the case of Ghana, the considerable power wielded by the king of a large pre-colonial
state made the continuation of institutions of indirect rule infeasible after independence. Just
as it was not possible for Nkrumah to make the Asantehene and other powerful Asante chiefs
instruments of his rule, it was not feasible for Obote to govern Uganda in the way the British
had done via the king and chiefs of Buganda and the other pre-colonial states. They had to
be abolished.


5    Conclusions

In this paper we have attempted three tasks. We have tried to explain the mechanisms that led
the colonial state based on indirect rule to persist to the present day in Sierra Leone. We have
also studied the sense in which indirect rule creates state weakness in Sierra Leone. Finally, we
provided a hypothesis which has the potential to explain the di¤erential persistence of indirect
rule in Africa.
    We argued that the persistence of indirect rule after the independence of Sierra Leone was
initially caused by the fact that those empowered by indirect rule were able to capture and
indeed to structure the post-colonial state. Yet the system persisted after these initial elites
lost power because Siaka Stevens, Prime Minister and then President between 1967 and 1985,


                                               24
was able to exploit the huge advantage that a sitting president had in the system and turn it
into a tool of incumbency bias.
   Yet indirect rule did make the state weak in at least three clear senses. First, it made it
di¢ cult to establish a monopoly of violence because traditional rule created a class of alienated
youth who could be easily recruited by politicians or armed groups. This monopoly was further
impeded by the fact that the system made it di¢ cult for a national identity to emerge, which
made the issue of civilian control over the military harder. The only solution was to keep
the military weak, further jeopardizing the monopoly of violence. Second, as developed by
Mamdani (1996), traditional rulers were relatively unaccountable and thus able to extract
rents and under-provide public goods. This feature was not compensated for by other types
of accountability, for example via a representative national parliament, in large part because
of the role chiefs played in managing these higher-level elections. Third, the fact that the
local state was based on lineages and ruling families recognized by the British made it an
intrinsically patrimonial and non-bureaucratized structure— a de…ning property of weakness.
   We then showed that indirect rule, though it was practised in all British colonies, persisted
very di¤erently across di¤erent colonies. Indeed, in both Ghana and Uganda, the political elites
who captured the state after independence overthrew the institutional structure of indirect rule
rather than reinforcing or reshaping it. We argued that the main reason for this was that these
countries had large powerful centralized pre-colonial states, Asante and Buganda, which had
chiefs that were too powerful to be controlled by post-independence elites. This made indirect
rule infeasible for post-colonial political elites.
   In explaining the variation in the persistence of indirect rule we are not claiming that this
led Ghana and Uganda to move onto radically better development paths. In both cases the
civilian governments, which had abolished indirect rule, were overthrown by the army which
they had strengthened as part of their state building projects. Moreover, in most cases they
substituted the patrimonialism of the traditional institutions with the patrimonialism of the
political parties, as our discussion of the Ghanaian case illustrated. Nevertheless, we also
argued that the persistence of indirect rule in Sierra Leone has had signi…cant consequences,
in particular generating a pathologically weak state and paving the way to a deadly civil war
unseen in either Ghana or Uganda.




                                                  25
References

   Abdullah, Ibrahim (1998) “Bush Path to Destruction: The Origin and Character of the
Revolutionary United Front/Sierra Leone,”Journal of Modern African Studies, 36(2), 203-235.
   Abraham, Arthur (1978) Mende Government and Politics under Colonial Rule, Free-
town: Sierra Leone University Press.
   Abraham Arthur (2003) An Introduction to Pre-Colonial History of the Mende of Sierra
Leone, Edwin Mellen Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,”Journal
of Monetary Economics, 52, 1199-1226.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo García-Jimeno and James A. Robinson (2014) “State
Capacity and Economic Development: A Network Approach” NBER Working Paper, No.
19813.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed and James A. Robinson (2014) “Chiefs: Elite
Control of Civil Society and Economic Development in Sierra Leone,” forthcoming in the
Journal of Political Economy.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2010) “Why is Africa Poor?”Economic
History of Developing Regions, 25, 21-50.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York:
Crown.
   Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Rafael Santos (2013) “The Monopoly
of Violence: Evidence from Colombia,”Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(S1),
5-44.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2010) “Persistence of Civil
Wars,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(2-3), 664-677.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2011) “Emergence and
Persistence of Ine¢ cient States”Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(2), 177-208.
   Africa Con…dential (2009) “A Family Business,” 8th October.
   Austin, Dennis (1964) Politics in Ghana, 1946-1960, London: Oxford University Press.
   Baldwin, Kate (2013) “Why Vote with the Chief? Political Connections and Public
Goods Provision in Zambia,” American Journal of Political Science, 57(4), 794–809.
   Bandyopadhyay, Sanghamitra and Elliott D. Green (2012) “Pre-Colonial Political
Centralization and Contemporary Development in Uganda,”
   http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2106357


                                             26
   Barrows, Walter L. (1976) Grassroots Politics in an African State: Integration and
Development in Sierra Leone, New York: Holmes and Meier.
   Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2011) Pillars of Prosperity, Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press.
   Bratton, Michael and Nicolas van der Walle (1997) Democratic Experiments in
Africa: Regime Transitions in Comparative Perspective, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Brempong, Nana Arhin (2006) “Chieftaincy, An Overview,” in Irene K. Odotei and
Albert K. Awedoba eds. Chieftaincy in Ghana: Culture, Governance and Development, Accra:
Sub-Saharan Publishers.
   Cartwright, John R. (1970) Politics in Sierra Leone, 1947-1967, Toronto: University
of Toronto Press.
   Clapham, Christopher (1976) Liberia and Sierra Leone: An Essay in Comparative
Politics, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Coleman, James (1958) Nigeria: Background to Nationalism, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
   Cooper, Frederick (2002) Africa since 1940: The Past of the Present, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
   Crook, Richard (1986) “Decolonization the colonial state and in chieftaincy in Ghana,”
African A¤ airs, 85(338), 75-107.
   Crowder, Michael and Obaro Ikime eds (1970) West African Chiefs: Their Changing
Status under Colonial Rule and Independence, New York: Africana Publishing Corporation.
   Dunn, John and A.E Robertson (1973) Dependence and opportunity; political change
in Ahafo, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Evans, Peter B. (1995) Embedded Autonomy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Evans, Peter B. and James Rauch (1999) “Bureaucracy and Growth: A Cross-
National Analysis of the E¤ects of ‘Weberian’State Structures on Economic Growth,” Amer-
ican Sociological Review, 64(5), 748-765.
   Evans, Peter B. and James Rauch (2000) “Bureaucratic Structure and Bureaucratic
performance in Less Developed Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 75, 49-62.
   Evans-Pricthard, E.E. and Meyer Fortes eds. (1940) African Political Systems,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
   Fanthorpe, Richard (2001) “Neither Citizen Nor Subject? ‘Lumpen’Agency and the



                                            27
Legacy of Native Administration in Sierra Leone,” African A¤ airs, 100, 363-386.
   Fanthorpe, Richard (2004) “Chieftaincy and the Politics of Post-War Reconstruction
in Sierra Leone,” DFID, Unpublished.
   Fanthorpe, Richard (2005) “On the Limits of the Liberal Peace: Chiefs and Democratic
Decentralization in Post-War Sierra Leone,” African A¤ airs, 105, 1-23.
   Fearon, James and David D. Laitin (2003) ““Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,”
American Political Science Review, 97(1), 75-90.
   Fallers, Lloyd ed. (1964) The King’s Men, London: Oxford University Press.
   Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilya Rainer (2007) “The Modern Impact of Pre-Colonial Cen-
tralization in Africa,” Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3): 185-234.
   Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans-Joachim Voth (2012) “State Capacity and Military
Con‡ict,” hhtp://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=1961619
   Gibson, Edward L. (2005) “Boundary Control: Subnational Authoritarianism in De-
mocratic Countries,” World Politics, 58
   Goldstein, Markus and Christopher Udry (2008) “The Pro…ts of Power: Land
Rights and Agricultural Investment in Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, 981-1022.
   Gould, David J. (1980) “Patrons and Clients: The Role of the Military in Zaire Politics,”
in Isaac Mowoe, ed., The Performance of Soldiers as Governors, Washington: University Press
of America.
   Herbst, Je¤rey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
   Hintze, Otto (1975) The historical essays of Otto Hintze, edited with an introd. by Felix
Gilbert, with the assistance of Robert M. Berdahl, New York: Oxford University Press.
   International Crisis Group (2007) Sierra Leone: The Election Opportunity, Africa
Report N 129, 12 July 2007.
   International Crisis Group (2008) Sierra Leone: A New Era of Reform?, Africa Report
N 143, 12 July 2008.
   Iyer, Lakshmi (2010) “Direct Versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Con-
sequences,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:4, 693-713.
   Jackson, Michael (2004) In Sierra Leone, Durham: Duke University Press.
   Kandeh, Jimmy (1998) “Transition without rupture: Sierra Leone’s transfer election of
1996,” African Studies Review, 41(2), 91–111.
   Keen, David (2005) Con‡ict & collusion in Sierra Leone, New York: Palgrave.



                                             28
   Kilson, Martin (1966) Political Change in a West African State: A Study of the Mod-
ernization Process in Sierra Leone, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
   Lange, Matthew (2004) “British Colonial Legacy and Political Development,” World
Development, 32(6): 905-922.
   Lange, Matthew (2009) Lineages of Despotism and Development: British Colonialism
and State Power, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Little, Kenneth (1965) “The Political Function of the Poro, Part 1,” Africa, 35(4),
349-365.
   Little, Kenneth (1966) “The Political Function of the Poro, Part 2,” Africa, 36(1),
62-72.
   McIntosh, Susan K. (1999) “Pathways to Complexity: An African Perspective,” In
Beyond Chiefdoms: Pathways to Complexity in Africa, Susan K. McIntosh, ed. New York:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–30.
   Mamdani, Mahmood (1996) Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy
of Late Colonialism, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Mamdani, Mahmood (2012) De…ne and Rule: Native as Political Identity, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
   Mann, Michael (1986) The Sources of Social Power, Volume I, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Mann, Michael (1993) The Sources of Social Power, Volume II, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   McGovern, Michael (2013) Unmasking the State: Making Guinea Modern, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
   Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou. (2013) “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Insti-
tutions and Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113-152.
   Migdal, Joel S. (1988) Strong Societies and Weak States, New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
   Mokuwa, Esther, Maarten Voors, Erwin Bulte and Paul Richards (2011) “Peas-
ant Greivance and Insurgency in Sierra Leone: Judicial Serfdom as a Driver of Con‡ict,”
African A¤ airs, 110 (440), 339-366.
   Mutibwa, Phares (1992) Uganda Since Independence: A Story of Unful…lled, Hopes,
London: C. Hurst & Co.
   Mwakikagile, Godfrey (2012) Uganda: A Nation in Transition, Dar es Salaam: New



                                             29
Africa Press.
   O’Donnell, Guillermo A. (1993) “On the State, Democratization and some Conceptual
Problems,” World Development, 21(8), 1355-1369.
   Osafo-Kwaako, Philip and James A. Robinson (2013) “Political Centralization in
Pre-Colonial Africa,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 41(1), 6-21.
   Phillips, Jonathan (2011) “From Caliphate to the Clinic: Traditional Groups and the
Provision
   of Public Goods in Nigeria,”
   http://scholar.harvard.edu/…les/jphillips/…les/from_caliphate_to_the_clinic_080112.pdf
   Rathbone, Richard (2000a) “Kwame Nkrumah and the Chiefs: The Fate of ’Natural
Rulers’ under Nationalist Governments,” Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, Sixth
Series, 10, pp. 45-63.
   Rathbone, Richard (2000b) Nkrumah and the Chiefs: The Politics of Chieftaincy in
Ghana, 1951–1960, Oxford: James Currey.
   Reid, Richard J. (2002) Political Power Pre-Colonial Buganda: Economy Society And
Warfare, Oxford: James Currey.
   Reed, Tristan and James Robinson (2012) “The Chiefdoms of Sierra Leone,”http://scholar.harvard.edu
chiefdoms-sierra-leone
   Reno, William (1995) Corruption and State Politics in Sierra Leone, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
   Richards, Paul (1996) Fighting for the Rainforest: War, Youth and Resources in Sierra
Leone, Oxford: James Currey.
   Richards, Paul, Khadija Bah and James Vincent (2004) “Social Capital and Sur-
vival: Prospects for Community-Driven Development in Post-Con‡ict Sierra Leone,” World
Bank, Social Development Paper No. 12.
   Robinson, James A. and Thierry Verider (2013) “The Political Economy of Clien-
telism,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(2), 260-291
   Scott, James C. (2009) The Art of Not Being Governed, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
   Service, Elman R. (1962) Primitive Social Organization, New York: Random House.
   Silberman, Bernard S. (1993) Cages of Reason: The Rise of the Rational State in
France, Japan, the United States, and Great Britain, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Tangri, Roger (1976) “Con‡ict and Violence in Contemporary Sierra Leone Chiefdoms,”



                                            30
Journal of Modern African Studies, 14:2, 311-321.
   Tilly, Charles (1975) “Re‡ections on the History of European State Making,”in Charles
Tilly ed. The Formation of National States in Western Europe, Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
   Weber, Max (1946) “Politics as a Vocation,” in H.H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills eds.
From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Weber, Max (1978) Economy and Society, Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Wylie, Kenneth (1977) Political Kingdoms of the Temne, London: Holmes & Meier
Publishers.
   Wyrod, Christopher (2008) “Sierra Leone: A Vote for Better Governance,”Journal of
Democracy, 19, 70-83.
   Young, Crawford (1994) The African colonial state in comparative perspective, New
Haven: Yale University Press.




                                            31
