NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN STEM WORKERS AND NATIVE WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT IN
U.S. CITIES
Giovanni Peri
Kevin Shih
Chad Sparber
Working Paper 20093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20093

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We thank Sarah Turner and two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions. We also received useful
comments and suggestions from Nick Bloom, Hilary Hoynes, William Kerr, Enrico Moretti and participants
to seminars in UC Davis, UC Berkeley, Universite' Catholique del Louvain, IZA, and the NBER. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign STEM Workers and Native Wages and Employment in U.S. Cities
Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber
NBER Working Paper No. 20093
May 2014
JEL No. F22,J61,O33,R10
ABSTRACT
Scientists, Technology professionals, Engineers, and Mathematicians (STEM workers) are fundamental
inputs in scientific innovation and technological adoption, the main drivers of productivity growth
in the U.S. In this paper we identify the effect of STEM worker growth on the wages and employment
of college and non-college educated native workers in 219 U.S. cities from 1990 to 2010. In order
to identify a supply-driven and heterogeneous increase in STEM workers across U.S. cities, we use
the distribution of foreign-born STEM workers in 1980 and exploit the introduction and variation of
the H-1B visa program granting entry to foreign-born college educated (mainly STEM) workers. We
find that H-1B-driven increases in STEM workers in a city were associated with significant increases
in wages paid to college educated natives. Wage increases for non-college educated natives are smaller
but still significant. We do not find significant effects on employment. We also find that STEM workers
increased housing rents for college graduates, which eroded part of their wage gains. Together, these
results imply a significant effect of foreign STEM on total factor productivity growth in the average
US city between 1990 and 2010.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
Kevin Shih
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
kyshih@ucdavis.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20093

Chad Sparber
Department of Economics,
Colgate University,
13 Oak Drive,
Hamilton, NY, 13346.
csparber@mail.colgate.edu

1

Introduction

Scientists, Technology professionals, Engineers, and Mathematicians (STEM workers) are
the main inputs in the creation and adoption of scientific and technological innovation. The
important role of STEM innovations in generating economic productivity and growth has
been recognized at least since Robert Solow’s (1957) seminal work. More recent growth
economists, including Zvi Griliches (1992) and Charles I. Jones (1995), have used measures
of Scientists and Engineers to identify the main Research & Development (R&D) contribution
to idea-production. Advances in STEM, therefore, appear to be important determinants of
sustained productivity growth.
Two additional considerations related to ideas and productivity have attracted the attention of economists recently. First, technological innovation during the past 30 years has
not increased the productivity of all workers equally. The development of new technologies —
especially Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) — significantly increased the
productivity and wages of college educated workers. They had a much smaller eﬀect on the
demand for non-college educated workers, which has remained rather stagnant.1
Second, while technological and scientific knowledge is footloose and spreads across regions and countries, STEM workers are less mobile. Tacit knowledge and face to face interactions still make a diﬀerence in the speed at which new ideas are locally adopted. Several
studies (e.g. Moretti (2004a, 2004b), Iranzo and Peri (2009)) have shown the importance
of concentrations of college educated workers in spurring local productivity. Other studies
have shown the tendency of innovation- and idea- intensive industries to agglomerate (Ellison
and Glaeser (1999)) and for ideas to remain local and generate virtuous cycles of innovation
(Jaﬀe et al. (1993), Saxenian (2002)).2
This paper sits at the intersection of these strands of the literature. We quantify the
long-run eﬀect of increases in STEM workers in U.S. cities on the employment and wages
of STEM, college educated, and non-college educated native workers. The challenge of
the exercise is to identify variation in the growth of STEM workers across U.S. cities that
is supply-driven and hence exogenous to other factors aﬀecting wages, employment, and
productivity changes. We do this by exploiting the introduction of the H-1B visa in 1990
and the diﬀerential eﬀect that these visas had in bringing foreign STEM workers to 219
U.S. metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)3 from 1990 to 2010. We then combine a simple
production model with our estimated wage and employment eﬀects to infer the eﬀects of
STEM growth on changes in total factor productivity (TFP) and skill-biased productivity
(SBP) in U.S. cities.
While the variation in STEM workers and foreign STEM workers across U.S. metropolitan
areas is likely endogenous to local productivity and employment growth, our identification
uses inflows of H-1B visa immigrants to capture more exogenous variation in STEM workers
1

See Katz and Murphy (1992), Krueger (1993), Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1998), Acemoglu (1998, 2002),
Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994), Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), and Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2006) among others.
2
Recent books by Edward Glaeser (2011) and Enrico Moretti (2012) identify a city’s ability to innovate
and to continuously reinvent itself as the main engine of its growth.
3
The oﬃcial unit of analysis is the metropolitan statistical area. Throughout the text we use the terms
“city” and “metropolitan area” interchangeably.

2

across cities over time. The H-1B visa, introduced with the Immigration and Nationality
Act of 1990, allowed college educated specialty professional workers (mostly STEM workers)
to enter the country. The policy was national in scope but had diﬀerentiated local eﬀects.
Foreign STEM workers were unevenly distributed across U.S. cities before the inception of
the H-1B visa program. Because of migrant preferences and the availability of information
spread by ethnic networks, subsequent inflows of H-1B workers have been more concentrated
in areas with large pre-existing foreign STEM presence.
Using the 1980 Census we measure foreign STEM workers as a share of employment
in each MSA. This share exhibits very large variation across metropolitan areas. Next,
we predict the number of new foreign STEM workers that would end up in each city by
allocating the H-1B visas to 14 foreign nationality groups in proportion to the city’s 1980
presence of foreign STEM workers of each nationality. This H-1B-driven imputation of future
foreign STEM is a good predictor of the actual increase of both foreign STEM and overall
STEM workers in a city over subsequent decades. We use this prediction as an instrument
for the actual growth of foreign STEM workers in order to obtain causal estimates of the
impact of STEM workers growth on wages and employment of native college and non-college
educated workers. This identification strategy is rooted in methods used by Altonji and
Card (1991) and Card (2001) to identify the wage eﬀect of immigrants. It is also closely
related to Kerr and Lincoln’s (2010) examination of the impact of foreign scientists on U.S.
patent applications.
The 1980 distribution of foreign STEM and the overall inflow of H-1B workers over the
period 1990-2010 may be correlated with unobservable city-specific shocks that aﬀect employment and wage growth. Thus, we subject our instrumental variable strategy to tests
and falsification checks to reduce potential exclusion restriction violations. We check that
the initial (1980) distribution of other types of foreign-born workers (e.g. less educated and
manual workers), the initial industry-structure of the metropolitan area, and the subsequent
inflow of non-STEM immigrants do not predict growth in foreign STEM workers. We also
check that the trends of native outcomes prior to the inception of the H-1B program (19701980) were not correlated with the H-1B-driven growth in STEM workers over the 1990-2010
period. Finally, we use a panel of 219 metropolitan areas over 1990-2010, and always adopt
a very demanding specification that includes both city and period fixed eﬀects. Our identification relies on changes in growth rates of H-1B-driven STEM workers within metropolitan
areas over time.
Our preferred specifications reveal that a rise in the growth of foreign STEM by one
percentage point of total employment increases growth in the wages of native college educated
workers by a statistically significant 7-8 percentage points. The same change had a smaller
but usually statistically significant eﬀect on the wages of native non-college educated workers
equal to 3-4 percentage points. No statistically significant eﬀects were found for the growth of
native employment. We also find that an increase in foreign STEM growth had a significantly
positive impact on growth in housing costs for college educated workers. The increased cost
in non-tradable services (housing) absorbed about half of the increase in the purchasing
power of college educated wages.
Finally, we use a simple model of city-level production and the estimated wage and
employment eﬀects to calculate the eﬀect of STEM on total factor productivity (TFP) and
skill-biased productivity (SBP). We find that STEM workers have positive eﬀects on both
3

TFP and SBP. Aggregating at the national level, inflows of foreign STEM workers may
explain between 30 and 50% of the aggregate productivity growth and 4 to 8% of the skillbias growth that took place in the U.S. between 1990 and 2010.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly presents the empirical
specification that we estimate. Section 3 describes the data on STEM workers and H-1B
visas, and how we construct the H-1B-driven growth of foreign STEM-workers. In section 4
we test and discuss the power and validity of the constructed H-1B-driven growth variable
as an instrument. Section 5 presents the basic empirical estimates of the eﬀect of an increase
in STEM workers on wages and employment of native U.S. workers, and also checks the
robustness of the estimates, and examines the impact on house rents. In Section 6 we
introduce a simple model and combine it with our estimated parameters to calculate the
impact of STEM on TFP and SBP across U.S. metropolitan areas. Section 7 concludes.

2

Empirical Framework

Our empirical analysis uses variation in foreign-born STEM workers across U.S. cities ()
and time-periods () to estimate their impact on wages, employment, and house rents for
native workers. We discuss identification and its challenges in Section 4, and we describe
how we use the estimated coeﬃcients to back-out productivity eﬀects in Section 6. The basic
specifications we estimate in Section (5) take the form,
 


∆  
=  +  + 
+ 3 
 + 


(1)


The variable 
is the period-change in outcome  for the sub-group of natives
with skill  (where  includes STEM workers, college educated workers, and non-college
educated workers), standardized by the initial year outcome level. The outcomes of interest
are average weekly wages, employment, and housing rents (measured as average rent per
room) for each group. The term  captures period fixed eﬀects, while  captures city fixed
 
∆ 
is the change of foreign STEM over a period, standardized
eﬀects. The variable

by the initial total employment in the city ( ). The term 
 includes other cityspecific controls, and  is a zero-mean idiosyncratic random error. Given this design, we
emphasize that identification relies on variation in the growth of foreign STEM workers
within cities over time-periods.
We focus our analysis on the period 1990-2010 and choose to partition these two decades
into three specific time-periods: 1990-2000, 2000-2005, and 2005-2010. This enables us to
take advantage of large variation in national H-1B policy that occurred during the 2000-2005
period relative to the other two. Additionally, as a robustness check, one can abstract from
the Great Recession period by removing 2005-2010 from the analysis.4
The coeﬃcient  , captures the elasticity of outcome for worker group  to an exogenous increase in STEM workers. Interpreting these coeﬃcient estimates as causal requires
changes in    that are exogenous to productivity shocks and other unobservable
4

Though not reported, estimates are robust to removing the Great Recession period. Similarly, they
remain robust when constructing variables over 1990-2000, and 2000-2010. These are available upon request.

4

determinants of city-level wage and employment changes. Before turning attention to this
challenge, we introduce our data and measures of STEM workers (section 3) and describe
the construction of the H-1B-driven Foreign STEM variable and its power as an instrument
(section 4).

3

Data: STEM Workers in U.S. Cities

We develop two separate methods of defining STEM occupations. Each method also uses
both a more inclusive and a more stringent STEM identification criterion, resulting in four
possible STEM definitions. The first method is based on skills that workers use in their
occupations. We use the O*NET database (Bureau of Labor Statistics), which associates to
each occupation the importance of several dozen skills required to perform the job. We select four O*NET skills that involve STEM use — namely, “Mathematics in Problem Solving,”
“Science in Problem Solving,” “Technology Design,” and “Programming.” We then compute
the average score of each occupation across the four skills and rank the 331 occupations5
consistently identified in the Census 1980-2010 according to the average STEM skill value
defined above. We classify STEM occupations as those employing the top 4% (strict definition) or 8% (broad definition) of workers in that ranking in the year 2010. O*NET 4% (or
8%) STEM workers are the individuals with these occupations.
Our second method for identifying STEM occupations is based on the skills workers
possess before employment — namely, the college majors found among workers within occupations. The U.S. State Department recognizes a list of college majors as STEM for the
purpose of granting foreign students extended time to work under the Optional Practical
Training (OPT) program.6 We rank occupations based on the percentage, in the 2010 ACS,
of individuals with a college degree in a STEM major. We then classify STEM occupations
as those employing the top 4% (strict) or 8% (broad) of workers following that ranking in
the year 2010. Major-based 4% (or 8%) STEM workers are the individuals within those
occupations. Both the O*NET and Major-based strict definitions include mainly Census
occupations with “scientist” or “engineer” in the title. The Major-based STEM occupations
largely coincide with the O*NET STEM occupations.7

3.1

Policy changes to the H-1B Visa Program

The main goal of this paper is to identify the eﬀect of STEM workers on the wages and
employment of college educated and non-college educated workers across U.S. cities in the
long-run. The ideal experiment would consist of randomly adding diﬀerent numbers of STEM
workers across U.S. cities and then observing the evolution of native wages and employment.
As we cannot run such an experiment, we use shifts in national H-1B visa policy, introduced
5

We make small refinements to the Census Occupational Classification in order to ensure complete timeconsistency in the availability of occupations over the 1980-2010 period. A detailed description of both of
our STEM definitions, as well as the refinement of occupations is available in the Online Appendix.
6
There is no direct cross-walk between majors/fields listed under the OPT STEM classification and
majors/fields as classified under the 2010 ACS. Thus our list is consistent with, but not exactly identical to,
the OPT STEM degree fields.
7
See the Online Appendix for the full STEM occupation lists and further details.

5

in 1990, as an exogenous source of variation in the inflow of foreign STEM workers across
U.S. cities.
The H-1B visa, introduced in 1990, provides temporary permits8 for college educated
foreign “specialty” workers. Since 1990 the H-1B visa has been a crucial channel of admission
for many college educated foreign-born workers, largely employed in STEM occupations.9
Our analysis exploits large policy-induced fluctuations in the size of the H-1B program over
the 1990-2010 period.
Figure 1 shows the maximum number of H-1B visas authorized per year (cap) and the
actual number of H-1B visas issued for each year between 1990 and 2010. Set initially at
65,000 H-1B visas annually, the cap rose to 115,000 for fiscal years 1999 and 2000, and then
to 195,000 per year for 2001, 2002, and 2003. It reverted back to the original 65,000 per year
beginning in 2004. Though the limit oﬃcially remains at 65,000, the first 20,000 H-1B visas
issued annually to individuals who have obtained a master’s (or higher education) degree in
the U.S. became exempt from H-1B limits beginning in 2005, eﬀectively raising the cap to
85,000.10
Not only has the size of the H-1B program varied greatly since its inception, but the ensuing inflow of foreign STEM workers has been heterogeneously distributed across U.S. cities as
well. Certainly part of these cross-city diﬀerences were due to varying economic conditions,
industrial structures and labor demand that likely influenced native wage and employment
growth. Importantly, however, a portion of this variation was also due to persistent immigrant preferences to locate in cities with historical communities of past immigration. The
1980 distribution of STEM workers by nationality proxies for these persistent historical settlements.
Our analysis needs to capture only the heterogeneity in foreign STEM created by this
diﬀerential initial presence (in 1980) of foreign enclaves by nationality, that are exogenous
to other determinants of future wage and employment growth of natives in cities. To do this
we construct an H-1B driven instrument which retains only the portion of growth in foreign
STEM that was due to national policy fluctuations and removes city-specific factors that
may have attracted both foreign STEM and native workers alike. Additionally, we use fixed
eﬀects to control for city-specific pre-determined characteristics, such as the industrial and
economic structure. We also construct variables that control for future city-shocks. In the
following two sections we define the variables in detail, show the importance of H-1B visa
entries in determining the net growth of foreign STEM workers, and test the validity of the
identifying assumptions, crucial for our approach.
8

H-1B have a the duration of three years, renewable up to 6, and they give the possibility of applying for
permanent residence.
9
Lowell (2000) notes that 70% of H-1B visas have been awarded to people employed as Computer Analysts,
Programmers, Electrical Engineers, University Professors, Accountants, Other Engineers, and Architects.
Similarly, Citizenship and Immigration Services (2009) reports that for all years between 2004 and 2011,
more than 85% of new H-1B visa holders work in Computer, Health Science, Accounting, Architecture,
Engineering, and Mathematics related occupations.
10
For more discussion of the H-1B visa and its economic eﬀects, see Kerr and Lincoln (2010) and Kato
and Sparber (2013).

6

3.2

The H-1B-Driven Increase in STEM

Our data on occupations, employment, wages, age, and education of individuals comes from
the IPUMS 5% Census files for 1980, 1990, and 2000, the 1% American Community Survey
(ACS) sample for 2005, and the 2008-2010 3% merged ACS sample for 2010.11 We only use
data on 219 metropolitan areas that can be consistently identified over the period 1980-2010.
These span the range of U.S. metropolitan sizes, including all the largest cities in the U.S.
(Los Angeles, New York, Chicago, Dallas-Forth Worth, Philadelphia and Houston are the six
largest) down to MSAs with close to 200,000 people (Danville, VA, Decatur, IL, Sharon, PA,
Waterbury, CT, Muncie, IN and Alexandria, PA are the six smallest). Data on aggregate
H-1B flows by nationality and year is publicly available from the Department of State (2011).
We construct a variable which we call the “H-1B-driven increase in STEM workers” in
each of 219 U.S. metropolitan areas between 1990 and 2010. This variable captures supplydriven variation in the growth of foreign STEM workers, and we use it as an instrumental
variable to estimate variants of equation (1). To create this instrument, we first impute the
number of foreign STEM workers in city  and year   \
  :
Ã
!
 
\
X



 
(2)
 \
  =
 1980
 


1980
=114
 
The term  1980
is the number of foreign STEM workers of nationality  (out of

14 foreign groups12 ) in city  and year 1980, while

\
 
 

 
 1980

is the growth factor of all

foreign STEM workers for each nationality  in the U.S. between 1980 and year .13 This is
calculated by adding the ¡inflow of STEM
¢ workers from each nationality between 1980 and
 
 to its initial 1980 level  1980
. For the decades 1990-2000 and 2000-2010 we use
 
 as the net increase in
the cumulative H-1B visas allocated to nationality  # 11990−
  14
 
 For the decade 1980-1990 we simply add the net increase in STEM workers
 
from nationality  as recorded in the U.S. Census, ∆ 1980−1990
. The imputed growth
factor for STEM workers, for each foreign nationality in year  = 1990 2000 2005 2010, is
therefore:
11

All of these data were retrieved from Ruggles et al (2010).
The national groups are: Canada, Mexico, Rest of Americas (excluding the USA), Western Europe,
Eastern Europe, China, Japan, Korea, Philippines, India, Rest of Asia, Africa, Oceania, and Other.
13
We choose 1980 as the base year in the imputation of foreign STEM for three reasons. First, it is the
earliest Census that allows the identification of 219 metropolitan areas. Second, it occurs well before the
creation of the H-1B visa and hence does not reflect the distribution of foreign STEM workers aﬀected by
the policy. Third, it pre-dates most of the ICT revolution so that the distribution of STEM workers was
hardly aﬀected by the geographic location of the computer and software industries.
14
Data on visas issued by nationality begin in 1997, and while we know the total number of H-1B visas
issued in each year from 1990, we must estimate # 11990− , the total number of visas issued by
nationality between 1990 and 1997, as:
µ
¶
[ 1990− = # 11990− # 11997−2010
# 1
# 11997−2010
12

# 1

where # 11997−2010
is the share of visas issued to nationality group  among the total visas issued from
1997−2010
1997 to 2010. For  larger than 1997 we have the actual number of yearly visa by nationality # 1 

7

 
 
 
 
\
+ ∆ 1980−1990
+ #11990−
 1980
 

=
 
 
 1980
 1980

(3)

The H-1B-driven change in foreign STEM workers that we use as our instrument is
the change in  \
  over the time-periods standardized by the initial imputed city
c , in which natives were also imputed using the 1980 city population and
employment, 
aggregate population growth.15
Our identification strategy is closely related to the one used by Altonji and Card (1991)
and Card (2001), who exploit the initial distribution of foreign workers across U.S. cities. Our
approach diﬀers from theirs in that our strategy is based on the initial distribution of foreign
STEM workers across cities rather than all immigrants. In this regard, our methodology is
more similar to Kerr and Lincoln’s (2010) examination of foreign scientists and engineers
and the impact of H-1B flows on innovation. Our approach diﬀers from theirs by using the
foreign STEM presence in a city in 1980 (rather than in 1990), and by further distinguishing
immigrant presence by nationality (rather than the aggregate foreign STEM presence). We
also use a more demanding panel approach that measures variables in growth rates (first
diﬀerences) while including both city and time-period eﬀects.
Our modeling choices aim to reduce the risk of correlation between the instrument and
unobserved determinants of wage and employment growth. To further bolster its validity,
we subject our instruments to a series of robustness checks. The possibility that the initial
(1980) distribution of foreign STEM is correlated with other shocks may introduce omitted
variable bias. The risk that aggregate inflows of H-1B workers may have been driven by a few
specific cities raises endogeneity concerns. The presence of measurement error, more likely in
cities with small populations, could result in attenuation bias for our estimates. We discuss
and address each of these concerns in Section 4. In the next section we describe summary
statistics that illustrate the significant foreign-born presence among STEM workers in the
U.S. and the numbers of the H-1B program.

3.3

Summary Statistics for Foreign STEM in U.S. Cities

A cursory look at the data shows that foreign-born individuals are particularly over-represented
among STEM occupations and that they have contributed substantially to the aggregate
growth of STEM jobs in the U.S.16 Table 1 shows the foreign-born share of five diﬀerent
employment groups for years 1980, 1990, 2000, 2005, and 2010. From left to right we show
the percentage of foreign-born in total employment (column (1)), among college educated
workers (column (2)), among college educated workers in MSAs (column (3)), among STEM
15

To avoid endogenous changes in total employment at the city level we also impute city employment by
augmenting employment by nativity and skill level in 1980 by the corresponding growth factor in national


 = 
total employment. Hence, d

1980 ∗ ( 1980 ), where  = native college educated workers, native
non-college educated workers, foreign college educated workers, and foreign non-college educated workers.
−1
P c
∆ 
and the instrument is
.
Thus, d
 =  



16

In the summary statistics and in the empirical analysis we mainly use the O*NET 4% STEM definition,
unless we note otherwise.

8

occupations in MSAs (column (4)), and among college educated STEM workers in MSAs (column (5)). While foreign-born individuals represented about 16% of total U.S. employment
in 2010, they counted for almost 30% of college educated STEM workers in the metropolitan
sample that we analyze. Also, this percentage has more than doubled since 1980.
Table 2 shows that college educated STEM workers have increased from 2.1% of total
employment in 1980 to 3.7% in 2010. The share of college educated foreign STEM workers
has grown from 0.3% to 1.1%. Of the 0.81 points increase in college educated STEM as a
percentage of employment, between 1990 and 2010, 0.65 percentage points (four fifths of the
total) was due to foreigners.
Table 3 shows absolute numbers (in thousands) suggesting that the H-1B program was
large enough to drive all or most of the increase in foreign STEM workers. Column (1) reports
the net total increase in college educated STEM workers in the U.S. over three decades, and
column (2) displays the increase in college educated foreign STEM workers. While before
1990 only one fifth of the net increase in STEM workers was driven by foreigners, in the 1990s
and 2000s between half and 90% of the net STEM growth came from foreigners. Column
(3) of Table 3 shows the cumulative number of H-1B visas issued during the corresponding
decade.
It is clear that in the 1990s H-1B visas were enough to cover the whole growth in college
educated foreign STEM workers in the U.S., even accounting for some returnees. Even more
remarkably, H-1B issuances were three to four times as large as the net increase in college
educated STEM between 2000-2005 and 2005-2010. This implies that many foreign STEM
workers, including H-1B recipients, must have left the U.S.17 Overall, the figures presented
emphasize the importance of foreigners for STEM jobs in the U.S. The overall size of the
H-1B program was large enough to contribute substantially to the foreign STEM job growth
between 1990 and 2010.

4

Identification: Power and Validity of the Instruments

Our identification strategy relies on the H-1B supply-driven instrument whose validity is
based on the assumption that the employment share of foreign STEM workers in 1980 varied
across cities due to factors related to the persistent agglomeration of foreign communities
in some localities. These historical diﬀerences — after controlling for an array of other city
characteristics and other shocks — aﬀected the change in the supply of foreign STEM workers
but were not correlated with omitted shocks that aﬀected the growth of native wages and
employment in those cities.
We provide empirical tests of our instrument’s validity in this section to address several
challenges to our identification strategy raised by the presence of unobservable shocks potentially correlated with our instrument that aﬀect native outcomes. The framework to discuss
these issues is the first stage regression of the explanatory variable of our analysis on our
instrument:
17

Depew, Norlander, and Sorensen (2013) provide a detailed analysis of quit and return rates for temporary
skilled employees of six large Indian ICT firms. Twenty-nine percent of their sample returned to India during
the course of the survey period (2003-2011).

9

∆ −1
∆  
=  +  + 
+ 
c



(4)

The coeﬃcient  measures the impact of H-1B-driven STEM inflows (our instrument)
on the U.S. Census-measured increase in foreign STEM workers (the explanatory variable in
regression equation (1)). This coeﬃcient and its power are the main objects of interest in
the first stage regressions. The term  captures period fixed eﬀects, and  represents 219
MSA fixed eﬀects. We include the years  = 1990, 2000, 2005, and 2010 so that the changes
refer to the periods 1990-2000, 2000-2005, and 2005-2010.  is a zero-mean random error
uncorrelated with the explanatory variable.
We tackle several threats to the identification assumptions and begin by showing that
the presence of foreign STEM workers in metropolitan areas as of 1980 did not always mirror
the presence of native STEM workers. Table 4 shows the estimated coeﬃcient () and the
partial F-statistic from the first stage regressions (equation 4). The coeﬃcients reported in
the first and the second row are the  and the F-statistics of the instrument when using the
O*NET 4% definition of STEM for both the endogenous variable and the instrument. Those
in the third and fourth row are the corresponding statistics when using the Major-based 4%
definition of STEM. The diﬀerent columns represent diﬀerent specifications.
Column (1) includes period eﬀects, state eﬀects, and the 1980 employment share of
native STEM. Under this specification the imputed H-1B-driven growth of STEM has a
highly significant impact on foreign STEM growth. This implies that even controlling for
the initial native STEM share the foreign STEM share (used to construct the H-1B imputed
STEM growth) has significant explanatory power.18

4.1

Basic Specifications and Checks

In column (2) of Table 4 we introduce MSA fixed eﬀects to control for all other initial cityspecific conditions, so that our identification relies only on deviations in MSA growth rates
from MSA specific trends. We include these in all subsequent specifications. The top two
rows of column (2) show the results obtained using the O*NET 4% definition of STEM for
the endogenous variable and for the instrument. The following two rows use the Majorbased 4% definition for the endogenous variable and for the instrument. Column (3) uses
the broader 8% definition of STEM both for the endogenous variable and for the instrument,
with the O*NET definition used in the top two rows and the Major-based definition used in
the bottom two rows. The power of the instrument in these specifications is stronger (and
close to or above 10) than in column (1), emphasizing that our H-1B-based instrument is
good at capturing changes in the inflow of STEM workers within cities over time. Moreover,
18

One reason for the power of foreign STEM after controlling for native STEM is that cities with large
native STEM shares in 1980 were associated with traditional sectors that attracted Scientists and Engineers
in the 1970s but did not predict the presence of information technology and computer sector that dominated
R&D in the 1990s and 2000s. For instance Richland-Kennewick-Pasco, WA was the site of an important
nuclear and military production facility in the 1970s; Melbourne-Titusville-Cocoa-Palm Bay, FL had an
important aerospace center; Rochester, NY had a very developed oﬃce machine industry (Xerox, Kodak).
They were all top native STEM but not high foreign STEM cities.

10

while some small diﬀerences exist we find that the two definitions of STEM produce similar
results.
Columns (4) and (5) of Table 4 address two important concerns. The first is that the
correlation between the instrument and the actual change in foreign STEM could be driven
by the large high-tech boom in a few large MSAs, rather than by the exogenous initial distribution of immigrants. If large metropolitan areas drove most of the country’s R&D and
produced a large increase in demand for foreign H-1B visas and STEM workers, the instrument and the endogenous variable for those large R&D intensive cities could be spuriously
correlated.
Alternatively, the presence of a few particular industries (e.g., ICT sector) might have
attracted particular types of immigrants whose growth simply proxies for the success of
those industries. The current population of foreign STEM workers from India is strongly
associated with information technology as most of them are employed in computer, software,
and electrical engineering occupations. Moreover, Indians have always accounted for at least
40% of H-1B visas.
Column (4) excludes the five metro areas with the largest number of STEM workers in
1980.19 Column (5) excludes Indian STEM workers from the calculations of both the actual
change and the instrument. The coeﬃcients are still highly significant (although somewhat
reduced in column (4) for O*NET STEM), emphasizing that the correlation between H-1Bdriven STEM growth and a city’s actual foreign STEM growth is not driven by top STEM
cities or by a specific nationality group.
An alternative way to check that the predictive power of our instrument is not driven by
individual nationality groups, whose specific location preferences may be aﬀected by some
industries, is to remove the nationality dimension from the instrument. We construct an
instrument similar to the one used by Kerr and Lincoln (2010), by aggregating H-1B visas
across nationalities and only exploiting variation in the aggregate number of visas over time,
interacted with the initial overall presence of foreign STEM workers. We interact aggregate
H-1B visa growth with the 1980 foreign STEM share distribution across cities. First stage
results using this instrument are shown in column (6). The estimates remain similar and
F-statistics confirm that the instrument maintains its power.
In column (7) we account for another potential weakness of our instrument. The use of 1
to 5% population samples may introduce measurement error in our variables. Aydemir and
Borjas (2011) show how measurement error may produce attenuation bias when estimating
the causal eﬀect of immigrants on native outcomes. Because of small sample size, it is likely
that these cities may actually have small foreign STEM communities that are not captured
in Census sampling. In order to see how this measurement error may aﬀect the power of
our instrument column (7) shows the first stage estimates when eliminating all metropolitan
areas with fewer than 400,000 people. This cut-oﬀ eliminates all cities from our sample that
have a measured zero foreign STEM (or imputed foreign STEM) employment share.
Although we only retain 118 of the 219 cities, the coeﬃcient estimates remain significant
and stable, while the instrument is still reasonably powerful—F-statistics are around 9 for the
Major-based STEM definition and well above 10 for the O*NET STEM definition. While we
19

These are New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Jose, San Francisco. Together they account for 24% of
STEM workers in our sample.

11

will discuss the potential impact of measurement error on attenuation bias when presenting
the second stage estimates (In Table 6), it is reassuring to notice that the exclusion of
the cities where measurement error may be larger does not aﬀect much the power of the
instrument and the first-stage estimate of the coeﬃcient.

4.2

Confounding Shocks

Two types of shocks at the MSA level might be correlated with the inflow of STEM workers
(and possibly with the instrument) and aﬀect native wages and employment, thereby creating
omitted variable bias. The first is a change in the skill distribution of workers related to
the inflow of other (non-STEM) immigrants.20 The second is an industry-driven change in
productivity that would aﬀect native employment and wages. Including those shocks directly
as controls would introduce endogeneity in regression (1). Instead, we include their predicted
values, formed by interacting the 1980 immigrant and industry distribution with national
immigrant and industry shocks, respectively.
As STEM immigrants usually possess a college degree, we introduce a control for the
\  ) based on the distribuimputed number of non-college educated immigrants ( 

tion
of
non-college
educated
immigrants,
by
nationality,
in
1980
across metropolitan areas
¡
¢
 

´ the subsequent aggregate growth of that immigrant population in the
³ 1980 and
U.S.

 
 
1980

. Using notation similar to (2), we first calculate:
\  =



X

 
1980

=114

µ

 
 
1980

¶

(5)

We then construct our control for non-college educated immigrant growth, by taking the
\ 
\  over time, relative to total initial imputed employment, hence, ∆

.
change in 






In column (8) of Table 4 we add the imputed growth of non-college educated immigrants
to the basic first stage regression (column (2)). Cities with large communities of less educated
immigrants may also have large communities of highly educated immigrants, although usually
from diﬀerent nationalities. Controlling for these flows will also be important to account for
complementarity between college and non-college educated workers and their possible eﬀect
on wages in the second stage regressions. The results from column (8) show that the imputed
H-1B driven instrument maintains its power when controlling for the imputed number of
non-college educated immigrants.
To control for the second type of shock — those driven by a city’s industrial structure
— we construct four variables that predict the growth of wages and employment of college
and non-college educated workers in a city based upon its 1980 industrial composition. We
use a three-digit industry classification from the census, which, after small refinements for
time-consistency, provides a very detailed break-down of the productive structure of cities
into the 212 industries/sectors that comprise them.21
20

A change in the skill distribution of natives can also confound the estimates, although it is likely less
correlated with 1980 the presence of immigrants. In Table 6, row (i) we include a control for the imputed
change in native college educated based on their distribution in 1980 and their national growth.
21
To give an idea of the detail of the classification sectors as “Computers and related equipment,” “Hotel

12

Let 1980 denote the share of total city () employment in each sector ( = 1 2212)
in 1980. Then let ∆  be the percentage change over the decade of the national
average of native weekly wages in constant 2010 dollars for group  (=College, No-College)

in sector . Similarly, let ∆ 
   be the national growth of native employment of workers of type  in sector , expressed as percentage of total initial employment
in the sector. We define sector-driven wage growth and sector-driven employment growth
(respectively) for group , in city , and over time-periods beginning in year  with the
following expressions:
Ã
!
¶−
µ
X
∆
∆
1980 
for  =  
(6)
=
 


=1212
Ã
!
µ
¶

 −
X
∆
∆ 
1980
for  =  
(7)
=
  
 
=1212

These two variables measure the average wage and employment growth at the sector
level weighted by the share of employment in each sector in the city in 1980. They proxy
for the sector-driven changes in demand (wage and employment) in city  based on a very
detailed level breakdown of its 1980 industrial composition. These imputed variables are
also commonly known as Bartik instruments (from Bartik (1991)).
Column (9) augments the specification shown in column (8) by also adding the employment and the wage Bartik instruments for college educated. The results show that including
the Bartik instruments still leaves the H-1B imputed STEM growth instrument with significant, albeit somewhat reduced, explanatory power, especially when using the O*NET
definition.

4.3

Falsification and Extensions

Our instrument is predicated on two assumptions. First, the H-1B visa policy significantly
and exogenously (from the perspective of each metropolitan area) aﬀected the inflow of
foreign STEM workers in the U.S. over the period 1990-2010. Second, the initial distribution
of foreign STEM was crucial in determining the subsequent inflow of H-1B immigrants and
was not correlated with other city-level shocks that aﬀected native wages and employment.
Columns (1)-(4) of Table 5 present some tests of these assumptions.
The aggregate inflow of H-1B workers in the U.S. could simply be a proxy for strong aggregate labor demand growth. This strong demand growth, possibly originating in particular
cities or attracting particular nationality of immigrants, may produce a positive correlation
between the instrument and the explanatory variable, in spite of the presence of city and
period eﬀects. If this was the case, then one could substitute the non-H1-B immigrant flow
(or the non-college educated immigrant flow) for the H-1B flow when constructing the instrumental variable and still produce a significant positive first stage correlation. Columns (1)
and (2) show that this is not the case by testing the power of such a "falsified" instrument.
and Motels,” and “Legal Services” are considered individual sectors. See the online appendix for details on
the refinements for time-consistent industries.

13

No significant relation is generated between the instrument and the explanatory variable
(growth of foreign O*NET 4% STEM workers) when we impute the foreign STEM growth
by interacting the 1980 distribution of foreign STEM with subsequent non-college immigrant
flows (column (1)) or when we augment them with aggregate immigrant flows net of H-1B
flows (column (2)), instead of H-1B flows. Hence the aggregate variation of H-1B visas over
time is crucial to predict subsequent STEM variation across cities. This is reassuring as
aggregate H-1B flows have been driven by policy changes more than by aggregate immigrant
inflows.
Column (3) similarly shows that if we substitute the initial presence of foreign workers in
manual-intensive jobs (rather than in STEM) across metropolitan areas in the construction
of the instrument we do not obtain a significant correlation with the actual STEM growth.
Less skilled immigration, therefore, while possibly correlated with STEM immigration, did
not drive the explanatory power of the instrument.22
Column (4) of Table 5 considers a direct test of the exclusion restriction for the instruments. We show the correlation between the instrument — calculated for the 1990-2000
decade — and the pre-existing growth in native college wages in the period 1970-1980 (and
below its F-statistics as check of the coeﬃcient significance). The top two rows show such
a test when using the O*NET 4% definition of STEM to build the instrument. The two
following rows show the coeﬃcient and F-statistic when using the Major-based 4% definition
of STEM. This is a direct test that the instrument is uncorrelated with pre-existing trends
in the native outcomes. Of all the outcomes we consider, native college wages are the most
significantly aﬀected by increased STEM during the 1990s and 2000s (as we will see in Section 5). It is reassuring, therefore, to see that there is no correlation at all between the H-1B
imputed STEM growth after 1980 and the pre-1980 native wage growth.23
As a final check in this section, we want to show that H-1B policy has aﬀected the total
number of STEM workers in the U.S. by attracting more foreign-born workers. That is,
metropolitan areas with large foreign STEM inflows have not experienced a substitution of
foreign STEM for native STEM, but rather an increase in the overall STEM labor force due
to immigration. If this is true, we can consider the H-1B policy as an exogenous shock to
assess the impact of STEM workers on native wages, employment, and productivity.
We examine this claim in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5 by regressing total (native
plus foreign) STEM worker growth on the H-1B-predicted inflow of foreign STEM (the
instrument). The estimated coeﬃcient is even larger than in the basic specification, implying,
as we will see below, a positive response of native STEM to foreign inflows. In column (5) we
use the stricter 4% STEM definition (based on O*NET in the top rows and on College Major
in the two lower rows) for both the endogenous and instrumental variable. In column (6) we
use the broader 8% definition of STEM for both endogenous and instrumental variable. The
power of the instrument is relatively strong in most cases (except when using the O*NET
8% definition of STEM24 ).
Overall the specifications and falsifications shown in this section demonstrate that our
22

The details of the construction of these "falsified" instruments are in the Online Appendix.
We also checked the correlation with non-college wages before 1980 and we similarly found no significant
coeﬃcient.
24
For this reason we will in general prefer and use the O*NET 4% definition in the regressions of the next
section.
23

14

H-1B imputed instrument has significant power in predicting foreign STEM and total STEM
growth, that its variation is not driven by top cities or by one ethnic group, and that its
power survives the inclusion of city eﬀects, industry controls, and low-skilled immigrants
controls. The instrument’s predictive power is crucially driven by the H-1B program and by
initial distribution of STEM immigrants across cities.

5

The Eﬀect of STEM on Native Outcomes

5.1

Basic Results

The empirical specifications estimated in this section follow the regression described in equation (1) and seek to identify the impact of STEM workers on the wages and employment
of diﬀerent groups of native workers, so as to keep the experiment
¡  ¢ cleaner since the change
in STEM supply is driven by immigrants. The outcomes 
are always measured for
native workers, by group  (STEM, college educated, or non-college educated) in city .
The dependent variables measures either growth in outcomes — average weekly wages or employment — for the appropriate native group . The explanatory variable in each regression
 
∆ 

is the change in foreign STEM relative to the initial level of total employment,

All 2SLS regressions use the H-1B driven change in foreign STEM relative to initial im−1
∆ 
, as an instrument for the actual change (the endogenous
puted employment,



explanatory variable).
Tables 6 reports the  coeﬃcients of interest, as defined in equation (1). Each of the
six columns reports a diﬀerent  estimate corresponding to the use of diﬀering outcome
variables. The basic specification includes time-period eﬀects, 219 MSA fixed-eﬀects, and
the Bartik instruments for the relevant wage (6) and employment (7) changes. We always
cluster standard errors at the MSA level.
In column (1) the dependent
is the percentage change of the weekly wage paid
´
³ variable
∆
to native STEM workers  . In column (2) the dependent variable is the percentage

³ ∆ ´

change of the weekly wage of native college educated workers 
, and in column


(3)
is the´ percentage change of the weekly wage of native non-college educated workers
³ ∆it

.25 We define college educated workers as those individuals who completed four

 

years of college, while non-college educated are those who did not. Columns (4), (5), and (6)
show the eﬀect of STEM on the employment change of native STEM workers, native college
educated workers, and native non-college educated workers, as a percentage of initial total
 ∆ 



employment (respectively ∆
   and ∆
)


The diﬀerent rows of Table 6 represent diﬀerent specifications to test the robustness of
the estimates, mirroring in large part those performed on the first stage of Table 4. Row
25
Weekly wages are defined as yearly wage income divided by the number of weeks worked. Employment
includes all individual between 18 and 65 years old who have worked at least one week during the previous
year and do not live in group-quarters. Individual weekly wages are weighted by Census person weights. We
convert all wages to current 2010 prices using the BLS Inflation Calculator. See the appendix for full details
on the sample selection process.

15

(a), the baseline specification, shows the results when the O*NET 4% definition of STEM
workers is used both for the explanatory variable and the instrument. In row (b) we instead
use the Major-based 4% definition of STEM workers and in row (c) we use the broader
O*NET 8% definition. Row (d) omits the top five metropolitan areas in terms of STEM
employment, from specifications otherwise identical to those in row (a). Row (e) adds to the
baseline specification the growth of imputed non-college educated immigrants, as defined
in (5), as a control. Row (f) excludes MSAs with populations below 400,000. Row (g)
excludes Indian STEM workers from the explanatory variable and instrument. Row (h)
uses the instrument constructed using aggregate H-1B flows and the initial foreign STEM
distribution, thus removing the nationality dimension. In row (i) we control for growth in
native college educated employment by including a shift-share instrument for the growth of
native college educated, constructed by interacting the number of native college educated
in each city in 1980 with the national growth of native college educated in the population.
Finally, row (j) shows the OLS estimates of the basic specification.
We first comment on the main results, which are relatively consistent across specifications,
and then discuss some interesting features revealed by the robustness checks. First, there
is a positive, large, and significant eﬀect of foreign STEM workers on wages paid to college
educated native workers. The estimated eﬀect is significantly diﬀerent from zero at the
5% significance level in all specifications, and is significant at the 1% level in most. The
point estimates from the 2SLS specifications are mostly between 5.6 and 9.3 with some
larger values. This implies an increase in college educated wage growth between 5.6 and 9.3
percentage points in response to an increase in foreign STEM growth by 1 percentage point
of initial employment.26
Second, the estimates of the eﬀects on native STEM wages are comparable to, but less
precisely estimated than, the eﬀects on native college educated workers. While we can never
rule out the hypothesis that the estimated eﬀect on native STEM wages is equal to the
point-estimate of the eﬀects on college educated wages27 , the first eﬀect is only occasionally
diﬀerent from zero at the 5% significance level. As there are fewer STEM natives (about 4%
of employment in our sample) than college educated natives (about 25% of employment),
measurement error in the average wage of the first group makes the precision of the estimates
much smaller.
The third consistent result of Table 6 is that H-1B STEM workers had a positive and
usually significant eﬀect on wages paid to non-college educated native workers. The eﬀects,
however, are smaller than those for college educated natives. The point estimates are mostly
between 2.4 and 4.3 and less significant than those for college educated native wages. This
result implies that the productivity eﬀect of STEM workers is positive, but skill-biased:
foreign STEM workers are closer substitutes for college educated natives than for non-college
educated natives, yet they generate a larger increase in the wages paid to college educated
natives than to non-college educated ones.
26

Let us emphasize that 1 percentage point of employment is a very large increase for STEM workers,
comparable to the increase over the whole period 1990-2010 as shown in Table 2.
27
For instance, a formal test that the estimated coeﬃcient on STEM wages in row (a) is equal to 8.03
(the point estimate for the eﬀect on college educated) has a p-value of 0.76. At no level of confidence can
we reject the hypothesis that they are equal. Similarly for the other specifications, we can never reject the
hypothesis of equality at the 10% confidence level.

16

Fourth, the inflow of STEM workers did not significantly aﬀect the employment of any
group of workers. The point estimates are mainly positive for native STEM and college
educated workers, and mainly negative for non-college educated natives. However, they are
usually not significant, even at the 10% level28 . The weak employment response, especially
among college educated workers, who generally tend to be mobile across cities, suggests the
potential existence of additional adjustment mechanisms for college educated workers at the
metropolitan area level. We explore the possibility of changes in the price of non-tradables
(in the form of house rents) as a response to the increase in productivity and wages of college
educated workers in Section 5.4.

5.2

Robustness Checks

We now comment on some interesting and reassuring results emerging from the robustness
checks performed in Table 6. To mitigate endogeneity concerns discussed earlier, row (d)
omits the top five STEM-dependent cities and row (g) removes Indian workers. The estimated eﬀects of STEM on native wages remain stable and even increase in some cases, albeit
at the cost of larger standard errors. On one hand, this suggests that the inclusion of fixed
eﬀects, the instrumental variable strategy, and the additional controls (Bartik variables) in
the baseline model largely address the endogeneity bias. On the other hand, the increase
in standard errors indicates that the omitted cities, when included in regressions, aﬀord
precision in the estimates due to larger variation in the data.
The introduction of imputed low-skilled immigrants as a control in row (e) also results
in an interesting and reasonable small change in the coeﬃcient estimates when compared to
row (a). We obtain a somewhat smaller estimate of the eﬀect of STEM on college educated
wages (down to 7.00 from 8.03) and a somewhat larger coeﬃcient on non-college educated
wages (up to 4.94 from 3.78). This is consistent with the idea that the inflow of less-educated
immigrants, as predicted by the MSA composition in 1980, was partially correlated with foreign STEM (although not too strongly) and that less-educated labor inflows complemented
college educated natives while substituting for non-college educated ones. Controlling explicitly for such imputed inflows helps to better isolate the eﬀect of STEM, which ends up
being more balanced in terms of productivity eﬀects on college and non-college educated
natives.
Similarly, a high initial share of foreign STEM might simply proxy for high education
levels in a city. If cities with high initial share of college educated natives also experienced
high wage and employment growth during periods of large inflows of foreign STEM, this
would result in spurious correlation. Hence the inclusion in row (i) of a shift-share predictor
of native college-educated growth helps address this issue. The estimated impact of STEM
on wage of college educated remains quantitatively similar and is still statistically very
significant.
When omitting small cities (row (f)) to examine issues related to measurement error, the
point estimates do not change much (relative to row (e)), but the standard errors decrease.
Hence, the measurement error that may be present does not seem to importantly aﬀect the
explanatory variable or the instrument by inducing bias, but the reduction of measurement
28

Only the employment eﬀect on native STEM in specification (d) is significantly positive.

17

error, by focusing only on large MSAs, leads to more precise estimates.
Finally, it is worth commenting on the diﬀerence between the OLS estimates (row j) and
the corresponding 2SLS (row (e)). Interestingly, while the estimated employment eﬀects
have an upward bias in OLS relative to 2SLS, the wage eﬀects have a downward bias. This
may be due to the correlation between unobserved shocks and the inflow of foreign STEM
over the considered period. It is likely, in fact, that the inflow of foreign STEM is positively
correlated with employment growth and with a city’s openness to new workers. Hence, the
cities endogenously attracting foreign STEM workers could be those with fast inflows of
workers in general, which may moderate wage growth. Thus, the correlation between STEM
growth and omitted determinants of employment can be positive and the correlation with
openness that induces wage growth moderation can drive a negative correlation with wages.
This pattern of correlation would result in the observed biases.
Before extending the findings, we provide a sense of the magnitude of the estimated
eﬀect. The growth in foreign STEM, measured as a percentage of total initial employment,
was only about 0.65% of total employment during the period 1990-2010. Applying the 7.00,
2SLS estimates of row (e) to the national growth in foreign STEM implies that the foreigndriven net growth in STEM increased real wages of college educated natives by around
4.55 percentage points (=7.00 x 0.65) between 1990 and 2010. As a reference, Census data
suggests that the cumulative growth of college educated wages in this period equaled around
13 percentage points. Thus, one third of that growth can be attributed to the increased
presence of foreign STEM workers. We return to these implications in Section 6 when we
analyze the implied productivity and skill-bias eﬀects of STEM.

5.3

Extensions

As shown in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5, the increase in foreign STEM across cities
was an important driver of the increase in overall (native plus immigrant) STEM labor.
Table 7 generalizes the second-stage results of Table 6 by using the same specifications as
those from the first four rows of Table 6, and replacing the explanatory variable with total
STEM growth, instead of foreign STEM growth.29 The estimated eﬀects confirm that STEM
workers positively aﬀect wages of college educated natives, and to a smaller extent, wages
of the non-college educated as well. STEM workers had a positive and significant eﬀect on
wages of college educated natives that equaled around 4 percentage points for each increase in
STEM by one percentage point of employment. The eﬀects on wages of non-college natives,
on the other hand, is around 2.4.30 There is no evidence that either group experiences
employment eﬀects.
The basic result is robust to using the Major-based definition of STEM (row b), using
the broad (8%) definition of STEM (row c), and omitting top STEM cities (row d). Also,
29
We do not assess native STEM employment outcomes, as employment is subsumed in the explanatory
variable itself.
30
The point estimate of the eﬀect on wages when considering foreign STEM only as explanatory variable
(Table 6) is somewhat larger. It is possible that those estimates include a positive eﬀect through the
attraction of native STEM (as revealed by Table 6) who, in turn, spur the productivity of college educated
workers. Hence an increase in foreign STEM by 1% of employment may imply an increase in total STEM
by 1.5%, thereby generating a larger wage eﬀect (by about 50%).

18

the OLS estimates confirm a positive bias (relative to the 2SLS results) for the eﬀects on
employment, and a negative one for the eﬀects on wages. Overall our estimates confirm that
the demand for native college educated workers received a significant positive boost from
STEM workers and the demand for native non-college educated labor was also positively,
but less strongly, aﬀected.
A lot of heterogeneity exists among non-college educated workers. Table 8 explores
whether the wage and employment eﬀects of STEM workers are diﬀerentiated at diﬀerent
parts of the educational distribution within non-college educated. In particular, we assess
whether eﬀects are diﬀerent among natives without a high school diploma (H.S. dropouts)
and with a high school diploma (H.S. graduates). The table presents foreign STEM eﬀects for
wages (columns (1) and (2)) and employment (columns (3) and (4)). Rows (a)-(d) present
several specifications of the 2SLS regression mirroring those in the corresponding rows of
Tables 6 and 7. The main feature of each specification is described by the row headings.
Row (e) reports the OLS coeﬃcients.
By distinguishing high school graduates from high school dropouts, we can check whether
these two groups are diﬀerentiated in their complementarity with college educated labor.
This decomposition tests whether STEM workers produced the type of change in labor
demand that is commonly called “skill biased” or if their eﬀect appears to be indicative of
a “polarization of the labor market.” Skill-biased eﬀects (see Acemoglu (1998, 2002)) would
imply that productivity growth has been complementary to schooling, hence workers with
lower schooling are less positively aﬀected by innovation spurred by STEM workers. College
educated workers would be most positively aﬀected, followed by high school graduates, and
lastly by high school dropouts. Polarization, instead, implies higher relative labor demand
growth at the high and low ends of the educational spectrum at the expense of intermediatelevel jobs (e.g. Autor (2010), Autor et al. (2006)). This outcome can be understood in
terms of technological progress that may have substituted for intermediate types of skills
(e.g., routine cognitive skills) but complemented low end (manual) and high end (analytical)
skills.
The estimates of Table 8 show that STEM eﬀects were significant only for high school
graduates while dropouts experienced mostly insignificant consequences (typically with smaller
point estimates). Neither group had significant employment eﬀects. The basic specification
in row (a) shows that STEM workers increased wages paid to native high school graduates
by 5.5 percentage points for each percentage point increase in STEM employment. This
would be consistent with a claim that STEM-driven technological progress has been skill (or
schooling) biased rather than polarizing. The diﬀerence between the eﬀects on high school
graduates and dropouts is not usually significant, however, due to the lack of precision in estimating the dropout eﬀects. No evidence of polarization as a consequence of STEM growth
is found.

5.4

The Eﬀect on Housing Rents

The impact of STEM worker growth on college educated wages is significantly positive. Given
that college educated workers are generally mobile across cities (see Malamud and Wozniak
(2012), for example), it is interesting that STEM worker growth did not also generate a
significant employment response for this group. A plausible explanation, emphasized by
19

Moretti (2011) and Saiz (2007), is that the cost of non-tradable services, mainly housing
rents, increases in the cities experiencing wage growth. Thus, housing prices might absorb
some of the college educated wage growth driven by an inflow of STEM workers that we
have identified in this paper.
In order to check this adjustment channel, we analyze the eﬀect of STEM workers on
native house rents as measured by the U.S. Census in 1990, 2000, 2005, and 2010. We use
the data on rents, rather than house values, because they capture more closely the cost of
housing services provided by a building or unit, and their changes do not include changes
in their asset value (which was subject to large swings during our period of study). We
construct average monthly rent per room in constant 2010 dollars by using data on the
total number of rooms and monthly rent paid by native workers between 18 and 65 years of
age, who rent their house, in the 219 metropolitan areas.31 In order to identify the specific
eﬀect for college and non-college educated rents, we construct the rent per room for the two
groups separately. As rental payments are top-coded and in some cities more than 5% of the
individuals are subject to the top-code, we also calculate the median value of rent per room
in a metro area. We then adopt the growth rate of these rent values as the outcome variable
in regression (1), using the same methodology and instrument as in the estimated wage and
employment regressions.
Table 9 reports the estimated eﬀects of changes in foreign STEM employment on changes
in rents paid by native college (column (1)) and non-college educated workers (column (2)).
Each of the six rows of the table correspond to diﬀerent specifications. Row (a) uses the
O*NET 4% definition of STEM (both in the explanatory variable and instrument) and median rent as the dependent variable. In row (b) we use the average rent as dependent variable.
Row (c) shows the results obtained using the broader O*NET 8% definition of STEM (both
in the explanatory variable and instrument). Row (d) uses the same specification as in row
(a), but omits the top five STEM cities. Similarly, row (e) omits Indians in the calculation of
STEM workers. Row (f) shows the estimates when we use total (rather than foreign) STEM
as the explanatory variable.
Each specification reveals a significant and positive eﬀect (at the 1% level) of STEM
growth on growth of rents paid by college educated workers. Point estimates center around
7. Conversely, point estimates of STEM eﬀects on rents paid by non-college educated workers
are near zero and are not significant. The inflow of H-1B STEM workers increased the wages
of college educated labor and increased their housing costs. These higher wages likely caused
college educated natives to bid up the rent price of houses in the parts of cities most desirable
to them. This diﬀerential increase in rents is therefore due to the more limited supply of
desirable locations for college educated labor and the larger increase in their income.
Housing costs are likely to aﬀect the cost of other non-tradable local services as well,
and the sum of those eﬀects will influence real wages. The Consumer Expenditure Surveys32
for college educated workers from 1998-2002 show that housing costs represented 33% of
individual expenditures, while 17% of their expenditures were in utilities, health, and entertainment (non-tradable services). Hence, 50% of college educated workers’ incomes could
easily be spent on non-tradable services.
31
32

See Online Appendix for further details on selection criteria.
See the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2005).

20

If we consider the average estimated price eﬀect (from Table 9) to be around a 7 percentage point increase for each percentage point rise in the STEM share of employment, and
the corresponding average eﬀect on native college wages to be around 7 percentage points as
well (from the average estimate in Table 6), then the real wage increase for college educated
labor, accounting for purchasing power, would be only around 3.5 percentage points. The
STEM eﬀect on non-tradables prices, therefore, contributed substantially to absorbing the
local eﬀect on college educated wages and helps to explain the small employment response.

6

Deriving Productivity and Skill-Bias Eﬀects

In this final section we sketch a simple model of production in cities that allows us to use the
elasticities estimated in Tables 6 and 7 for calculating the long-run eﬀect of STEM on the
total factor productivity (TFP) and skill bias of productivity (SBP) in a city. We present
the basic assumptions and the intuition of the model, and then we show simulations of TFP
and SBP eﬀects for 1990-2010 that can be explained by growth in foreign STEM workers.
We present the solution to the model and derive the exact expressions for the three demand
conditions used to calculate the eﬀects of STEM on TFP and SBP in the Appendix A.

6.1

Framework

Suppose a city () produces a homogeneous, tradable, numeraire product ( ) in year .
The economy employs three types of workers: non-college educated ( ), college educated
workers ( ), and STEM workers ( ). Production occurs according to the following
long-run production function:

∙
µ
  −1
  −1 ¶¸  −1



+ (1 − ( ))
 = ( ) ( )

(8)


µ  −1
  −1 ¶  −1



+ 
 = 

(9)

Input  is a composite factor obtained by combining college educated and STEM workers
as follows:

The parameter   1 captures the elasticity of substitution between non-college and college
educated labor. Similarly,    1 is the elasticity of substitution between college educated
(non-STEM) and STEM workers.
Physical capital is absent from (8). Instead we assume that capital mobility and the
equalization of capital returns imply a constant capital-output ratio in the long run so that
capital can be solved out of the production function. In this sense, the comparative static
results that we find can be thought of as a comparison between long-run balanced growth
paths.
STEM workers are the key inputs in developing and adopting new technologies, which
are widely credited for increasing the productivity of college educated workers as well as
increasing total factor productivity. Our modeling choices seek to capture these factors.
21

33
We follow the literature on human capital externalities
and growth of ideas34 by allowing

the level of total factor productivity, ( )  −1  0 to be a function of the number of
STEM workers in the city. If 0 ( )  0, STEM-driven innovation externalities have a
positive eﬀect on TFP. At the same time we allow for skill (college) biased productivity,
( ) ∈ [0 1] to depend upon the number of STEM workers. If  0 ( )  0, STEMdriven innovation externalities may have a college-biased eﬀect on productivity. Even if
STEM and college-educated workers are close substitutes in production ( ≈ ∞), in the
described framework STEM workers are uniquely capable of potentially generating ideas,
innovation, and externalities that benefit productivity.
³  ´
The main goal of the model is to identify the eﬀect of STEM workers on TFP   −1
and its college-bias ((1 − )) in equilibrium. We proceed as follows. First we derive wages
paid to each factor as their marginal productivity, implied by the production function. Then
we calculate the total logarithmic (percentage) change in wages for each group (non-college,
college educated , and STEM) in response to the changes in the supply of each type of
worker (expressed as a percentage of total employment), allowing for mobility of workers
and, hence, for changes in each group’s supply in response to an exogenous change of STEM
workers. Next, we divide each side of the three labor demand conditions (one for each type
of worker) by the exogenous change of STEM workers expressed as a percentage of total
employment. This gives us three linear conditions35 relating the elasticity of each group’s
wage and employment to STEM (i.e., the coeﬃcients  estimated from Equation 1).
The linear expressions also include terms that depend upon the wage and employment
∆
share of each worker type and the four unknown parameters       = ∆
 and

∆
 = ∆
 Wage and employment shares can be calculated from Census data. Values for

the elasticity of substitution between college and non-college educated labor ( ) can be
taken from prior literature. The  and  terms are the elasticity of  and  to changes
in STEM (relative to initial employment). These values, in addition to the elasticity of
substitution between STEM and college educated labor (  ) can be solved for by using the
three labor demand conditions derived from the model (which are linear due to the CES
structure of production).  and  allow us to evaluate the impact of STEM on TFP and
its skill bias.
The advantage of this approach is that we have an intuitive and standard definition of
TFP and SBP based on a city-specific production function. We can use it to infer the productivity impacts of STEM. Moreover, we can calculate these eﬀects without specifying the
labor supply-side of the model, which is aﬀected by mobility and labor force participation, as
long as we have the equilibrium elasticity for the employment of each factor to the exogenous
change in STEM (which we estimated in Tables 6 and 7). The limitations of this approach
are its dependence on the specific assumptions on the production structure and on the form
of the productive interactions between diﬀerent types of labor.
33

See Acemoglu and Angrist (2000), Iranzo and Peri (2009), and Moretti (2004a).
See Jones (1995).
35
The interested reader can find these conditions as equations 13-15 in Appendix A.
34

22

6.2

Estimated Productivity Eﬀects

By substituting the estimated values of b — the elasticity of outcome  for group 
to STEM workers — in the equations derived from our model (and described in Appendix
A), we can back-up the eﬀects on the growth of TFP and SBP.36 The literature provides
estimates of  that usually range between 15 and 25.37 We assume a  value of 2 in
our basic simulation, and we use values of 175 and 225 in two robustness checks. We
combine this value with U.S. Census data on the relative wage and employment of college
and non-college educated labor to obtain an implied value of  equal to 057 (in the basic
specification) for the year 2000.38 We also use the values of the share of STEM workers in
total employment (004) and in the total wage bill (009), plus the college educated share of
the wage bill (046) as obtained from the 2000 Census data for the aggregate U.S. sample.
Changing those parameters to their 2010 or 1990 values has only very marginal eﬀects on
the simulations.39
Table 10 displays the simulated changes to TFP (column (1)) and SBP (column (2)) over
the period 1990-2010 attributed by our model to the average (aggregate) growth in foreign
STEM between 1990 and 2010. The change in foreign STEM was equal to an increase by
0.04% of the total employment each year. Actual annual changes in TFP (from Fernald
(2010)) is 0.89% and SBP, from our caluclations based on Census data, is 1.75%. Those
values are reported in columns (3) and (4). The last two columns then show the proportion
of the actual changes explained by the simulated eﬀect of foreign STEM.
The first row of Table 10 reports the simulated eﬀects when we use the elasticities estimated from the basic specification of Table 6, row (a). Row (2) uses the estimates from
Table 6, row (f), in which we control for imputed unskilled immigrants and reduce the attenuation bias by including only large cities in the regression. We label this row “Conservative
Estimates” because the underlying regression leads to somewhat smaller estimates of the
eﬀect of STEM on native wages. In row (3) we use estimates from Table 7 row (a), obtained
using total STEM as explanatory variable,40 which tend to be 40-50% smaller than those
obtained with foreign STEM. The fourth and fifth row show the robustness of the estimates
to changes in values of the parameter   , using the Basic specification of Row (a).
The estimated elasticities imply that foreign STEM growth can explain between a third
36

We also get from our model an estimate of   the elasticity of substitution between STEM and nonSTEM college educated in production. That elasticity is always very high and statistically non distinguishable
from infinity (1/  is not significantly diﬀerent from 0). This is because our estimates of the elasticity of
college educated wages and STEM wages to STEM supply are always very close to each other, implying high
substitutability between the two groups.
37
See Ciccone and Peri (2005) for a review of the estimates. Katz and Murphy (1992), Goldin and Katz
(2007), and Ottaviano and Peri (2012) provide some influential estimates of that parameter.
¡  ¢1

38

The formula is 1−
=
, where  and  are the wages of college and non-college educated
 

for the US
workers and  and  their respective employment. Using data from year 2000, the term 1−
turns out to be 107, which implies  = 057When we change the value of   in the simulations, the value
of  changes as well according to the above formula.
39
These simulations are available upon request.
40
In this case we used the estimated elasticity of college educated wages (3.96) also for STEM, as the
model implies that the elasticity of college educated wages to foreign STEM cannot be smaller than that of
native STEM wages.

23

and a half of the average productivity growth in the period 1990-2010, depending on the
particular wage regression coeﬃcients and value of  substituted into the model. Even
in the case of the smallest estimates, 30% of the TFP growth of the average U.S. city is
explained by foreign STEM. Let us emphasize that the average annual TFP eﬀect implied
by our simulations is about 0.44 percentage points per year. This annual growth implies
that income per capita of native workers in 2010 was 9.1% larger in the U.S. that it would
have been without contributions from foreign STEM. This is a significant eﬀect. We also
find an eﬀect on the skill bias, but it seems more modest and it does not explain more than
5 to 8% of the SBP growth over the period.41
This macro exercise must certainly be taken with great caution as it is based on very
strong assumptions. In particular, we apply parameters that were estimated across cities to
calculate national eﬀects of foreign STEM. Simulations will overstate the aggregate eﬀects
on productivity if some of the wage eﬀects from the underlying regressions are due to the
selection of natives. However, since our regressions only capture the within city productivity
eﬀect, we may also be under-estimating the national impact on productivity.
Despite its limitations, the exercise is informative as it provides a reference for the magnitude of productivity eﬀects. It is also reassuring that the simulated eﬀects are closely aligned
with the productivity eﬀects of scientists and engineers found by the growth literature. For
example, Jones’s (2002) very influential paper on aggregate U.S. data found that about 50%
of the long-run productivity growth of the U.S. in recent decades could be attributed to
growth in scientists and engineers as a share of employment. We find that during the 20
years leading to 2010, between one third and one half of the U.S. productivity growth can
be attributed to the growth of foreign STEM workers. As foreign STEM worker growth
represented about 80% of the net growth in STEM workers in those decades, our results
closely align with Jones (2002). It would be impossible to justify the estimated eﬀects of foreign STEM on native wages by considering them only as an increase in skilled labor supply.
However, if they are considered as a source of growth in R&D resources, then their eﬀect is
perfectly in line with the previously estimated eﬀects of R&D on productivity growth.

7

Conclusions

In this paper we used the inflow of foreign scientists, technology professionals, engineers, and
mathematicians (STEM), made possible by the H-1B visa program, to estimate the impact
of STEM workers on the productivity of college and non-college educated American workers
over the 1990-2010 period. The uneven distribution of foreign STEM workers across cities in
1980 — a decade before the introduction of the H-1B visa — and the high correlation between
the pre-existing presence of foreign-born workers and subsequent immigration flows allows
us to use the variation in foreign STEM as a supply-driven increase in STEM workers across
metropolitan areas.
We find that a one percentage point increase in the foreign STEM share of a city’s
total employment increased wages of native college educated labor by about 7-8 percentage
points and the wages of non-college educated natives by 3-4 percentage points. We find
41

Our measure of college bias is the percentage change in the college to non-college labor wage ratio,
keeping their relative labor supply constant.

24

non-significant eﬀects on the employment of those two groups. These results indicate that
growth in STEM workers spurred technological growth by increasing productivity, especially
that of college educated workers. They also experienced increasing housing rents, which
eroded part of their wage gain.

25

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron. (1998) “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed
Technical Change and Wage Inequality.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):
November 1998, pp. 1055-89.
[2] Acemoglu, Daron. (2002) “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market.” Journal of Economic Literature 40(1): March 2002, p. 7-72.
[3] Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist. (2000) “How large are human capital externalities? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
2000.
[4] Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card. (1991) “The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor
Market Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives.” In . John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1991, pp. 201—34.
[5] Autor, David H. (2010) "The Polarization of Job opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market" The Hamilton Project, Washington D.C. April 2010.
[6] Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. (2003) “The Skill Content of
Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118(4). November 2003, pp. 1279-1334.
[7] Autor, David H., Lawrence Katz and Alan Krueger (1998) “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):
November 1998, pp. 1169-1214.
[8] Autor, David H., Lawrence F Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. (2006) “The Polarization
of the U.S. Labor Market.” The American Economic Review 96(2): May 2006, pp.
189-194.
[9] Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas (2011) "Attenuation Bias in Measuring
the Wage Impact of Immigration," Journal of Labor Economics, University of Chicago
Press, vol. 29(1), pages 69-113, 01.
[10] Bartik, Timothy J. (1991) Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development
Policies? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
[11] Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches. (1994) “Changes in the Demand for Skilled
Labor within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures.”
The Quarterly Journal Of Economics 109(2): May 1994, pp. 367-397.
[12] Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2005) “ The Consumer Expenditure Survey” year 19992002, http://www.bls.gov/cex/home.htm#tables.
[13] Card, David. (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
Impacts of Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19(1): January 2001, pp.
22-64.
26

[14] Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri. (2005) “Long-Run Substitutability between More
and Less Educated Workers: Evidence from U.S. States 1950-1990.” Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 87, Issue 4, pp. 652-663
[15] Department of State. (2011) “Nonimmigrant Visa Statistics” http://travel.state.
gov/visa/statistics/nivstats/nivstats_4582.html Classes of Nonimmigrants Issued Visas — FY1987-2010 Detail Table.
[16] Depew, Briggs, Peter Norlander, and Todd A. Sorensen. (2013) “Flight of the H-1B:
Inter-Firm Mobility and Return Migration Patterns for Skilled Guest Workers,” IZA
Discussion Paper 7456.
[17] Ellison, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser. (1999) “The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” American Economic Review,
American Economic Association, vol. 89(2), pages 311-316, May.
[18] Fernald, John. (2010) "A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity." FRBSF Working Paper.
[19] Glaeser, Edward L. (2011) "The Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention
Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier, and Happier" New York: Penguin Press
(2011)
[20] Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. (2007) “Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure: Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2007
(2):135-65
[21] Griliches, Z. (1992) “The Search for R&D Spillovers”Scandinavian Journal of Economics. Vol. 94(0), pp. 29-47.
[22] Iranzo, Susana and Giovanni Peri. (2009) “Schooling Externalities, Technology, and Productivity: Theory and Evidence from U.S. States.” Review of Economics and Statistics
91(2): May 2009, pp. 420-431.
[23] Jaﬀe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, Rebecca Henderson. (1993) “Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 108 (3): August 1993, pp. 577-598.1.
[24] Jones, C. (1995) “Time Series tests of Endogenous Growth Models” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 110. pp.495-525.
[25] Jones, C. (2002) “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas” American
Economic Review Vol 92, No
[26] Kato, Takao and Chad Sparber. (2013) “Quotas and Quality: The Eﬀect of H-1B Visa
Restrictions on the Pool of Prospective Undergraduate Students from Abroad” Review
of Economics and Statistics Vol. 95 (1): 109-126.

27

[27] Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages, 19631987: Supply and Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): February 1992, pp. 35-78.
[28] Kerr, William and William F. Lincoln. (2010) “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B
Visa Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 2010, p.
473-508.
[29] Krueger, Alan. (1993) “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence
from Microdata 1984-1989.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(1), February
1993, pp. 33-60.
[30] Lowell, Lindsay. (2000) "H-1B Temporary Workers: Estimating the Population" Working Paper, Center for Comparative Immigration Studies UC San Diego, http://
escholarship.org/uc/item/4ms039dc.
[31] Malamud, Ofer and Abigail Wozniak. (2012) “The Impact of College Education on
Geographic Mobility.” Journal of Human Resources. 47(4): 913-950.
[32] Moretti, Enrico. (2004a) “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence
from Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data.” Journal of Econometrics 121
(1): 2004a, pp. 175-212.
[33] Moretti, Enrico. (2004b) “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence
from Plant-Level Production Functions.” American Economic Review 94(3) pp. 656-690.
[34] Moretti, Enrico. (2011) “Local Labor Markets” Volume 4 of the Handbook of Labor
Economics, Chapter 14, pp. 1237-1313.
[35] Moretti, Enrico. (2012) "The New Geography of Jobs" Houghton Miﬃn Harcourt Publishing Company, New York NY.
[36] Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri. (2012) “Rethinking the Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 10(1), pages
152-197, 02.
[37] Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber. (2009) "Task Specialization, Immigration, and
Wages." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no. 3 (2009): 135-169.
[38] Ruggles, Steven J., Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B.
Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek. (2010) “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database].” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.
[39] Saiz, Albert. (2007) “Immigration and housing rents in American Cities” Journal of
Urban Economics, Elsevier, vol. 61(2), pages 345-371.
[40] Saxenian, Anna Lee. (2002) “Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant High Growth Entrepreneurs.” Economic Development Quarterly 16(1): February 2002, p. 20-31.

28

[41] Solow, Robert M. (1957) “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 39, No. 3. (Aug., 1957), pp. 312-320.
[42] U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (2009) “Characteristics of Specialty Occupation Workers (H-1B): Fiscal Year 2009”, http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis.

29

A

A Model to Derive Productivity Eﬀects

In this Appendix we show the details of the calculations performed to obtain the elasticities
∆
∆
and  = ∆
, used to
of TFP and SBP to changes in STEM workers,  = ∆


simulate the eﬀects shown in Table 10 and discussed in Section 6.

A.1

Wages and Labor Demand System

Using a production function as defined in (8) for each city we assume that each group
of workers is paid their marginal productivity. Hence, to obtain the wages of each type
of worker, we take the first derivative of the production function (8) with respect to the
employment of each group. This generates the following expressions (for brevity, we omit
the subscripts and the dependence of  and  on  ):
 = (1 − )
 = 
 = 

1




1




( 1


1


− 1



− 1


)

( 1 − 1 )






(10)

− 1


(11)





− 1



(12)

In equilibrium we observe simultaneous changes in wages and employment of each type
of worker. Taking a total logarithmic diﬀerential of expressions (10)-(12) and writing all
employment changes relative to total employment  =  +  +  we have the following
three equations relating the equilibrium changes in employment and wages for each group of
workers (non-college educated, college educated, and STEM, respectively):
∆
=


∆


∆


¶
¶µ
∆   + ∆ 



 +
+
1 −     


µ 
¶

∆
1

 ∆
+
−




   
     

µ
 −

¶  ¶
µ
µ

∆  

1
1

+
=
 +  +
+
−

    

  
 

µ 
¶ 
¶
µ

 ∆

∆
1
1
1
+
+
−
−

  
    
  

   
 



(13)

(14)

¶ 
¶
µ
µ

∆  

1
1
1

+ (15)
=
 +  +
+
−
−

    

  
  
 


µ 
¶ 
¶
µ

 ∆

∆
1
1
1
+
+
−
−

    

  
  
   
 



These equations have to hold in equilibrium. The terms  and   appearing in all
expressions, are our main objects of interest. They capture the elasticity of productivity and
skill-bias to (foreign-born) STEM workers. Their expressions are:
30

 =

∆
∆
  =
∆ 
∆ 

(16)

We use the equilibrium conditions (13)-(15) and our empirical estimates to calculate 
 
and  . If we divide both sides of all equations by ∆ 
then the wage and employment elasticity terms obtained are exactly the estimated coeﬃcients  from the empirical
 
 ∆
equation (1). For instance the elasticity ∆

is the coeﬃcient  estimated

³ ´
 

. Similarly, ∆
 ∆ 
is the
from regression (1) when the dependent variable is ∆



¡ ∆ ¢
coeﬃcient  estimated from regression (1) when the dependent variable is   .

The terms 
 and  , for  =    and  represent, respectively, the share of total
wage income and employment represented by factor  For example, 
 is the share of total
wage income accruing to workers with college education (STEM and non-STEM) and equals
(  +  )(  +   +  ), while 
 =   is the STEM worker share of
total employment.
With the equilibrium response of wages and employment of each group to   estimated in the text, and using census wage and employment data to calculate the shares 

and 
  equations (13)-(15) only depend on four unknown parameters:    ,   , and   .
We adopt estimates of the parameter  from the extensive literature that estimates the
elasticity of substitution between college and non-college educated, and we use (13)-(15) and
our elasticity estimates to obtain values for    and   . The three equations are linear
in    and 1 

A.2

Solving the Linear System to Obtain TFP and Skill Bias

 
Our empirical estimates suggest that three employment elasticities — b = ∆
 ∆ 
; b

  ∆  
∆ ∆  
∆
=  
; and b =

— are never statistically diﬀerent from zero.



Hence for simplicity (and without aﬀecting much the simulations) we set them equal to zero.
This allows us to simplify the system and obtain the following three equations that identify
the remaining three unknown parameters:



 = b −  
1−
  
¶ 
µ


1
1

b
−
−
 +  =  −


     
  

³
´
1
b − b
= 


 −

(17)
(18)
(19)

The last equation immediately defines 1  This can be substituted into (17) and (18),
thereby reducing them to simple linear equations in the two unknown  and   By solving
them we obtain the following solutions:
 = 1 + (1 − )2
31

(20)

 = (1 − )(1 − 2 )

(21)

Where:
1 = b


−   −
  

µ

2 = b −

1
1
−
 



  


¶




 


(22)
(23)

We use these formulas to calculate the eﬀect of STEM growth on TFP and skill biased
growth that we report in Table 10.

32

Tables and Figures

Table 1:
Summary Statistics, Percentage of Foreign-Born by Group

1980
1990
2000
2005
2010

(1)
% in Total
Employment

(2)
% Among College
Educated
Employment

6.15
8.82
13.31
15.37
16.37

6.81
8.96
12.80
14.82
15.46

(3)
% Among College
Educated
Employment in
219 MSAs
8.01
10.51
14.75
17.10
17.74

(4)
(5)
% Employment in
% Among College
STEM Occupations in Educated Employment
219 MSAs
in STEM Occupations
in 219 MSAs
9.27
12.18
12.63
15.64
19.66
24.74
22.74
28.40
23.95
29.74

Note: The figures are obtained by the authors’ calculations using IPUMS Census data from 1980-2010. The relevant population includes only noninstitutionalized individuals between age 18 and 65, who have worked at least one week in the previous year and report identified occupations. The
statistics exclude those with unknown, unreported, or military occupations, and individuals without a clearly identified birthplace who do not possess
U.S. citizenship through parents with U.S. citizenship. STEM occupations are defined according to the O*NET 4% definition. College educated workers
have a bachelor degree or higher. The sample is comprised of 219 consistently identified MSAs from 1980-2010.

33

Table 2:
College Educated STEM Workers as a Percentage of Employment, 219 Metropolitan Areas
1980

Foreign STEM
0.26

Total STEM
2.11

1990

0.45

2.90

2000

0.87

3.52

2005

1.00

3.52

2010

1.10

3.71

Note: The figures are obtained by the authors’ calculations using IPUMS Census data from 1980-2010. The relevant
population includes only non-institutionalized individuals between age 18 and 65, who have worked at least one week in
the previous year, and report identified occupations. The statistics exclude those with unknown, unreported, or military
occupations, and individuals without a clearly identified birthplace who do not possess U.S. citizenship through parents with
U.S. citizenship. STEM occupations are defined according to the O*NET 4% definition. College educated workers have a
bachelor degree or higher. The sample is comprised of 219 consistently identified MSAs from 1980-2010.

34

Table 3:
Net Increase in College educated STEM Workers and Cumulative H-1B Visas (Thousands)

1980-1990

Net Change in Total
College Educated STEM
980

Net Change in Foreign
College Educated STEM
204

Cumulative H-1B Visas
Issued
0

1990-2000

1,114

498

575

2000-2005
2005-2010

254
269

202
131

663
671

Note: The figures are obtained by the authors’ calculations on 219 consistently identified MSAs in IPUMS Census data from 1980-2010. The
relevant population includes only non-institutionalized individuals between age 18 and 65, who have worked at least one week in the previous
year, and report identified occupations. The statistics exclude those with unknown, unreported, or military occupations, and individuals
without a clearly identified birthplace who do not possess U.S. citizenship through parents with U.S. citizenship. STEM occupations are defined
according to the O*NET 4% definition. College educated workers have a bachelor degrees or higher. H-1B numbers also include TN visas. Data
on the total number of H-1B & TN visas issued are from the Department of State (2010).

35

Table 4:
First Stage: Power and Validity of H-1B-Driven STEM as an IV
Explanatory
Variable
Specification

Coefficient

H-1B Driven
Growth in
ForeignSTEM, O*Net
H-1B Driven
Growth in
ForeignSTEM,
Major-based
Fixed Effects:
Number of
Observations:
Metro areas:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Strict (4%)
Definition
of STEM
(with State
Fixed
Effects)

Baseline:
Strict (4%)
Definition
of STEM
(with City
Fixed
Effects)

Broad (8%)
Definition
of STEM
both for
endogenous
variable and
Instrument

As (2),
Excluding
Top 5 Cities

As (2),
Excluding
Indians

As (2),
Imputation
Using
Aggregate
H-1B Visas
(Not by
Nationality)

As (2),
Excluding
Cities with
Population
<400,000

As (8),
Controlling
for Bartik
Employment
and Wage
Growth

Coefficient
(Standard
Error)
F-statistic

0.48***
(0.18)

2.56***
(0.88)

4.06***
(1.28)

1.82**
(0.82)

3.51***
(0.90)

3.02***
(0.74)

3.21***
(0.85)

As (2),
Controlling
for
Imputed
NonCollege
Educated
Immigrants
2.47***
(0.90)

6.57

8.51

9.95

4.86

15.20

16.43

14.04

7.59

6.46

Coefficient
(Standard
Error)
F-statistic

0.44***
(0.16)

2.83***
(0.84)

4.23***
(0.93)

2.13***
(0.63)

3.59***
(1.00)

3.26***
(1.03)

3.34***
(1.08)

2.79***
(0.86)

2.42**
(0.88)

7.73

11.32

20.53

11.27

12.99

9.86

9.48

10.64

7.50

State &
Period
657

City &
Period
657

219

219

City &
Period
657

City &
Period
642

City &
Period
657

219

214

219

City &
Period
657
219

2.33***
(0.92)

City &
Period
354

City &
Period
657

City &
Period
657

118

219

219

Note: Each cell shows the coefficient from a different regression. The dependent variable is the growth in foreign STEM as percentage of the labor force. The units of
observations are 219 U.S. metropolitan areas over the periods 1990-2000, 2000-2005, 2005-2010. The explanatory variable is the H-1B-driven growth of foreign-STEM jobs,
as a percentage of initial employment. Top 2 rows use the O*NET based definition of STEM occupations; Rows 3 and 4 use Major-based STEM definitions. Baseline models
use the narrow (4%) definition of STEM. Column (1) also controls for a city’s native STEM employment in 1980. Standard errors (in parentheses) are always clustered at the
metro area level.
***, **,*= significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

36

Table 5:
First Stage: Falsification and Extensions
Explanatory Variable

Coefficient

(1)
Falsification:
Endogenous
Variable is
Growth of
foreign STEM
O*NET 4%

(2)
Falsification:
Endogenous
Variable is
Growth of
foreign STEM
O*NET 4%

(3)
Falsification:
Endogenous
Variable is
Growth of
foreign STEM
Major-based
4%

Predicted Foreign-STEM, Coefficient
O*NET definition

Predicted Foreign-STEM,
Major-based definition
Predicted Growth in
Foreign STEM using Flows
of Non-College Immigrants
Predicted Growth in
Foreign STEM using Flows
of Total Immigrants minus
H-1B
Predicted Growth in
Foreign STEM using 1980
Distribution of Manual
Immigrants
Number of Observations:
Metro areas:

(Standard Error)
F-statistics
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
F-statistics
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
F-statistics
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
F-statistics

(4)
Dependent
Variable 1970-1980
College educated
Native Wages;
Explanatory
Variable 1990-2000

(5)
Dependent
Variable: Total
STEM Growth
(Native +
Immigrant), 4%
STEM Definition

(6)
Dependent
Variable: Total
STEM Growth,
8% STEM
Definition

-1.66
(1.02)
2.62
-1.12
(1.09)
1.05

5.03***
(1.81)
7.70
5.29***
(1.71)
9.54

8.50**
(4.40)
3.65
9.632***
(2.56)
14.05

0.04
(0.03)
2.24
0.04
(0.025)
3.08

Coefficient
(Standard Error)
F-statistics

0.41
(0.27)
2.42
657

657

657

116

657

657

219

219

219

116

219

219

Note: Each cell shows the coefficient from a different regression and below it the F-test of significance. The units of observations are 219 U.S. metropolitan areas over the
periods 1990-2000, 2000-2005, 2005-2010. The dependent variable is the growth in foreign STEM in columns (1)-(3), the growth in native college educated wage 19701980 in column (4), and total STEM growth in columns (5) and (6). The explanatory variables are described at the beginning of the row. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are always clustered at the metro area level.***, **,*= significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

37

Table 6: The Effects of Foreign STEM on Native Wages and Employment
Explanatory Variable:
Growth Rate of Foreign–
STEM
Instrument: H-1B
Imputed Growth of
Foreign-STEM
(a) Baseline 2SLS; O*NET
4% Definition
(b) 2SLS; Major-based
4% Definition
(c) 2SLS; O*NET 8%
Definition
(d) Omitting Top 5 STEM
Cities
(e) Controlling for
Imputed Non-College
Immigrants
(f) Dropping Small Cities
(pop<400,000)
(g) Dropping Indians
from the IV
(h) Aggregate H-1B IV
(i) Controlling for
Imputed College Natives
(j) OLS Version of
Specification (e)

(1)
Weekly Wage,
Native STEM

(2)
Weekly Wage,
Native College
educated

(3)
Weekly Wage,
Native NonCollege
educated

(4)
Employment,
Native STEM

(5)
Employment,
Native College
educated

(6)
Employment,
Native NonCollege
educated

6.65
(4.53)
6.64
(5.08)
7.23**
(3.51)
11.35
(8.63)
7.94
(5.38)

8.03***
(3.02)
10.94**
(4.34)
5.64***
(1.95)
12.78***
(4.99)
7.00**
(2.98)

3.78**
(1.75)
3.21**
(1.67)
2.55**
(1.08)
5.03
(3.42)
4.94**
(2.08)

0.53
(0.56)
0.60
(0.63)
0.53
(0.75)
1.64***
(0.53)
0.76
(0.61)

2.47
(4.69)
1.04
(3.98)
1.84
(3.20)
8.45
(7.04)
3.29
(4.84)

-5.17
(4.19)
-7.82
(4.90)
-4.13
(3.31)
-2.50
(7.45)
-3.39
(4.15)

5.70
(3.51)
3.52
(5.04)
5.76
(4.05)
2.72
(4.68)
3.32
(2.98)

7.17***
(2.61)
9.33**
(4.35)
6.03**
(2.75)
7.57**
(3.78)
4.10***
(1.86)

4.28***
(1.45)
3.45*
(2.07)
4.13***
(1.33)
2.39
(1.99)
1.16
(1.24)

0.34
(0.58)
0.46
(0.51)
0.31
(0.48)
-0.32
(0.47)
0.91**
(0.34)

-0.60
(1.50)
1.29
(3.60)
1.64
(4.20)
-0.62
(4.18)
4.97
(3.68)

-5.19
(3.18)
-6.43*
(3.53)
-5.56
(3.63)
-7.28
(5.15)
2.11
(2.51)

Note: Each cell shows the estimate of the coefficient on the growth in foreign STEM (relative to employment) when the dependent variable is the one described at the
top of the column. Each regression includes period effects, metropolitan area effects, and the Bartik for employment or wage of the relevant group. Rows (a) and (d)-(h)
are 2SLS regressions using the O*NET 4% definition of STEM. Rows (b) and (c) use alternative definitions of STEM. Row (j) shows the OLS estimates. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the metro area level. Unit of observations are 219 metro areas over 3 periods, 1990-2000, 2000-2005 and 2005-2010.
***, **,*= significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

38

Table 7: The Effects of Total STEM on Native Wages and Employment
Explanatory Variable:
Growth Rate of Total
STEM
Instrument: H-1B
Imputed Growth of
Foreign-STEM
(a) 2SLS; O*NET 4%
Definition
(b) 2SLS; Major-based
4% Definition
(c) 2SLS; O*NET, 8%
Definition
(d) Same as (a), but
omitting Top 5 STEM
Cities
(e) OLS; O*NET 4%
Definition

(1)
Weekly Wage,
Native STEM

(2)
Weekly Wage,
Native College
educated

(3)
Weekly Wage,
Native NonCollege
educated

(5)
Employment,
Native College
educated

(6)
Employment,
Native NonCollege educated

4.50
(2.93)
4.89
(3.4)
4.55
(3.01)
4.50
(3.38)

3.96***
(1.41)
5.68**
(2.41)
2.64*
(1.43)
4.02**
(1.73)

2.43**
(1.01)
2.40**
(1.00)
2.43**
(1.01)
1.97
(1.12)

1.86
(2.31)
1.15
(2.10)
1.45
(1.24)
3.23
(2.37)

-1.67
(2.33)
-2.91
(2.82)
-1.23
(1.79)
-0.27
(2.33)

0.37
(1.08)

0.72
(0.54)

0.75*
(0.40)

2.72***
(0.77)

4.59***
(0.79)

Note: Each cell shows the estimate of the coefficient on the growth in total STEM (relative to employment) when the dependent variable is the one
described at the top of the column and the instrument is the H-1B driven STEM growth. Each regression includes period effects, metropolitan area
effects, the Bartik for employment and wage of the relevant group, and the imputed growth of non-college educated immigrants. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the metro area level. Unit of observations are 219 metro areas over 3 periods, 1990-2000, 2000-2005 and 2005-2010.
***, **,*= significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

39

Table 8: The Effect of Total STEM on Non College educated Natives
Explanatory Variable:
Growth Rate of Total STEM
Instrument: H-1B Imputed
Growth of Foreign-STEM
(a) 2SLS; O*NET 4%
Definition
(b) 2SLS; Major-based 4%
Definition
(c) 2SLS; O*NET, 8%
Definition
(d) Same as (a), but
Dropping Top 5 STEM Cities
(e)
Explanatory Variable: Total
STEM, O*NET 4%

(1)
Weekly Wage,
Native HS
Graduates
5.54**
(2.33)
4.86**
(2.10)
4.10**
(1.70)
7.05*
(4.29)
2.73**
(1.15)

(2)
Weekly Wage,
Native HS
Dropouts
3.30
(4.26)
5.97
(4.67)
2.45
(3.01)
6.28
(7.58)
1.63
(1.99)

(3)
Employment,
Native HS
Graduates
-3.35
(3.72)
-5.11
(4.08)
-2.48
(2.88)
-1.37
(6.65)
-1.65
(2.12)

(4)
Employment,
Native HS
Dropouts
-0.03
(0.54)
-0.50
(0.65)
-0.02
(0.40)
0.50
(0.96)
-0.01
(0.27)

Note: Each cell shows the estimate of the coefficient on the growth in foreign STEM (relative to employment) when the dependent
variable is the one described at the top of the column. Each regression includes period effects, metropolitan area effects, the Bartik
for employment and wage of the relevant group, and the imputed growth of non-college educated immigrants. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the metro area level. Unit of observations are 219 metro areas over 3 periods, 1990-2000, 2000-2005
and 2005-2010.
***, **,*= significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

40

Table 9: The Effects of Foreign STEM on Native Rents
Explanatory Variable:
Growth Rate of STEM
Instrument: H-1B Imputed Growth of
Foreign STEM
(a) 2SLS;
Expl. Var.: Foreign O*NET 4%
Dep. Var.: Median Rent
(b) 2SLS;
Expl. Var.: Foreign O*NET 4%
Dep. Var.: Average Rent
(c) 2SLS;
Expl. Var.: Foreign O*NET 8%
Dep. Var.: Median Rent
(d) Same as (a), but Dropping
Top 5 Metro areas
(e) Same as (a), but No Indians
in the IV
(f) 2SLS;
Expl. Var.: Total O*NET 4%
Dep. Var.: Median Rent

(1)
Dep. Var: Rent per Room,
Native College Educated
10.29***
(3.64)

(2)
Dep. Var:
Rent per Room, Native nonCollege Educated
1.64
(2.88)

10.02***
(3.85)

2.73
(2.80)

6.80***
(2.56)

0.04
(2.30)

13.27*
(6.69)
5.33***
(1.92)
5.07**
(2.04)

-1.14
(4.05)
2.00
(1.57)
0.80
(1.54)

Note: Each cell shows the estimate of the coefficient on the growth in foreign STEM (relative to employment) when the dependent
variable is the one described at the top of the column. Each regression includes period effects, metropolitan area effects, the Bartik
for wage of the relevant group, and the imputed growth of non-college educated immigrants. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the metro area level. Unit of observations are 219 metro areas over 3 periods, 1990-2000, 2000-2005 and 2005-2010.
Row (a) shows the basic specification with Median rent as dep. Variable. Row (b) uses average rent as dep. var. Row (c) uses the
broader O*NET definition of STEM, Row (d) omits the top 5 Metro Area in number of STEM. Row (e) Omits Indians from the
instrument construction. Row (f) uses total (native+ foreign) STEM as explanatory variable.
***, **,*= significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

41

Table 10: Simulated Foreign-STEM effects on Yearly Average TFP Growth and SBP Change

(1) Basic Estimates
(2) Conservative
Estimates
(3) Based on Total
STEM
(4) σΗ=1.75
(5) σΗ =2.25

(1)
Simulated
Foreign STEM
Effect on TFP
Growth

(2)
Simulated
Foreign STEM
Effect on SkillBiased Growth

(3)
Average U.S.
TFP Growth
1990-2010

(4)
Average Change
in Skill-Biased
Productivity
1990-2010

(3)/(1)
TFP Growth
Explained by
Foreign STEM

(4)/(2)
Skill Bias
Growth
Explained by
Foreign STEM

0.47%
0.41%

0.13%
0.08%

0.89%
0.89%

1.75%
1.75%

0.53
0.47

0.07
0.05

0.27%

0.04%

0.89%

1.75%

0.30

0.04

0.54%
0.43%

0.13%
0.12%

0.89%
0.89%

1.75%
1.75%

0.61
0.48

0.08
0.07

Note: The table uses the formulas in the Appendix to calculate the implied elasticity φA and φ . We then use the growth of US foreign-STEM workers as a share
of employment to calculate the implied effects on TFP. The average TFP growth is taken from Fernald (2010) and the average skill biased growth is calculated
using the average U.S. values for the wages and employment (in hours) of college educated and non-college educated workers from the Census 1990 and 2010.
Unless otherwise noted, the elasticity of substitution between college and non-college educated workers is σΗ=2. The STEM share of employment is 0.04, the
STEM share of wages 0.09, and the college educated share of wages 0.46. The values are calculated from the 2000 US Census.

42

Figure 1: Official Cap and Number of H-1B Visas, 1990-2012

0

Number of Visas
50000 100000 150000

200000

Evolution of the H-1B Visa

1990

1995

2000
Fiscal Year
H-1B

2005
Official Cap

Note: The data on H-1B visas and their cap are from the Department of State (2011)

43

2010

