                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CORRUPTION IN CHINESE PRIVATIZATIONS

                                          Raymond Fisman
                                          Yongxiang Wang

                                        Working Paper 20090
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20090


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




We would like to thank Loren Brandt, Charles Calomiris, Harry DeAngelo, Nandini Gupta, Amit
Khandelwal, John Matsusaka, Adair Morse, Kevin Murphy, Richard Roll, Philipp Schnabl, Catherine
Thomas, Shang-Jin Wei, Julie Wulf, Jialin Yu, and seminar participants at AFA, Berkeley, Indiana
University (Kelly), Maryland, NBER China Conference, Yale, University of International Business
and Economics, and USC-UCLA Finance Day for helpful comments. Jin Xie and Huifeng Yin provide
able RA support. We also thank a senior officer at the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration
Commission of the State Council (SASAC), Feihu Long, Kui Zeng and Zhichao Fang for providing
institutional details on state asset transfers. Financial support from CIBER at Columbia Business School
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Corruption in Chinese Privatizations
Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20090
May 2014
JEL No. D73,G30,L33

                                              ABSTRACT

We document evidence of corruption in Chinese state asset sales. These sales involved stakes in partially
privatized firms, providing a benchmark – the price of publicly traded shares – to measure underpricing.
Underpricing is correlated with deal attributes associated with misgovernance and corruption. Sales
by “disguised” owners that misrepresent their state ownership to elude regulatory scrutiny are discounted
5-7 percentage points more than sales by other owners; related party transactions are similarly discounted.
Analysis of subsequent operating performance provides suggestive evidence that aggregate ownership
transfers improve profitability, though not in cases where the transfers themselves were corrupted.


Raymond Fisman
School of Business
Columbia University
605b Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu

Yongxiang Wang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
1. Introduction

Governments around the world have sold state assets over the past few decades with the twin

rationales of raising revenues and improving operating efficiency. The broad consensus among

economists is that the net effect has been positive: post-privatization, companies increase sales,

invest more, and earn higher profits (see Megginson and Netter, 2001, for the most recent

survey).

       Yet privatization’s history is hardly unblemished. Notoriously, corruption in Russian

voucher privatizations led to the theft of state assets on a very large scale, undermining in large

part the revenue generation rationale for shedding state assets, and at the same time resulted in

increased ownership concentration. Further, the subsequent performance of privatized companies

in Russia has been mixed. While Russian government ownership was inefficient, there were

widespread reports of asset stripping and mismanagement of privatized firms. For example,

Gazprom, a partially privatized gas and oil company, had a market valuation of $0.05 per barrel

of hydrocarbon reserves in 2000 (Exxon Mobile’s value was $13.68 per barrel), implying an

astronomical rate of inefficiency and misgovernance (MacMillan and Twiss, 2002). This post-

privatization underperformance is, on some level, unsurprising: a buyer that is willing and able to

pay off officials in state-run companies in exchange for share price discounts may also have the

means and inclination to subsequently tunnel value out of companies at the expense of minority

shareholders. Understanding the causes and consequences of corruption in state asset sales can

improve our understanding of privatization in the face of weak public and private sector

governance, and may thus also help to guide policy for future privatizations.

       We study these issues in the context of Chinese asset transfers by examining the

correlates of underpricing of state assets, as well as operating performance of firms following



                                                  1
asset transfers. A number of aspects of the Chinese setting are useful for analyzing these issues.

First, at least on an anecdotal level there have been widespread concerns of corruption and self-

dealing in Chinese privatizations. Wedeman (2012), for example, recounts instances of steeply

discounted sales of state assets to connected parties, along with details of the subsequent

exploitation of privatized companies by their new owners.

       The particular structure of Chinese privatization also lends itself to our analysis. Many

Chinese companies were partially privatized in the early 1990s through share issue privatizations,

yet the government maintained very substantial (usually majority) holdings in most firms via

unlisted state-owned firms. For the most part, government shares of publicly listed firms were

non-tradable, and could only change hands through privately negotiated sales subject to

regulatory approval. Since shares with the same cash flow rights as these government holdings

were freely traded in parallel in the stock market, we have a credible benchmark to assess the

extent of underpricing. Figure 1 illustrates the structure of such a deal. In general, three firms are

involved in an ownership transfer: There is a publicly traded company, A, whose (non-tradable)

block of shares are transferred via private sale, from seller B1 – generally an unlisted firm or

government entity – to buyer D, also generally an unlisted firm. Note that the company will also

generally have other non-tradable shareholders (B2,…), and also tradable shareholders (C1,

C2,…) – usually individuals or mutual funds.

       We begin by documenting extent of transfer underpricing. We find that negotiated

transfers of non-traded shares occur at very steep discounts (73% on average) relative to the

benchmark of the publicly traded share price. We argue that part of this discount can be

explained by a principal-agent problem where insiders at the selling firm (not the listed firm

itself but rather an unlisted state company that owns the non-tradable shares) do not bear the cost



                                                  2
of transferring shares at a discount, and may potentially do so in exchange for a side payment or

benefits to friends and family.

         Of course, discounted transfers may occur for many reasons. For example, prior research

has also found that governments may choose to sell their holdings quickly and cheaply because

of immediate revenue needs or to signal a commitment to market reforms.2 In our case non-

tradable shares may also be underpriced as a result of a liquidity discount, as has been shown in

Chen and Xiong (2001), Chen et.al. (2008) and Huang and Xu (2009), among many others.3

         We therefore provide evidence on the correlates of underpricing that have no obvious

connection to either liquidity or government objectives, by distinguishing sellers that we identify

as likely engaging in underpriced sales as a means of transferring value. We focus on sellers

where the underlying owner is a state-owned firm that has chosen to identify itself as a private

company in transfer disclosure documents, referred to hereafter as disguised transfers. Since

sales by government firms faced greater regulatory scrutiny, misrepresentation of ownership may

be a means of avoiding regulators’ attention. We thus argue that insiders wishing to put through

underpriced sales “on the sly” may choose to mis-declare ownership in this way. We find that

these disguised transfers are associated with an incremental 5-7 percentage point discount

relative to transfers by SOEs where underlying ownership is not obscured by the seller.4

         Although a 5 or 7 percentage point increment is small relative to the overall discount, it is

important to keep in mind that much of the total discount is likely the result of illiquidity, and the

further impact of disguised transfers is large when compared to other correlates of asset value. In

2
  See, for example, Morgan Stanley (1997), for evidence on underpriced transfers in Europe.
3
  The illiquidity discount is one common explanation for underpricing in the finance literature. Silber (1992)
documented a 30 percent discount on restricted stocks that are less liquid, while Kahl, Liu and Longstaff (2003)
provides a theoretical model justifying such large discounts.
4
  These private non-tradable shares originate through two channels: (1) in a privately controlled firm, the stake of a
majority shareholder also cannot trade; (2) some private buyers obtained shares earlier from state sellers through
private negotiations. See Jian and Wong (2003) for a discussion of related party transactions and misgovernance in
the Chinese context.

                                                          3
particular, we report a parallel set of results for private sellers of non-traded shares where we

show that the transfer discount for related party transactions – a well-documented source of

misgovernance in developing countries – is comparable to that of disguised transfers. (Note that

we do not claim that disguised transfers and related party transactions were the only means by

which negotiated transfers were corrupted; rather, they serve as observable markers that we may

exploit to document underpricing that is plausibly tied to corruption.)

         Our estimate of the effect of disguised transfers on share price discounts is robust to

controlling for firm fixed-effects, and also time-varying measures of liquidity considerations,

profitability, and other factors.5 We also find that disguised transfers are concentrated in the early

years of our sample, before regulatory reforms in 2002 that increased disclosure requirements for

transfers. Also consistent with ownership misrepresentation as a means of eluding regulatory

oversight, disguised transfers are smaller than other government sales – as we explain below,

larger transfer size triggers greater regulatory scrutiny.

         We also assess the impact of these negotiated transfers on firm performance and

valuation. As indicated by our opening discussion, post-privatization performance may be

adversely affected by subsequent asset stripping and misgovernance. On the other hand, private

ownership may nonetheless improve performance: despite the low prices at which Russian

oligarchs obtained state companies, Shleifer and Treisman (2005) argue that privatization

nonetheless benefited the Russian economy because of the operational improvements and higher

investment that came with private ownership (the case of Gazprom notwithstanding).




5
 Also, Perotti (1998) and Biais and Perotti (2002) argue that underpricing could signal commitment to privatization,
or may help build public support for privatization (see Dewenter and Malatesta (1997) and Jones et al. (1999) for
empirical support). This is unlikely to account for the discounts we observe here, since we focus on negotiated sales
of state assets to specific buyers rather than the public at large.

                                                         4
       Empirically, we find significant profit improvements for listed firms where ownership

transfers have taken place. This is consistent with the existence of efficiency benefits derived

from privatizations overall, despite the high level of underpricing that we document. However,

when we disaggregate transfer history by seller type, we find that disguised sales are not

associated with increased profitability (though we note that this difference is imprecisely

measured). We also find that disguised sales are followed by an increase in related party

transactions, a proxy for tunneling by insiders.

       Overall, our findings are best explained by the existence of underpricing of asset transfers

as a means of private gain at the expense of state revenues. This corruption-based view provides

the clearest explanation for the underpricing of disguised sales and related party transactions, and

also the small size of disguised transfers relative to other deals. Our further results on post-

transfer profitability indicate that, despite highly discounted transfer prices overall, transfers are

associated with improved performance. However, the lack of improved profitability for disguised

transfers indicate that there may be a class of transfer participants for which privatization does

not yield any benefit. When combined with the particularly steep discounts for disguised

transfers – our analyses provide tentative evidence that attributes of the transacting parties matter

for the success of privatizations in terms of both revenue generation and subsequent performance.

       Our paper relates most directly to earlier work on state asset sales, which has focused

primarily on the governance improvements (and accompanying increases in firm value) as a

result of increased private ownership (see, for example, Gupta (2005) and La Porta and Lopes-

de-Silanes (1999); for studies focused on China, see Allen et al (2005), Cull and Xu (2005),

Deng et al (2005), Fan et.al. (2007), Sun and Tong (2003), Tian (2000), and Qian and

Huyghebaert (2009)). In contrast to earlier work, we assess both the corruptibility of asset sales



                                                   5
and its relationship to operating performance in a unified framework. Our work also relates to the

ever-expanding literature on measuring corruption and assessing its causes, most closely related

to the strand of this research that looks at corruption and firm valuation in the context of publicly

traded companies (e.g., Fisman (2001); Goldman, Rocholl, and So (2009)).

       Our work also contributes to a pair of research streams focused on Chinese capital

markets. The block transfers we consider in this paper were used by Chen et.al. (2008) and

Huang and Xu (2009), though for the very different purpose of estimating block control premia.

Our paper also complements the literature that exams financial fraud in Chinese capital markets

(See Chen at.al (2006), Chen et.al (2010), Cheung at.al. (2006), Fan et.al (2010), Jiang et.al.

(2010), Liu and Lu (2007) and Peng et.al. (2011) among many others for references), though

none of this earlier work addresses the presence or effects of corruption in privatization.

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we provide background on

relevant Chinese capital market attributes and institutions; Section 3 provides a description and

overview of the data; Section 4 presents our results, and Section 5 concludes.



2. Background

State asset sales in China began in the early 1990’s, with the partial privatization of some state-

owned enterprises through Share Issue Privatization (henceforth SIP). This created many

publicly traded firms where governments – both national and provincial –continued to hold

substantial stakes. In addition, millions of former state-owned firms were gradually sold to the

private sector, again with governments keeping significant holdings. These sales reached a peak




                                                  6
during 1998-2002 as a result of the central government’s widely noted policy of Guo Tui, Min

Jin (“state-owned firms out and private-owned firms in”).6

         The government wished nonetheless to maintain levers of control in the firms that were

privatized through SIP. As a result, more than two thirds of outstanding shares were not

permitted to trade in the stock market, which we refer to as non-tradable shares. These tend to be

one of three types. First, some were held by state-owned firms that were themselves owned by

provincial or city governments; we refer to their holdings as state owned enterprise shares, or

SOE shares. Second, non-tradable shares were directly held by the central government through

its State-owned Asset Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council

(henceforth SASAC) or directly by local governments; we refer to these holdings as state

shares.7 Finally, some non-tradable shares were held by (generally well-connected) private firms;

these holdings are referred to as private shares.

         While these shares did not trade on an exchange, ownership could be transferred through

private negotiation. In any such transaction, there are three firms involved: (1) the seller, itself

an unlisted firm or government entity that owns a non-tradable block of shares in the listed firm,

(2) the buyer, which is an unlisted firm, and (3) the listed firm. In the case of state and SOE

shares, i.e., when the ultimate owner of the shares is the government, a sale required approval by

regulators since the transaction involved the sale of a state asset.8 Note that when a transfer was

made, the shares’ classification changed according to the identity of its new owner. For example,

if a provincial SOE sold a block of shares to a private company, the shares’ classification would

shift from SOE to private.

6
  Data on this latter set of government asset sales is very sparse. In any event, since no tradable shares exist for
companies without a SIP, we do not have a benchmark value to compare the price set for asset transfers.
7
  Shares held by central government SOEs (Zhongyang Qiye) like SINOPEC are also defined as “state shares”.
8
  See http://preview.fec2.mofcom.gov.cn/aarticle/laws/200512/20051201243609.html for details on regulatory
statutes.

                                                            7
       These “negotiated transfers” created the potential for rent-seeking: The managers of

state-owned enterprises, which possessed large non-tradable holdings in many publicly traded

firms, were responsible for negotiating the prices of share transfers, while the firm (i.e., not the

manager) suffered the resultant cost of a low price. This created the possibility for prospective

buyers to bribe managers to set low transfer prices in exchange for private payments.

       This principal-agent problem is a function of the extent of monitoring and oversight of

negotiated transfer deals. As we note above, state and SOE sellers faced greater scrutiny than

private sellers because of the need for government approval. However, many SOE sellers were

reportedly able to avoid greater oversight by registering their shareholdings in transfer

documents as private shares, thus misrepresenting their true ownership. As a result, the seller

identity simply showed up as a private entity in the deal documents. We refer to these companies

– state-owned entities with holdings registered as private shares – as disguised sellers. This

misrepresentation of corporate ownership is documented in Li (2006), Shao (2007), and Zuo

(2006), among others. We contrast these companies with those truthfully revealing their SOE

status, which we refer to as face-value SOE firms.

       Li (2006), in particular, describes the disguised transfer process in detail and references a

number of instances of securities enforcement actions as a result of attempted disguised transfers.

Despite an increase in enforcement scrutiny in 2002, disguised transfers continued to take place,

albeit on a more limited scale. The enforcement database managed by the Peking University Law

School lists, for example, several cases in 2010 and 2011 in the Puyang city court of Henan

province where state officials were prosecuted for corruption as a result of proposed asset sales




                                                  8
that involved disguised transfers. 9 In one case, the defendant Jixuan Li was sentenced to jail for

11 years for stealing state assets worth 1 million RMB (about 130,000 US dollars).

         On an anecdotal level, problems with disguised sales sometimes continue after transfers

took place. For example, in the Puyang city example cited above, the case also described

subsequent asset stripping by the buyer, Caihong Yan, who sold assets in the listed company at a

50 percent discount via a related party transaction.

         Given that it is possible, in most cases, to disentangle the ultimate ownership of disguised

shares (as we have done for this paper), one might expect more enforcement cases. However,

regulators had various motives for turning a blind eye to disguised transfers. First, since 1997 the

SASAC, which is charged with oversight of negotiated transfers, has focused its attentions on

regulating large state firms (the so called zhua da, fang xiao policy, which translates roughly as

“focus on large state-owned firms, let small state-owned firms go”), which can help to explain

why in virtually all cases disguised transfers took place in relatively small firms controlled by

local governments. Further, there is likely willful ignorance of disguised share transfers – local

SASAC regulators may wish to avoid conflict with local government officials, or may be

personally enriched in exchange for turning a blind eye, as suggested by Zuo (2006) and the

cases noted above.10

         Why, then, do buyers and sellers not mislead regulators on other attributes, most

obviously the price or quantity of shares? This turns out to be much more difficult, since

transfers take place through the stock exchange itself where price and quantity of shares sold are


9
  The database may be accessed at pkulaw.cn.
10
   There have also been enforcement actions for asset sales that do not involve disguised transfers. For example, a
literature search of the China Newspaper Full-text Database and the Juling Financial Information System, which
covers Chinese financial news uncovered 74 cases where negotiated transfers resulted in prosecutions of SOE
managers for underpricing state asset sales. In our data, we do not find a correlation between prosecution and our
measure of transfer discount. This is unsurprising given the extreme selection bias involved – prosecutions are a
function of the political ties of managers, which also likely impact the extent of underpricing.

                                                          9
directly observable.11 By contrast, disguising ownership is the choice of the seller – an unlisted

firm – not the listed firm itself.



Rules governing negotiated transfers

All state and SOE sales were required to be reported to government regulators. In addition,

details on deals above certain size cutoffs were reported publicly. These public reporting

requirements applied equally to government and private sellers, and our data are derived from

these public disclosures.

        According to Rule 47 in the Temporary rules on stock issuance and trading

administration (henceforth Trading Rules) of the State Council of the People’s Republic of

China in May, 1993, once a non-tradable shareholder directly or indirectly holds five percent of

outstanding shares of a listed firm, it must disclose this holding information publicly within three

working days. Once this five percent threshold has been reached, the owner of the shares must

also disclose its holdings whenever it directly or indirectly buys or sells two percent or more of

shares outstanding of the listed firm. 12

        State and SOE sellers faced an additional layer of scrutiny. On May 15, 1996, the

government issued a “notification on standardizing the administration of state-owned shares in

limited liability companies.” This put in place a requirement that any transfer of SOE shares

obtain approval from local government agencies. When the transfer involved state shares, central


11
   See A notice on regulating negotiated transfer of nontradable shares issued by the CSRC (the SEC equivalence in
China) on Sep 30, 2001. Also see http://edu.sse.com.cn/cs/zhs/xxfw/flgz/html/t0036.htm for the full text of this
notice.
12
   Thus, some deals by either owners with relatively small stakes or transfers of relatively modest size will not
appear in our data. For example, if a firm held 4 percent of outstanding shares as non-tradable shares and sold any
proportion of its holdings through private negotiation, no public disclosure would have been required; instead it
needed only to register this deal with the appropriate stock exchange. If the owner held more than 5 percent of a
listed firm, but sold only 1.99 percent, again no public disclosure would be necessary. On December 29, 1998, the 2
percent cutoff was increased to 5 percent. This regulatory change took effect on July 1, 1999.

                                                        10
government approval was required in addition to the approval of provincial regulatory agencies.

In the latter case, stricter oversight and disclosure requirements prevented companies from

eluding regulation,13 which may account for the fact that we observe no disguised deals for state

sellers.

           The extent of oversight increased over the course of our sample period. In particular, on

December 6, 2001, the CSRC (the Chinese SEC-equivalent) circulated a discussion draft on

improving the “administrative method on information disclosure of shareholder changes in listed

firms.” This evolved into a final set of guidelines enacted on December 1, 2002. According to

the new rules, for each negotiated transfer both seller and buyer would be required to disclose the

ownership chain tracing back to the ultimate owner. While this does not rule out possible

ownership misrepresentation, it arguably made it riskier for the parties involved (Li, 2002).



3. Data sources and summary statistics

The original deal-level data are from the “Negotiated transfer dataset” obtained through

CCERDATA, a data provider affiliated with the China Center for Economic Research (CCER) at

Peking University. This dataset covers all announced negotiated transfer deals from February 8,

1995 to September 26, 2007. For each deal, the data include the date when the transaction was

first announced; the names of the buyer and seller; the stock code and name of the company

whose shares were to be transferred; the price per share; and the total number of shares

transferred.

           We delete all deals that involve the reallocation of state assets within a state enterprise.

These are cases where the state simply reshuffles its assets within a business group with transfer

13
  While China is gradually selling off firms held by local governments, it is simultaneously strengthening its control
over firms owned by the central government. The latter are generally very large business groups, which may account
for the very strict oversight.

                                                         11
price equal to zero. We keep transfers between different state-owned firms where the transfer

price is non-zero. We also omit the 17 deals where we cannot obtain firm-level financial

information. This yields a final sample of 2121 deals involving 649 firms.

       Based on the transfer price, we construct our key dependent variable, Value loss, which is

defined as 1 minus the ratio of the transfer price to the average price of the corresponding

tradable shares during the month prior to the announcement date. Intuitively, this reflects the

extent of underpricing relative to the benchmark of the tradable share price. As a measure of deal

size we define the ratio of transferred shares over total shares (tradable and non-tradable) as

fraction transferred.

       We obtain annual data on financials such as stock turnover, sales revenue, and other

balance sheet information, and data on the ownership structure of listed firms from CSMAR, a

database on Chinese capital markets. (Much of this database is now also available through

Wharton Research Data Services.) Where necessary, this is supplemented with more detailed

data from Resset (www.resset.cn), a widely used database provided and maintained by Tsinghua

University. These yearly data are then matched up to each deal (where there may be multiple

deals in a year for a given firm). We also obtain the pre-deal monthly stock trading information

from CSMAR. These data are used to construct control variables, including turnover (the

average daily trading volume over total shares in the year preceding a deal); log(Assets);

leverage (total borrowing divided by total assets of the listed firm), MktValue (market value of

equity), dividends (total dividends divided by mean price in the year prior to the deal), ROA

(return on assets), and non-tradable (fraction of total shares that are not freely tradable).

       The CSMAR data are used to calculate abnormal returns for dates around each sale. We

calculate returns for a range of windows up to one month prior to the transfer announcement to



                                                  12
allow for pre-announcement information leakage about impending transfers – since the deal is

the result of buyer-seller negotiation, at least some leakage is likely to occur. This is particularly

likely in the case of government sales, since regulators must give approval before the transfer is

announced. (As we will see in the next section, there is clear evidence of pre-event information

leakage in the data.)

       Finally, these data are also used in our later examination of post-deal operating

performance. For these analyses, we focus on growth in assets (book value of assets), ROA

(return on assets), investment (ratio of investment to book value of physical assets), leverage

(total borrowing divided by total assets of the listed firm), wages (total wage bill), and

employment (total number of employees). Owing to its very long tails, we winsorize the ROA

data at the 1 percent and 99 percent levels (we obtain slightly stronger results if we use more

conservative cutoffs of 0.5 and 99.5 percent). Finally, starting in 1998 all listed firms were

required to report all related party transactions. As a measure of potential scale of asset stripping

(or tunneling), we define RPT_ratio as the ratio of related party transactions to total assets.

       A critical covariate for our analysis is disguised, an indicator variable denoting whether

the negotiated transfer seller is a SOE that has registered its holdings in deal documents as

private. To construct disguised, we manually recorded the registered identities of sellers’

transferred shares using the original deal disclosure documents, which can be found in the China

Financial Newspapers Database (henceforth CFND), provided by the Shenzhen-based Juling

Information Company. In each case, the disclosure documents list the company name and also

whether the shares are declared as SOE-owned, state-owned or privately held.

       For each transfer, to determine whether the seller had identified itself truthfully, we begin

by looking at the listed company’s IPO documents and all the annual reports that pre-date the



                                                  13
transfer. At these earlier dates, there was no strong incentive for misrepresentation, so we expect

relatively honest disclosure. One potential concern is that the originally state-owned firm itself

may have been privatized before the negotiated transfer date. However, this would itself show up

as a change in ownership and reported to the stock exchange, and hence observed by us.14

         Based on the registered and “true” identities of sellers, we classify them into four

categories: state sellers that registered their shares as owned by the central government; face-

value SOE sellers that registered their holdings as state legal person shares; private sellers that

registered their holdings as private, and where true ownership is determined to be private on the

basis of earlier documents; and disguised sellers, where holdings are registered as private, but we

determine that the ultimate owner is a state-owned entity. Note that both face-value SOE and

disguised sellers are owned by SOEs, but in the case of disguised sellers, the firm has chosen to

list ownership (incorrectly) as private in negotiated transfer deal documents.

         On the buyer side, we do not observe any differences between registered ownership and

true underlying ownership.15 We define private buyer to denote buyers with privately registered

holdings.

         For private sellers, there may also be scope for extracting value through transfer deals. In

particular, private sellers are for the most part firms that themselves have dispersed ownership.

14
   In cases where the seller is not listed in IPO reports or earlier annual reports, we search the “Business Information
System database” (henceforth BISD), which provides a list of large Chinese firms by city of incorporation, along
with their subsidiary companies’ ownership status (private or state). Again, we are able to identify firms where there
exists a mismatch in state versus private ownership declarations. Finally, for smaller firms not listed in BISD, we
performed an internet search using the seller’s name and the keywords “Guoyou Qiye” or “Guoyou Konggu Qiye”
(meaning state-owned or state-controlled). For example, on some local governments’ homepages, firms controlled
by the local government are listed. One example of a disguised firm thus uncovered is the China Beijing Corporation
For International Economic Cooperation (CBCIEC) that registered itself as private when it sold 8,400,000 shares of
Zhongyan Fangzhi (stock code: 600763) in July 17, 2001 to Xinjiang D-Long Group which is a privately-controlled
business group held by the Tang Brothers. However, according to the Beijing city website (www.beijing.gov.cn),
CBCIEC is a state-owned firm.
15
   There is little incentive for such misrepresentation on the buyer side. If a state company has cash available for a
stock purchase, it is likely easier for company officials to tunnel out the cash rather than converting it into
overpriced share purchases in exchange for kickbacks or favors. As noted, in practice we found no such transactions
in our data.

                                                          14
Thus, insiders in these selling firms may wish to transfer shares at a discount to other entities

where they possess greater cash flow rights. Any transaction between related parties must be

publicly disclosed,16 and we use this information to define an indicator variable, RPT, which

denotes negotiated transfers that involved sale to a related party.

         When we examine post-transfer firm attributes, it is important to keep in mind that

transfers result in a permanent shift in the firm’s ownership composition and as a result, we wish

to assess performance as a function of the stock of transfers that has occurred up to that point in

time rather than the flow of yearly transfers. To account for the history of transfers for each firm,

we calculate prior transfers up to year y as




where yfd is the year of transfer d for firm f. We may further disaggregate this measure by

transfer type, to allow for a distinct effect by type of transfer (i.e., disguised, face-value SOE,

state, and private.).



Summary statistics

Before proceeding to our econometric analyses, we present an overview and summary of the

broad patterns in our data.

         In Panel A of Table 1, we present summary statistics for the full sample of negotiated

transfers. Of particular note, the mean of Value loss (1 minus the ratio of the negotiated transfer

16
  Paralleling our discussion around the disguised classification, there may be concerns that some sellers choose not
to reveal that the buyer is a related party. If this is the case, we are likely underestimating the discount of related
party transactions.

                                                          15
price of non-tradable shares to the average stock price of corresponding tradable shares in the

month prior to the deal) is 0.73. The full distribution of Value loss is shown in Figure 2A. While

there are many reasons that governments sell ownership stakes at a lower price, in many cases

the discount is extreme: for more than 10 percent of transfers, Value loss exceeds 0.9, and as

shown in the table, the maximum is 0.99. More importantly, we show that Value loss is strongly

related to deal attributes that serve as markers for self-dealing.

       The mean of fraction transferred is 0.13. While this is a sizeable fraction of shares

outstanding, there are relatively few control deals – only 22 percent of negotiated transfers result

in a change in the controlling shareholder. This is indicative of the very high level of ownership

concentration in publicly traded Chinese firms.

       Private buyer has a mean value of 0.69, i.e., in nearly 70 percent of transfers the

purchaser is a private company. By contrast, private seller has a mean of 0.32, so nearly 70

percent of transfers involve some form of state entity as the seller. Thus, overall state sellers and

private buyers dominate the share transfer market. Disguised sellers account for 23 percent of all

sales, or a third of all state-seller deals, while face-value SOE deals account for 32 percent of

transactions.

       Finally, we observe that the mean of dividend is only 0.4 percent. It will be important to

control for this payout rate as well as share turnover, given that one could potentially account for

some of the transfer discount based on the difference in liquidity between tradable and non-

tradable shares.

       In Panel B, we present company-year level statistics for firms that had at least one

negotiated transfer during our sample period. We will use these data to assess the effects of

transfers on subsequent operating performance in Section 4.4 below. In Panel C of Table 1, we



                                                  16
present summary statistics to contrast the attributes of disguised and face-value SOE transactions.

Recall that the underlying ownership in both cases is a state-owned enterprise, but in the case of

disguised sellers, ownership is mis-declared as private in deal documents. The mean value of

Value loss for disguised sales is 0.80, versus 0.73 for face-value SOE sales, significant at the 1

percent level. A number of other attributes are significantly correlated with seller ownership, but

as we will see in the results section below, controlling for these deal characteristics do not affect

our estimates of the effect of disguised (or RPT) sales on Value Loss.

        In Figure 2B, we present the frequency distributions of Value loss for disguised and face-

value SOE sellers. The graph illustrates that the extent of underpricing is consistently greater for

disguised sellers, as its Value loss distribution is clearly shifted to the right, relative to face-value

SOE sellers.

        Further, disguised transactions are smaller (fraction transferred = 0.10, versus 0.16 for

face-value SOE sellers), consistent with disguised sellers executing deals that avoid greater

scrutiny by regulators, which may be triggered for larger transactions.

        In Figure 3 we show the [-6,+6] moving average for deals per month; we boldface

disguised and face-value SOE observations for ease of viewing. Interestingly, the two deal types

follow similar patterns until the end of 2001, when the number of disguised transfers falls

dramatically (coinciding with the announcement of strengthened disclosure requirements). The

number of disguised transfers remains well below the number of face-value SOE transfers until

the end of 2004, at which point the CSRC announced a conversion plan for non-tradable shares

(Haveman and Wang, 2013), putting a damper on the negotiated transfer market.

        In Figure 4, we show the [-6,+6] moving average of Value loss, with disguised and face-

value SOE transfers boldfaced. The pattern parallels that of Figure 3 – Value loss is generally



                                                   17
higher for disguised sellers, but with a steady decline for all types of sellers that sets in at the end

of 2001. Again, the timing is consistent with the increased regulatory oversight discussed in the

preceding section.



4. Results

4.1 Value loss and Disguised transfers

We begin by assessing the cross-sectional correlates of Value loss. Our main specifications are of

the form:



    Value lossfd = β1Disguisedfd + β2Privatefd + β3Statefd + β4State buyerfd

                                 + β5log(Assetsfy) + β6Turnoverfy + β7Dividendfy

                                 + β8FLeveragefy β9log(MktValue)fy + β10ROAfy                   (1)

                                 + β11Fraction transferredfd + β12Non-Tradablefd

                                 + Fixed effects + εfd



for negotiated transfer d of the shares of firm f in year y (note that in many cases there are

multiple transfers for a single firm in a given year). For seller ownership, the omitted variable is

face-value SOE. In all cases, we use robust standard errors clustered at the level of the listed firm.

We report these results in Table 2. In the first column, we include only the ownership variables,

disguised, state, private, and private buyer. The coefficient on disguised is 0.072, significant at

the 1 percent level. When we add year fixed effects in column (2), the coefficient on disguised

drops to 0.054, significant at the 1 percent level, while no other seller or buyer ownership

coefficients is significant at conventional levels. (In additional analyses, we follow Chordia,



                                                  18
Sarkar, and Subrahmanyam (2005) by including stock return volatility as a separate measure of

liquidity and find that this has no effect on our coefficient estimates for disguised.)

        The impact of including year dummies is not surprising, given the patterns observed in

Figures 2 and 3 – disguised transfers are concentrated in the earlier years of our sample, when

transfer discounts were also highest. Adding the year effects absorbs these compositional

differences in the timing of deals. If it is the case that disguised deals took place in the earlier

part of the sample period precisely because oversight was lax and hence underpricing

opportunities the greatest, then controlling for time period may understate the impact of

disguised ownership on Value loss.

        In column (3) we add controls, including log(Assets), turnover, dividends, ROA, non-

tradable, log(Mkt Value) and fraction transferred. The coefficient on disguised is largely

unaffected (as are the coefficients on other ownership variables). In column (4) we add 2-digit

SIC industry fixed effects; again, the results are largely unchanged. When we add firm fixed

effects in column (5) the point estimate on disguised falls to 0.029 (though still significant at the

1 percent level). Finally, in column (6) we limit the sample to state sellers (i.e. omitting private

sellers); the results are comparable to those obtained in comparable specifications with the full

sample.



4.2 Value loss and related party transactions

We have argued that disguised transactions are likely a means of regulatory evasion to transfer

value through underpriced asset sales. In this case, the underpricing is the result of principal-

agent problems in state firms. A related mismatch of incentives exists for private sellers – an

insider at a selling firm may wish to transfer shares at a discount to a separate entity where he



                                                  19
holds greater cash flow rights. We therefore look at the impact of related party transactions (RPT)

on Value loss in Table 3 (see, for example, Bertrand et al (2002), for a discussion on the

tunneling incentives among related parties). The first five columns parallel those of Table 2, but

with RPT included as a regressor. Consistent with negotiated transfers as a means of tunneling

value by private firms, RPT takes on a positive coefficient, and in most specifications its size is

comparable to that of disguised, though somewhat smaller in magnitude (in the range of 0.019-

0.037) and in some specifications it is not statistically significant. (In the firm fixed effects

specification, the RPT effect disappears as a result of the relative rarity of RPT transactions –

there were only 71 such transfers among private sellers.) Finally, in column (6), we limit the

sample to private sellers, the set of firms where related party transactions would be an effective

means of tunneling value. The coefficient in this specification increases to 0.066; by contrast, for

the sample of state sellers the coefficient on RPT is only 0.004 (see column (7)), and is

statistically indistinguishable from zero.

        Our findings on related party transactions are useful in benchmarking the magnitude of

the disguised coefficient, which we measure to be in the range of 0.029-0.072. While this is

small relative to the mean level of Value loss (0.73), it also indicates that for disguised transfers,

up to an additional quarter of the remaining transfer value is erased. Further, the effect of

disguised transfers is consistently measured as greater than that of related party transactions

which are accepted as a common source of tunneling in emerging markets.



4.3 The characteristics of Disguised transfers

The hypothesis that disguised sellers underprice their transfers as a means of eluding scrutiny has

a further prediction for the data. As noted in Section 2, larger transfers trigger greater public



                                                  20
disclosure. More importantly, larger transfers increase the likelihood of regulatory scrutiny,

given the attention that such deals attract in the media. Thus, we expect disguised transactions –

to the extent that this is a marker for greater underpricing – to be smaller relative to face-value

SOE transactions. We examine this additional prediction in Table 4, using specifications that

parallel those of equation (1), but with fraction transferred as the outcome variable. As before,

the omitted ownership variable is face-value SOE.

         In columns (1) and (2), the coefficient on disguised is about -0.05, significant at the 1

percent level, implying that disguised sales involve equity stakes that are more than 5 percentage

points smaller than face-value SOE transfers. The coefficient on state is positive (0.048) and

significant, implying that state transfers involve stakes that are 5 percentage points larger than

those of face-value SOE transfers. In column (3) we add firm fixed effects; once again the

coefficient on disguised is negative, though somewhat smaller, and significant at the 5 percent

level.

         To summarize thus far, we have documented a higher discount for transfers by disguised

sellers, and that such sales are smaller in size (relative to sales by face-value SOE sellers). We

argue that these patterns are consistent with disguised sales as a means of transferring value out

of state sellers.

         Before turning to our analysis of the consequences of negotiated transfers for operating

performance and market valuation, it is important to note that disguised is an endogenous

variable, chosen by the seller. As such, the readiest alternative explanation for the transfer

discount associated with disguised transfers we document above is that some state-owned

enterprises simply wish to sell their holdings very quickly and hide their real identities to

expedite the transaction. While we cannot fully rule out this possibility, there are several



                                                  21
considerations that favor our corruption-based interpretation. First, we have uncovered no media

accounts that suggest this as a motivation for disguised transfers, so if it is the primary cause it is

one that has eluded the media. Second, there is no reason to expect a correlation between the

need to execute a transfer quickly and the size of a desired transfer.

           A more general concern is that disguised sellers’ attributes may differ systematically

from those of other listed firms, and that these differences may underlie the higher Value loss of

disguised sellers. To account more flexibly for the different attributes of disguised versus face-

value SOE sellers, we present in Table 5 estimates of the effect of disguised on Value loss based

on propensity score matching.17 Our estimates are comparable to those in our main specifications,

indicating that differences in the distribution of observables are unlikely to account for our

results.



4.4 Post-transfer operating performance

We now examine assess how companies perform following negotiated transfers, and further

analyze whether there are differences in post-transfer performance across seller types. To

account for the cumulative impact of transfers – ownership changes are permanent and hence we

expect that the “stock” of ownership matters rather than the flow of ownership changes – we use

the accumulated share transfers up to year y at firm f, prior transfersfy. We may further

disaggregate prior transfers by seller type, which yields the firm-year level measures of

cumulative transfers disguised transfers, face-value SOE transfers, state transfers, and private

transfers.

17
   We follow the method and also the codes in Sascha and Ichino (2002). A logit model is used in the propensity
score test, where firms are matched on the following dimensions: log(Assets), Leverage, ROA, log(MktValue),
Turnover, Nontradable, Dividend Ratio and SIC-2 digit industry. The Epanechnikov kernel is used in the kernel
matching where the bandwidth is set at 0.04, smaller than the default value of 0.06.


                                                      22
       We begin by examining whether negotiated transfers in aggregate affect operating

performance in Table 6, using



                ROAfy+1 = β1Prior transfersfy + Controls + γy + δf + εfy                     (2)



where γ and δ are year and firm fixed-effects respectively. Throughout, we limit the sample to

firms that had at least one negotiated transfer during 1992-2005.

       In column (1) we observe that past transfers are strongly correlated with profitability. The

coefficient on prior transfers is 0.039, significant at the 1 percent level. Given the standard

deviation in prior transfers of 0.27, this implies that a one standard deviation increase in past

negotiated transfers is associated with an increase in return on assets of about 1 percent

(0.039*0.27).

       When we examine the determinants of related party transactions (RPT_ratio), a proxy for

asset stripping by insiders, we find no significant effect of prior transfers. At least part of the

overall improvement in profitability appears to work through the channel of reduced labor costs

– when log(Employment) is used as the dependent variable, the coefficient on prior transfers is -

0.38, significant at the 5 percent level. Also consistent with ownership transfers increasing

companies’ future prospects, we find that higher prior transfers are associated with a modest

increase in investment.

       In Table 7, we repeat specification 2, with prior transfers disaggregated based on seller

type. Our primary interest is in comparing the effects on operating performance from disguised

versus face-value SOE transfers. In column (1), with ROA as the outcome variable, we find that

the coefficient on face-value SOE transfers is positive and significant at the 5 percent level. Its



                                                  23
magnitude of 0.034 is comparable to that of the coefficient on prior transfers, reported in Table 5.

By contrast, disguised transfers are not associated with improved profitability: the coefficient on

disguised transfers is very close to zero, with a standard error of 0.024. The difference in the

coefficients on disguised transfers and face-value SOE transfers is not significant (p-

value=0.267), so any interpretation of these findings on the differential impact of disguised

versus face-value SOE transfers must necessarily be made with caution. Nonetheless, the

difference does provide tentative evidence that corrupted asset sales – those associated with

disguised transfers – result in lower improvements in profitability. This is consistent with the

view that, while asset transfers have the potential to improve profit incentives and governance,

for at least a subset of the cases we examine here, these benefits are erased by the value-

destroying activities of insiders.

        In the remaining columns of Table 7, we present the relationship between prior transfers

disaggregated by seller type and other measures of post-transfer performance. Interestingly,

when we look at determinants of related party transactions, RPT_ratio, we find a positive impact

from past disguised transfers, possibly indicating one channel through which profitability is

adversely affected by disguised transfers. Notably, there are no further differences between the

effects of disguised and face-value SOE transfers, with the exception of leverage. This helps to

rule out explanations for the difference in performance based on, for example, different

constraints that seller governments place on disguised versus face-value SOE sellers. (One

interpretation, albeit a speculative one, for the difference in the effects on leverage is that

borrowed funds may further serve as free cash flow that can be diverted by new owners.)




                                                  24
4.5 Negotiated transfers and market valuation

Given the profit improvements documented in the preceding section, it is natural to examine how

investors react to the announcement of negotiated transfers. This can help to provide validation

for the results on operating performance, and can also help to assess the extent to which investors

correctly anticipated the effects of different types of transfers. The latter is particularly relevant

given that disguised transfers may appear indistinguishable from face-value SOE transfers for

many investors.

        We assess the effect of ownership transfers by examining announcement cumulative

abnormal returns (CARs). In Figure 5, Panel A, we graph the median CARs for transfer

announcement dates over a one month pre-event window [-d,1], for d = {1,2,3,…30}, where

cumulative abnormal returns are calculated using a standard CAPM model (MacKinlay, 1997).

Median returns are positive, implying investor expectations of increased post-transfer

profitability. There is also striking evidence of pre-transfer information leakage –abnormal

returns begin to dissipate about two weeks before the transfer announcement, and are close to

zero on the actual announcement date.

        In Figure 5, Panel B, we present median CARs for the sample disaggregated by seller

type. For ease of comparing different types of SOE transfers, we highlight the lines for disguised

and face-value SOE sellers. For all seller types, pre-event returns are positive. Further, for

sufficiently long windows (to remove the effect of information leakage), the median returns are

comparable for the various seller types.

        In the first column of Table 8, we list the mean value of CAR[-d,1] for a range of

windows (d= -1,-5,-10,-15,-20,-25,-30); for anything longer than the short two day [-1,1]

window, average cumulative abnormal returns are positive and significant at least at the 5



                                                  25
percent level. (As Figure 5 suggests, there is a very high rate of information leakage.) In the

second column, we provide a Wilcoxon signed-rank test based on the fraction of transfer

announcements where returns are positive. Again, for any window longer than two days, we find

that significantly more than half of transfer announcements are associated with positive

cumulative abnormal returns (above 55 percent of announcements for any window).

         We next look at the determinants of cumulative abnormal returns using a regression

framework to assess whether there are different investor responses as a function of seller type

and other sale attributes. In all regressions, we include year and 2-digit industry effects or, more

stringently, firm fixed-effects. We also control for firm size by including log(Assets). We are

particularly interested in whether seller identity affects returns. We therefore include disguised,

state, and private seller as covariates (face-value SOE is the omitted category). We also include

fraction transferred to examine whether investors are sensitive to the extent of ownership

change.18

         We present these results in Table 9. In the first 5 columns we present results with year

and industry fixed effects, using windows that begin 5, 10, 20, and 30 days before the official

transfer announcement. The second set of columns includes firm fixed-effects. Aside from the 5

day window, we find that disguised transfers are associated with lower event returns, though this

relationship is not statistically significant in any specification. Further, when we include firm

fixed effects, the coefficient on disguised switches sign, though again in no case is the effect

significant. Notably, for any window longer than five days, the firm fixed effects results indicate

that investors do not, for a given firm, respond differently to transfer announcements as a

function of seller type.


18
  It is worth noting that we cannot use Value loss as an independent variable in these specifications since Value loss
and CARs are mechanically correlated due to the appearance of stock price in both variables.

                                                         26
        The one transfer attribute that is robustly associated with returns is fraction transferred –

its coefficient is, in all specifications, significant at least at the 5 percent level and its magnitude

over longer windows implies that a standard deviation increase in fraction transferred of 0.12

increases abnormal returns by more than 1 percent.

        Overall, we find that investors respond positively to transfers, underpricing

notwithstanding. However, there is little evidence that investors respond differently to sales as a

function of ownership type.



5. Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate the underpricing of state asset sales and the subsequent performance

of publicly traded firms in China.

        We argue that our results, which involve particularly steep discounts for disguised sales

and related party transactions, are best explained by corruption as a source of underpricing. Our

analyses of post-transfer performance find that, despite the very high level of underpricing

overall, profitability improves following asset transfers. However, there is an important

exception to this general pattern: the lack of improved profitability for disguised transfers (as

well as the accompanying increase in related party transactions) provides tentative evidence that

there are some cases where state asset sales provide neither revenue benefits nor subsequent

operating improvements.

        While our results on profitability are noisily estimated, they indicate that the further

analysis of the circumstances where privatizations fail to achieve their desired ends may be a

fruitful direction for future research. Such evidence can help to enrich our understanding of the

privatization process, and the role of ownership in affecting organizational performance.



                                                   27
References:

Allen, F., Qian, J., Meijun Qian, 2005. Law, finance, and economic growth in China. Journal of
       Financial Economics 77, 57-116.
Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta and Mullainathan, Sendhil 2002, Ferreting Out Tunneling: An
       Application to Indian Business Groups, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1),
       February: 121-48.
Biais Bruno and Enrico Perotti, 2002. "Machiavellian Privatization," American Economic
       Review, March, vol. 92(1), pages 240-258.
Chen Charles J.P.,Zengquan Li, Xijia Su, and Zheng Sun, 2010, Rent-seeking incentives,
     corporate political connections, and the control structure of private firms: Chinese evidence,
     Journal of Corporate Finance forthcoming
Chen Gongmeng, Michael Firth, Daniel N. Gao and Oliver M. Rui, 2006, Ownership structure,
       corporate governance, and fraud: Evidence from China, Journal of Corporate Finance,
       Volume 12, Issue 3, Pages 424-448
Chen, Gongmeng., Michael Firth, Yu Xin and Liping Xu, 2008, Control Transfers, Privatization,
       and Corporate Performance: Efficiency Gains in China's Listed Companies, Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Volume 43, issue 01, pp: 161-190
Chen Zhiwu and Peng Xiong, 2001, Discounts On Illiquid Stocks: Evidence From China,
       working paper.
Chordia Tarun ,Asani Sarkar, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2005, An empirical analysis of
       stock and bond market liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 18, 85-129.
Cull, R., Xu, L. C., 2005. Institutions, ownership, and finance: The determinants of profit
       reinvestment among Chinese firms. Journal of Financial Economics 77: 117-146.
Deng, J., Gan, J., He, J., 2008. The dark side of concentrated ownership in privatization:
       Evidence from China. Unpublished working paper. Hong Kong University of Science and
       Technology.
Dewenter, Kathryn and Paul H. Malatesta. 1997. “Public Offerings of State-Owned and
       Privately-Owned Enterprises: An International Comparison,” Journal of Finance 52, pp.
       1659-1679.
Fan Joseph P.H., K.C. John Wei, and Xinzhong Xu, 2010, Corporate Finance and Governance in
       Emerging Markets: A Selective Review and An Agenda for Future Research, Journal of

                                                28
      Corporate Finance forthcoming
Fan, Joseph P.H., T.J. Wong and Tianyu Zhang, 2007, Politically connected CEOs, corporate
       governance, and Post-IPO performance of China's newly partially privatized firms,
       Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 84, Issue 2, May, pp: 330-357.
Fisman, Raymond, 2001, Estimating the Value of Political Connections. American Economic
       Review, September, pp:1095-1102
Goldman, Eitan, Joerg Rocholl,. and Jongil, So., 2009, Do Politically Connected Boards Affect
       Firm Value? Review of Financial Studies, Vol 22 (6), pp: 2331-2360.
Gupta, Nandini, 2005, Partial Privatization and Firm Performance, The Journal of Finance, Vol.
       LX, No. 2, April, pp: 987-1015.
Haveman, Heather and Yongxiang Wang, 2013, Going (More) Public: Institutional Isomorphism
       and Ownership Reform among Chinese Firms, Management and Organization Review,
       Vol 9, issue 1, pp: 17-51
Huang Zhangkai and XInzhong Xu, 2009, Marketability, Control, and the Pricing of Block
       Shares, Journal of Banking and Finance, Volume 33, Issue 1, January, Pages 88–97.
Huyghebaert N and Quan Q, 2009, Share issuing privatizations in China: Sequencing and its
       effects on public share allocation and underpricing, Journal of Comparative Economics,
       vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 306 - 320.
Jian, Ming and T.J. Wong, 2003. Earnings management and tunneling through related party
       transactions: Evidence from Chinese corporate groups. Working Paper,University of
       Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Jiang Guohua, Charles Lee and Heng Yue, 2010, Tunneling in China: The Remarkable Case of
       Inter-Corporate Loans, Forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Jones, Steven L., William L. Megginson, Robert C. Nash, and Jeffry M. Netter. 1999. “Share
       Issue Privatizations as Financial Means to Political and Economic Ends,” Journal of
       Financial Economics 53, pp. 217-253.
La Porta, Rafael, and Florencio López-de-Silanes, 1999, The Benefits of Privatization: Evidence
       from Mexico, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume.114, No.4, pp:1193-1242
Li, Bin, 2002, More transparency in information disclosure by listed firms in China, Dec 27,
       Shanghai Securities Journal.



                                               29
Li Yuxian, 2006, The differences among bribe-taking, crime of corruption and crime of
       embezzlement, (zui xin xing shi fa lv wen jian jie du), Issue 10, 2006, Court Press,
       Beijing.
Liu Qiao, a, and Zhou (Joe) Lu, 2007, Corporate governance and earnings management in the
       Chinese listed companies: A tunneling perspective, Journal of Corporate Finance,
       Volume 13, Issue 5, December, Pages 881-906
Kahl,Matthias, Jun Liu and Francis A. Longstaff, 2003, Paper millionaires: how valuable is stock
       to a stockholder who is restricted from selling it? Journal of Financial Economics, Vol
       67, PP 385-410.
Kaplan, Steven. and Luigi. Zingales, 1997, Do Financing Constraints Explain why Investment is
       Correlated with Cash Flow? Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.112, pp: 169-215.
MacKinlay, C.A., 1997. Event studies in economics and finance. Journal of Economic Literature,
       35, 13-39.
McMillan John and Jim Twiss, Gazprom and Hermitage Capital: Shareholder Activism in
       Russia, Stanford GSB Case IB-36, 2002 June.
Megginson, William L., and Jeffry M. Netter, 2001 From state to market: a survey of empirical
       studies on privatization, Journal of Economic Literature, Volume 39 , No.2, pp: 321–389.
Morgan Stanley, 1997. Privatized Companies: Underperformance Over? Morgan Stanley and
       Co., London.
Peng,Qian., K.C. John Wei, and Zhishu Yang,2011, Tunneling or propping: Evidence from
       connected transactions in China, Journal of Corporate Finance, Volume 17, Issue 2,
       April, Pages 306–325
Perotti, Enrico. 1995. “Credible Privatization,” American Economic Review 85, pp. 847-859.
Shao Daosheng, 2007, Corruption in China, the dramatically changing society (JuBian Shehui
       Zhong de Zhongguo Fubai Wenti, in Chinese), unpublished book manuscript.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Treisman, 2005, A Normal Country: Russia After Communism,
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, v19 (1,Winter), pp: 151-174.
Silber, W., 1992. Discounts on restricted stock: the impact of illiquidity on stock prices.
       Financial Analysts Journal, July/August, 60–64.
Sun, Q., Tong, W.H.S., 2003. China's share issue privatization: The extent of its success. Journal
       of Financial Economics 70, 183-222

                                                 30
Tian, L. 2000. Government shareholdings and the value of China's modern firms. Working
        paper No. 319. Institute of Finance and Accounting, London Business School.
Wedeman, Alexander, 2012, Double Paradox: Rapid Growth and Rising Corruption in China,
Cornell University Press.
Zuo Dapei, 2006, No more sales of state assets: Uncover the mysteries of cheap privatization in
       China (in Chinese: Bu Xu Zai Mai: Jie Chuan Qiye Gaizhi De Shenhua), China Financial
       and Economic Publishing House, Beijing.




                                               31
Figure 1: The structure of a negotiated transfer of nontradable shares


A publicly-traded company A:
 Block shareholder B1 (unlisted firm)                                   The seller B1 in the

 Block shareholder B2 (unlisted firm)
                                            Non-tradable shares
 Block shareholder B3 (unlisted firm)

 ……………………………………...




 Tradable shareholder D1 (firm or individual)

 Tradable shareholder D2 (firm or individual)     Tradable shares

 ……………………....




                                                                        The buyer C in the deal




Note: Three firms are involved in this negotiated transfer of nontradable shares: The seller B, an
unlisted firm, was a large shareholder of the publicly-traded company A, and it sold its non-
tradable holdings to the buyer C.




                                                32
Figure 2A – Distribution of Value Loss

                           0.35



                            0.3



                           0.25
   Fraction of transfers




                            0.2



                           0.15



                            0.1



                           0.05



                             0
                                  < 0.1   0.1 ‐ 0.2   0.2 ‐ 0.3   0.3 ‐ 0.4   0.4 ‐ 0.5   0.5 ‐ 0.6   0.6 ‐ 0.7   0.7 ‐ 0.8   0.8 ‐ 0.9   0.9 ‐ 1
                                                                                 Value loss

Note: Value loss is equal to 1 minus the ratio of the negotiated transfer price of non-tradable shares to the average stock price of
corresponding tradable shares in the month prior to the deal. The graph shows the distribution of Value loss for 2121 negotiated
transfer deals during 1995 – 2007.

                                                                                          33
Figure 2B – Distribution of Value loss by seller ownership

                           0.45


                            0.4


                           0.35
   Fraction of transfers




                            0.3


                           0.25

                                                                                                                                      Disguised
                            0.2
                                                                                                                                      Face‐value SOE
                           0.15


                            0.1


                           0.05


                             0
                                  < 0.1   0.1 ‐ 0.2 0.2 ‐ 0.3 0.3 ‐ 0.4 0.4 ‐ 0.5 0.5 ‐ 0.6 0.6 ‐ 0.7 0.7 ‐ 0.8 0.8 ‐ 0.9   0.9 ‐ 1
                                                                          Value loss
Note: Value loss is equal to 1 minus the ratio of the negotiated transfer price of non-tradable shares to the average stock price of
corresponding tradable shares in the month prior to the deal. Disguised sellers are state-owned entities selling shares where the
holdings are registered as private in deal documents; Face-value SOE sellers are state-owned entities that honestly represented their
ownership in deal documents. The graph shows the distribution of Value loss for these transfer deals during 1995 – 2007.



                                                                                            34
Figure 3: Number of negotiated transfer deals by type of seller, [-6,+6] month moving average

 14



 12



 10



  8
                                                                                                                 Private
                                                                                                                 State
  6
                                                                                                                 Face‐value SOE
                                                                                                                 Disguised
  4



  2



  0
         Jan 1998



                    Jan 1999



                               Jan 2000



                                          Jan 2001



                                                     Jan 2002



                                                                Jan 2003



                                                                           Jan 2004



                                                                                           Jan 2005



                                                                                                      Jan 2006
Notes: The graph shows the (weighted average) distribution of negotiated transfer deals during 1997 – 2007. Disguised sellers are
state-owned entities selling shares where the holdings are registered as private in deal documents; State sellers are state entity; Face-
value SOE sellers are state-owned entities that have honestly represented their ownership in deal documents; Private sellers are private
firms.

                                                                                      35
Figure 4: Mean Value loss of negotiated transfers, by seller type, [-6,+6] month moving average

   1

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6
                                                                                                              Private
 0.5
                                                                                                              State
 0.4                                                                                                          Face‐value SOE
                                                                                                              Disguised
 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

   0
          Jan 1998



                     Jan 1999



                                Jan 2000



                                           Jan 2001



                                                      Jan 2002



                                                                 Jan 2003



                                                                            Jan 2004



                                                                                        Jan 2005



                                                                                                   Jan 2006
Notes: Value loss is equal to 1 minus the ratio of the negotiated transfer price of non-tradable shares to the average stock price of
corresponding tradable shares in the month prior to the deal. The graph shows the (weighted average) distribution of negotiated
transfer deals during 1997 – 2007. Disguised sellers are state-owned entities selling shares where the holdings are registered as private
in deal documents; State sellers are state entity; Face-value SOE sellers are state-owned entities that have honestly represented their
ownership in deal documents; Private sellers are private firms.


                                                                                   36
 Figure 5A: Median cumulative abnormal returns for transfer announcements for windows [-30,1] to [-1,1]

               0.014



               0.012



                0.01



               0.008
   CAR(‐d,1)




               0.006



               0.004



               0.002



                  0
                       ‐30 ‐29 ‐28 ‐27 ‐26 ‐25 ‐24 ‐23 ‐22 ‐21 ‐20 ‐19 ‐18 ‐17 ‐16 ‐15 ‐14 ‐13 ‐12 ‐11 ‐10 ‐9 ‐8 ‐7 ‐6 ‐5 ‐4 ‐3 ‐2 ‐1
                                                         Date d (relative to transfer announcement)

Notes: CAR[-d,1] is the cumulative abnormal returns over window [-d,1] around the first announcement of each negotiated transfer.




                                                                                 37
Figure 5B: Median CARS by seller type for transfer announcements for windows [-30,1] to [-1,1]

                0.02




               0.015




                0.01
                                                                                                       Private
   CAR(‐d,1)




                                                                                                       State
                                                                                                       Face‐value SOE
               0.005                                                                                   Disguised




                   0
                        ‐30
                        ‐29
                        ‐28
                        ‐27
                        ‐26
                        ‐25
                        ‐24
                        ‐23
                        ‐22
                        ‐21
                        ‐20
                        ‐19
                        ‐18
                        ‐17
                        ‐16
                        ‐15
                        ‐14
                        ‐13
                        ‐12
                        ‐11
                        ‐10
                         ‐9
                         ‐8
                         ‐7
                         ‐6
                         ‐5
                         ‐4
                         ‐3
                         ‐2
                         ‐1
               ‐0.005
                                  Date d (relative to transfer announcement)

Notes: CAR[-d,1] is the cumulative abnormal returns over window [-d,1] around the first announcement of each negotiated transfer.
Disguised sellers are state-owned entities selling shares where the holdings are registered as private in deal documents; State sellers
are state entity; Face-value SOE sellers are state-owned entities that have honestly represented their ownership in deal documents;
Private sellers are private firms.

                                                                     38
Table 1 - Summary Statistics

Panel A – Negotiated transfer deal-level statistics

                              Mean        Std Dev           Min            Max       Observations
 Value Loss                    0.73         0.21           -2.17           0.99          2121
 Fraction Transferred          0.13         0.12            0.00           0.75          2121
 Nontradable                   0.64         0.11            0.24           0.96          2121
 Log(Assets)                  20.43         0.85           12.31          24.15          2121
 Leverage                      0.25         0.17            0.00           0.97          2121
 ROA                          0.004         0.11           -0.63           0.16          2121
 Log(MKT value)               21.29         0.68           19.03          24.20          2121
 Dividend Ratio (*100)         0.40         0.85            0.00           8.24          2121
 Turnover                      4.18         2.56            0.39          17.77          2121
 Private                       0.32         0.47            0.00           1.00          2121
 Face-value SOE                0.32         0.47            0.00           1.00          2121
 State                         0.14         0.34            0.00           1.00          2121
 Disguised                     0.23         0.42            0.00           1.00          2121
 RPT                           .078        0.268            0.00           1.00          2121
 Private Buyer                 0.69         0.46            0.00           1.00          2121
Notes: Value loss is equal to 1 minus the ratio of the negotiated transfer price of non-tradable
shares to the average stock price of corresponding tradable shares in the month prior to the deal;
Fraction Transferred is the ratio of shares transferred in this deal to all outstanding shares;
Log(Assets) is the log value of total sales of the listed firm in the last year; Nontradable is the
ratio of nontradable shares to total shares; log(Mkt value) is the log value of market value of the
firm; Leverage is the ratio of total borrowings to total assets of the listed firm; Dividend Ratio is
the ratio of dividends over price in the year prior to the deal; Turnover is average daily turnover
in the past year; Private is a dummy variable indicating whether the seller is a private firm;
Face-value SOE is a dummy variable indicating a SOE seller that has honestly represented its
ownership in deal documents; State is a dummy denoting the seller is a state entity; Disguised is
a dummy variable denoting a state-owned entity selling shares where the holdings are registered
as private in deal documents; RPT is a dummy variable indicating whether the seller and the
buyer are related parties according to China accounting rules; Private Buyer is a dummy
indicating the buyer is a private firm.




                                                 39
Panel B - Listed firm level variables

                                        Mean       Std Dev        Min        Max       Observations
Prior Transfers                           0.201       0.271        0.000      1.934         5499
Prior Transfers: Disguised                0.041       0.107        0.000      1.026         5499
Prior Transfers: Face-value SOE           0.076       0.167        0.000      1.814         5499
Prior Transfers: State                    0.043       0.122        0.000      1.004         5499
Prior Transfers: Private                  0.041       0.108        0.000      1.170         5499
Private legal person ownership            0.343       0.240        0.000      0.910         5455
State legal person ownership              0.121       0.208        0.000      0.850         5455
State ownership                           0.147       0.213        0.000      0.886         5455
Log(1+Tobin's Q)                          1.254       0.390        0.454      4.200         5469
Log(Sales)                               19.716       1.318        7.950     24.672         5351
Employees_F1                              6.987       1.342        1.792     11.090         3365
ROA_F1                                    0.014       0.086       -0.348      0.173         4772
RPT_Ratio_F1                              0.147       0.204        0.000      0.740         4644
Investment Ratio_F1                       0.053       0.064       -0.038      0.749         4045
Leverage_F1                               0.259       0.196        0.000      6.334         4899
Notes:Prior Transfers is the cumulative transfers, which is further disaggregated into four
types: Disguised, Face-value SOE, State and Private transfers; Private legal person ownership
is the ratio of total legal person shares owned by non-state entities to total outstanding shares;
State legal person ownership is the ratio of total state legal person shares to total outstanding
shares; State ownership is the ratio of total state shares to total outstanding shares; Log(Sales)
is the log value of total sales; ROA which is defined as the ratio of net profits (after tax) over
total assets, RPT_Ratio is the ratio of total related party transactions to total assets, Investment
Ratio is the ratio of investment over total assets, Leverage is the ratio of total borrowings to
total assets of the listed firm; Employees is the log value of total employees; F1 denotes these
variables are in year t+1; all above variables are defined at the listed firm level and all
accounting ratios are trimmed at 1% and 99% quantitle to avoid extreme values. We restrict
our sample to firms that have at least one transfer in its entire history.




                                                40
Panel C – Comparison of Face-value SOE and Disguised transfers

                           Face-value     Disguised=1      Difference      P-value
                            SOE =1
Value Loss                    0.730          0.801           -0.071         0.000
Fraction Transferred          0.156          0.099            0.057         0.000
log(Sales)                   19.494          19.191           0.304         0.000
Dividend Ratio (*100)         0.398          0.314            0.084         0.064
Turnover                      4.149           4.554          -0.406         0.009
Observations                   674             480
Notes: Value loss is equal to 1 minus the ratio of the negotiated transfer price of
non-tradable shares to the average stock price of corresponding tradable shares in
the month prior to the deal; Fraction Transferred is the ratio of shares transferred
in this deal to all outstanding shares; Log(sales) is the log value of total sales of
the listed firm in the last year; Dividend Ratio is the ratio of dividends over price
in the year prior to the deal; Turnover is average daily turnover in the past year;
Private Seller is a dummy variable indicating whether the seller is actually a
private firm instead of a state firm; Face-value SOE is a dummy variable
indicating the state seller honestly states his shareholdings as state-owned shares
in the deal document; Disguised is a dummy variable denoting whether the
negotiated transfer seller is a state legal person that has registered its holdings in
deal documents as general legal person shares.




                                               41
Table 2 – Effect of seller type on Value loss

                       (1)       (2)      (3)               (4)        (5)       (6)
 Disguised          0.072*** 0.054*** 0.047***          0.047***   0.029***   0.042***
                     (0.013)  (0.011)  (0.010)           (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.010)
 State               -0.029    -0.014   -0.002            0.001     -0.020     -0.002
                     (0.017)  (0.014)  (0.012)           (0.012)    (0.019)    (0.012)
 Private            -0.031**    0.009    0.011            0.014     -0.007      0.000
                     (0.015)  (0.012)  (0.010)           (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.000)
 Private Buyer        0.002    0.004    -0.002           -0.001     -0.012
                     (0.013)  (0.010)  (0.009)           (0.010)    (0.015)
 Dividend Ratio                       -1.440**          -1.670**     -1.004   -1.890***
                                       (0.723)           (0.720)    (1.104)     (0.723)
 Turnover                             0.005***           0.004*      0.000       0.001
                                       (0.002)           (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.002)
 Fraction                               -0.042            -0.057    -0.067      -0.032
        Transferred                    (0.034)           (0.036)    (0.049)     (0.033)
 Nontradable                          0.157***          0.151***      0.300    0.088**
                                       (0.050)           (0.053)    (0.197)     (0.040)
 Log(Assets)                          -0.10***          -0.11***    -0.064    -0.135***
                                       (0.012)           (0.013)    (0.050)     (0.011)
 Leverage                               0.034             0.031      0.100    0.237***
                                       (0.047)           (0.049)    (0.071)     (0.037)
 ROA                                     0.009            0.008      0.025       0.005
                                       (0.012)           (0.012)    (0.018)     (0.021)
 log(Mkt value)                       0.108***          0.118***   0.125***   0.137***
                                       (0.013)           (0.013)    (0.026)     (0.011)
                                                                                  State
 Sample                  Full        Full       Full      Full       Full        sellers
                                                         Ind &     Firm &        Ind &
 Fixed Effects           No         Year        Year      Year      Year          Year
 Observations           2,121       2,121       2,121    2,121      2,121        1,439
 R-squared              0.035       0.350       0.457    0.470      0.697        0.571




                                                42
Notes: The dependent variable in all specifications is Value Loss, equal to 1 minus the
ratio of the negotiated transfer price of non-tradable shares to the average stock price of
corresponding tradable shares in the month prior to the deal; Disguised is a dummy
variable denoting whether the negotiated transfer seller is a state legal person that has
registered its holdings in deal documents as general legal person shares; State is a dummy
denoting the seller is selling state shares; Private is a dummy variable indicating whether
the seller is actually a private firm instead of a state firm; Face-value SOE (the omitted
category) is a dummy variable indicating the state seller honestly states his shareholdings
as state-owned shares in the deal document; Private Buyer is a dummy indicating the
buyer in this deal is a private firm instead of a state firm; Dividend Ratio is the ratio of
dividends over price in the year prior to the deal; Turnover is average daily turnover in the
past year; Log(Assets) is the log value of total assets of the listed firm in the last year;
Fraction Transferred is the ratio of shares transferred in this deal to all outstanding shares;
Nontradable is the ratio of nontradable shares to total shares; log(Mkt value) is the log
value of market value of the firm; Leverage is the ratio of total borrowings to total assets
of the listed firm. In all cases, the columns report the results of a linear regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm level included in parentheses. In specifications with
industry fixed effects, the industry is defined at the 2-digit SIC level. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                43
Table 3 - Effect of related party transactions (RPT) on Value loss

                      (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)                    (5)       (6)           (7)
Disguised          0.071*** 0.053*** 0.046*** 0.046***               0.028***     0.000      0.042***
                    (0.013)  (0.011)  (0.010)  (0.010)                (0.011)    (0.000)      (0.010)
State               -0.028   -0.014    -0.001    0.002                 -0.019     0.000        -0.002
                    (0.018)  (0.014)  (0.012)  (0.012)                (0.019)    (0.000)      (0.012)
Private            -0.032**   0.008     0.009    0.012                 -0.008
                    (0.015)  (0.012)  (0.010)  (0.010)                (0.013)
Private Buyer        0.001    0.004    -0.003   -0.002                 -0.013       0.005      -0.004
                    (0.013)  (0.010)  (0.009)  (0.010)                (0.015)     (0.023)     (0.010)
Dividend Ratio                       -1.496** -1.736**                 -0.954      -0.584   -1.878***
                                      (0.709)  (0.712)                (1.113)     (1.118)     (0.725)
Turnover                             0.005*** 0.004*                    0.000      0.003       0.001
                                      (0.002)  (0.002)                (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.002)
Fraction                               -0.047  -0.063*                 -0.069      -0.149      -0.033
       Transferred                    (0.035)  (0.037)                (0.049)     (0.107)     (0.034)
Nontradable                          0.156*** 0.148***                  0.305     0.257*     0.087**
                                      (0.050)  (0.053)                (0.196)     (0.151)     (0.040)
Log(Assets)                          -0.10*** -0.11***                 -0.064   -0.104***   -0.135***
                                      (0.012)  (0.013)                (0.050)     (0.038)     (0.010)
Leverage                                0.033    0.030                  0.097      -0.026    0.236***
                                      (0.047)  (0.049)                (0.071)     (0.024)     (0.037)
ROA                                     0.009    0.008                  0.025      -0.006       0.005
                                      (0.012)  (0.012)                (0.018)     (0.006)     (0.021)
log(Mkt value)                       0.107*** 0.116***               0.125***   0.121***    0.136***
                                      (0.013)  (0.013)                (0.026)     (0.029)     (0.012)
RPT                 0.037*    0.019   0.032*    0.034*                  0.025    0.066***      0.004
                    (0.020)  (0.020)  (0.017)  (0.017)                (0.019)     (0.024)     (0.022)
                                                                                  Private
Sample                 Full        Full       Full         Full        Full                 State Seller
                                                                                   Seller
                                                           Ind &     Firm &
Fixed Effects           No        Year        Year                              Ind & Year Ind & Year
                                                            Year      Year
Observations          2,121       2,121       2,121        2,121      2,121        682         1,439
R-squared             0.037       0.350       0.459        0.471      0.697       0.407        0.570




                                                      44
Notes: The dependent variable in all specifications is Value Loss, equal to 1 minus the ratio of the
negotiated transfer price of non-tradable shares to the average stock price of corresponding tradable
shares in the month prior to the deal; RPT is a dummy variable indicating whether the seller and the buyer
are related parties according to China accounting rules; Disguised is a dummy variable denoting whether
the negotiated transfer seller is a state legal person that has registered its holdings in deal documents as
general legal person shares; State is a dummy denoting the seller is selling state shares; Private is a
dummy variable indicating whether the seller is actually a private firm instead of a state firm; Face-value
SOE (the omitted category) is a dummy variable indicating the state seller honestly states his
shareholdings as state-owned shares in the deal document; Private Buyer is a dummy indicating the buyer
in this deal is a private firm instead of a state firm; Dividend Ratio is the ratio of dividends over price in
the year prior to the deal; Turnover is average daily turnover in the past year; Log(Assets) is the log value
of total assets of the listed firm in the last year; Fraction Transferred is the ratio of shares transferred in
this deal to all outstanding shares; Nontradable is the ratio of nontradable shares to total shares; log(Mkt
value) is the log value of market value of the firm; Leverage, the ratio of total borrowings to total assets
of the listed firm. In all cases, the columns report the results of a linear regression with standard errors
clustered at the firm level included in parentheses. In specifications with industry fixed effects, the
industry is defined at the 2-digit SIC level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%




                                                      45
Table 4: –The determinants of transfer size

                               (1)                      (2)                 (3)
Disguised                  -0.052***               -0.047***            -0.018**
                            (0.007)                  (0.007)             (0.008)
State                      0.048***                 0.047***            0.053***
                            (0.011)                  (0.010)             (0.014)
Private                    -0.057***               -0.052***            -0.020**
                            (0.007)                  (0.007)             (0.008)
Private Buyer              -0.020***               -0.018***              -0.003
                            (0.007)                  (0.007)             (0.008)
Dividend Ratio                                        -0.490            -1.278**
                                                     (0.392)             (0.636)
Turnover                                              0.001               -0.001
                                                     (0.002)             (0.002)
log(Assets)                                        -0.013***              -0.009
                                                     (0.004)             (0.009)
Fixed Effects                   Year              Ind & Year           Firm&Year
Observations                   2,121                  2,121                2,121
R-squared                      0.109                  0.158                0.513
Notes: The dependent variable in column (1),(2) and (3) is Fraction Transferred,
the ratio of shares transferred in this deal to all outstanding shares. Disguised is a
dummy variable denoting a state-owned entity selling shares where the holdings
are registered as private in deal documents; State is a dummy denoting the seller is
a state entity; Face-value SOE (the omitted category of seller type) is a dummy
variable indicating a SOE seller that has honestly represented its ownership in deal
documents; Private is a dummy variable indicating whether the seller is a private
firm; Private Buyer is a dummy indicating the buyer is a private firm; Turnover is
average daily turnover in the past year; Log(Assets) is the log value of total assets
of the listed firm in the last year; In all cases, the columns report the results of a
linear regression with standard errors clustered at the firm level included in
parentheses. In specifications with industry fixed effects, the industry is defined at
the 2-digit SIC level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%




                                               46
Table 5: Effect of Disguised on Value loss: Propensity Score Matching

                                                             Number of        Number of
                                                             Treatment         Control
Dependent Variable     Matching Method                         Firms            Firms         ATE Std. Err.
Value loss              Radius Matching                         476             1510          0.073 0.008
Value loss              Kernel Matching                         476             1510          0.044 0.009
Value loss         Nearest-Neighbor Matching                    480              966          0.059 0.015
Notes: Stata codes come from Becker Sascha and Andrea Ichino (2002). ATE stands for "Average Treatment Effect
on the Treated." Bootstrap replication number is set at 100 in each case. A logit model is used in the propensity
score test, where firms are matched on these dimensions: Log(Assets), Leverage, ROA, log(Mkt value), Turnover,
Nontradable, Dividend Ratio and SIC-2 digit industry. The Epanechnikov kernel is used in the kernel matching
where the bandwidth is set at 0.04, smaller than the default value of 0.06.




                                                       47
Table 6 - Relationship between listed firm level operating performance and Prior Transfers

                                      (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)
                                                  RPT                       Investment
                                     ROA                     Employees                    Leverage
Dependent Variable                                Ratio                         Ratio
Prior Transfers                    0.039***      -0.027        -0.380**       0.017**        -0.026
                                    (0.010)      (0.032)        (0.161)       (0.008)        (0.028)
Private legal person ownership       -0.002       0.037          -0.193        -0.003         0.021
                                    (0.010)      (0.054)        (0.161)       (0.008)        (0.028)
State legal person ownership        -0.003        0.032          -0.273        -0.013        -0.052
                                    (0.027)      (0.053)        (0.239)       (0.019)        (0.040)
State ownership                      0.040       -0.015          -0.204        -0.011        -0.032
                                    (0.028)      (0.062)        (0.272)       (0.022)        (0.041)
Log(1+Tobin's Q)                   0.070***       0.026        -0.227**      0.032***        -0.039
                                    (0.007)      (0.017)        (0.091)       (0.006)        (0.025)
log(Sales)                         0.009***       0.009        0.231***         0.003        -0.016
                                    (0.003)      (0.006)        (0.047)       (0.002)        (0.012)
Fixed Effects                                                 Firm & Year
Observations                          4,629       4,470          3,232         3,928          4,707
R-squared                             0.277       0.428           0.824        0.330          0.469
Notes: The dependent variables are ROA, the ratio of net profits (after tax) to total assets,
Employees, which is the log value of total number of employees; Investment Ratio, the ratio of
investment to total assets, and Leverage, the ratio of total borrowings to total assets of the listed
firm respectively, RPT_Ratio is the ratio of total related party transactions to total assets; Prior
Transfers are cumulative transfers in this listed firm; Private legal person ownership is the ratio
of total legal person shares owned by non-state entities to total outstanding shares; State legal
person ownership is the ratio of total state legal person shares to total outstanding shares; State
ownership is the ratio of total state shares to total outstanding shares. Other variables are self-
explained. In all cases, the columns report the results of a linear regression with standard errors
clustered at the firm level included in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.




                                                 48
Table 7 - Relationship between listed firm level financials and four types of "Prior Transfers"

                                        (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                    RPT                      Investment
                                       ROA                    Employees                     Leverage
Dependent Variable                                 Ratio                        Ratio
Prior Transfers: Disguised            0.003        0.085         0.085          0.010         0.086
                                     (0.024)      (0.062)       (0.062)        (0.020)       (0.058)
Prior Transfers: Face-value SOE      0.034**      -0.114*       -0.114*         0.018        -0.040
                                     (0.015)      (0.058)       (0.058)        (0.013)       (0.036)
p-value of difference between         0.267       0.021**       0.021**         0.723        0.03**
 Disguised and Face-value SOE
Prior Transfers: State              0.071***        0.005        0.005          0.009         -0.026
                                      (0.022)     (0.048)       (0.048)        (0.016)        (0.047)
Prior Transfers: Private             0.057**        0.023        0.023          0.026         -0.088
                                      (0.025)     (0.053)       (0.053)        (0.018)        (0.073)
private legal person ownership        -0.004        0.043        0.043          -0.002         0.025
                                      (0.024)     (0.055)       (0.055)        (0.018)        (0.039)
state legal person ownership           -0.003       0.027        0.027         -0.013         -0.054
                                      (0.027)     (0.053)       (0.053)        (0.019)        (0.040)
state ownership                       0.048*       -0.016       -0.016         -0.013         -0.034
                                      (0.028)     (0.061)       (0.061)        (0.022)        (0.042)
Log(1+Tobin's Q)                    0.069***        0.026        0.026        0.033***        -0.039
                                      (0.007)     (0.017)       (0.017)        (0.006)        (0.026)
log(Sales)                          0.009***        0.009        0.009          0.003         -0.016
                                      (0.003)     (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.012)
Fixed Effects                                                 Firm & Year
Observations                           4,629        4,470        3,232          3,928          4,707
R-squared                              0.278        0.433        0.824          0.329          0.470
Notes: The dependent variables are ROA, the ratio of net profits (after tax) to total assets,
Employees, which is the log value of total number of employees; Investment Ratio, the ratio of
investment to total assets, Leverage, the ratio of total borrowings to total assets of the listed firm,
and RPT_Ratio, the ratio of total related party transactions to total assets of the listed firm
respectively; Prior Transfers are disaggregated into four types: Disguised transfers, Face-value
SOE transfers, State transfers and Private transfers. Private legal person ownership is the ratio
of total legal person shares owned by non-state entities to total outstanding shares; State legal
person ownership is the ratio of total state legal person shares to total outstanding shares; State
ownership is the ratio of total state shares to total outstanding shares. Other variables are self-
explained. In all cases, the columns report the results of a linear regression with standard errors
clustered at the firm level included in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.




                                                  49
Table 8 - Event Return for Negotiated Transfers:
Summary Statistics and Wilcoxon signed-rank test

                                     Positive returns Wilcoxon signed-rank Test
                  Mean Value
                                           (%)           Z-value     Prob > |z|
CAR[-1,1]              0.004               51.3            2.258       0.024
CAR[-5,1]              0.011               56.7            6.493       0.000
CAR[-10,1]             0.015               55.7            6.328       0.000
CAR[-15,1]             0.018               58.3            7.146       0.000
CAR[-20,1]             0.021               57.3            7.084       0.000
CAR[-25,1]             0.022               56.1            6.467       0.000
CAR[-30,1]             0.022               55.2            5.886       0.000
Notes: CAR[-d,1] is the cumulative event returns over window [-d,1] (d=1, 5,
10, 15, 20, 25, 30, respectively) around the first announcement of negotiated
transfers; Data are collapsed at the level of the listed firm X announcement date
since some listed firms announced multiple transfers in one day.




                                     50
Table 9 - Relationship between cumulative abnormal event returns and seller ownership type

                            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)
                          CAR         CAR         CAR         CAR         CAR          CAR        CAR         CAR
                          [-5,1]    [-10,1]     [-20,1]      [-30,1]      [-5,1]     [-10,1]     [-20,1]    [-30,1]
Disguised                0.003      -0.006       -0.007      -0.006      0.009*       0.002       0.001      0.003
                        (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.011)
State                   0.011**      0.003        0.002      -0.000       0.005       -0.003     -0.002     -0.006
                        (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.014)    (0.017)
Private                 0.008**      0.002       0.005        0.004      0.009*       0.004       0.009      0.012
                        (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.011)
Private Buyer             0.001      -0.003      -0.004      -0.005      -0.002       -0.006     -0.004      -0.001
                        (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.010)    (0.011)
log(Assets)              -0.003    -0.007**      -0.002      -0.003      -0.009      -0.017*     -0.019    -0.028**
                        (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.013)    (0.014)
Fraction Transferred   0.053***    0.053*** 0.083***        0.110***    0.073***    0.078*** 0.106***      0.113***
                        (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.022)      (0.025)     (0.017)     (0.024)     (0.034)    (0.041)
Fixed Effects                         Industry & Year                                    Firm & Year
Observations             2,039       2,050       2,077       2,086        2,039       2,050       2,077     2,086
R-squared                0.070       0.051       0.060       0.070        0.309       0.299       0.284     0.282




                                                               51
Notes: The dependent variables are cumulative event returns over [-d,1] window around the announcement of transfers
where d=5, 10, 20, 30, respectively. Disguised is a dummy variable denoting whether the negotiated transfer seller is a
state legal person that has registered its holdings in deal documents as general legal person shares; State is a dummy
denoting the seller is selling state shares; Private Buyer is a dummy indicating the buyer in this deal is a private firm
instead of a state firm; Private is a dummy variable indicating whether the seller is actually a private firm instead of a
state firm; Face-value SOE (the omitted category) is a dummy variable indicating the state seller honestly states his
shareholdings as state-owned shares in the deal document; Log(Assets) is the log value of total assets of the listed firm in
the last year; Fraction Transferred is the ratio of shares transferred in this deal to all outstanding shares. In all cases, the
columns report the results of a linear regression with standard errors clustered at the firm level included in parentheses. In
specifications with industry fixed effects, the industry is defined at the 2-digit SIC level. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                    52
