                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND FIRM DYNAMICS

                                             Paul Bergin
                                              Ling Feng
                                            Ching-Yi Lin

                                        Working Paper 20099
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20099


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




We thank financial support from the Shanghai Pujiang Program and National Science Council of Taiwan
(NSC 102-2628-H-007-001-MY2). Collaboration was facilitated by German Volkswagen foundation
funding to Ling Feng under the project “Europe’s Global Linkages and the Impact of the Financial
Crisis: Policies for Sustainable Trade, Capital Flows, and Migration”. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Paul Bergin, Ling Feng, and Ching-Yi Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Financial Frictions and Firm Dynamics
Paul Bergin, Ling Feng, and Ching-Yi Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 20099
May 2014
JEL No. E32,E44,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Firm entry dynamics are an integral part of the propagation of financial shocks to the real economy.
A VAR documents that adverse financial shocks in the U.S. postwar period are associated with a fall
in new firm creation and a fall in firm equity values. We propose a DSGE model with endogenous
firm entry and financial frictions that is able to explain these facts. The model is novel in giving firms
a choice of financing up-front entry costs through a combination of debt as well as equity, so that financial
shocks directly impact the financing of firm entry. The model is also novel in making use of the asset
pricing implications of the firm entry condition to explain the equity price response to a financial shock.
The model indicates that free entry of new firms limits the ability of incumbent firms to respond to
negative financial shocks through endogenous capital restructuring. Also, allowing the number of
firms to fall after an adverse financial shock is a useful margin of macroeconomic adjustment, reducing
the overall impact of the shock on aggregate output. This is because the remaining firms become financially
stronger and better able to withstand a financial shock.


Paul Bergin                                           Ching-Yi Lin
Department of Economics                               National Tsing Hua University
University of California, Davis                       Department of Economics
One Shields Ave.                                      lincy@mx.nthu.edu.tw
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

Ling Feng
School of Finance
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
777 Guoding Road, Shanghai, China, 200433
feng.ling@mail.shufe.edu.cn
1.    Introduction


      Recent events have spurred interest in the financial sector as a source of business

cycle fluctuations. 1 As is well known, if firms rely upon financing for current

production costs, shocks to the ability to secure such financing can lead to fluctuations

in production. Less well known is the fact that in addition to a fall in production, the

recent financial crisis also has been characterized by a dramatic fall in the rate of new

firm creation: the quarterly rate of establishment births in the U.S. fell 22.5% from
                                                2
June 2007 to its low point in June 2009. This paper argues that the fall in firm entry

is central to understanding how financial shocks are transmitted to the real economy.

We also demonstrate that firm entry is fundamental to understanding other key

phenomena associated with the recent financial crisis, such as equity price
                                                                                      3
fluctuations and capital restructuring between equity and debt financing.

      While firm entry dynamics have been shown previously to be important for

understanding business cycle dynamics, we argue this is especially true in the case of

financial shocks which can affect the financing of firm entry.4 For example, while it

is common to model the need for external financing to cover current production costs,

this ignores what is probably the greatest need for external financing of a firm, its

initial startup costs. The greatest impacts of financial market shocks may be felt in the

1
  See especially Jermann and Quadrini (2012) and Monacelli, Quadrini and Trigari (2011). See also
examples in Arellano, Bai and Kehoe (2012), Asturias, Hur, Kehoe and Ruhl (2012), Barseghyan and
DiCecio (2011), Bah and Fang (2012), Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones (2012).
2
  Source: author calculations based on quarterly establishment birth statistics of the Business
Employment Dynamics report of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
3
  Jermann and Quadrini (2012) showed that capital restructuring was an important aspect of the recent
financial crisis. We show that the benefits of capital restructuring are significantly diminished in the
presence of free entry.
4
  Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012) demonstrate that the sluggish response of firm entry and creation
generates an important propagation mechanism for changes in aggregate productivity, and explains
stylized facts such as the procyclicality of firm entry and profits but countercycality of markups (with
translog preferences). Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2008) study the role of firm entry and product
creation in the transmission of monetary policy. Bergin and Corsetti (2008) find that firm entry
amplifies the real effects of monetary policy, and monetary policy rules that offset the uncertainty of
productivity shocks can raise the mean level of entry and welfare.
                                                     1
inability of potential firms to acquire financing for their startup costs, leading to large

effects on the number of firms.

     The paper begins by documenting some new facts regarding the dynamic

relationship of firm entry and equity prices after a financial shock. The fall in firm

creation observed in the recent crisis is not atypical; using a vector-autoregression on

U.S. postwar data, we find that an adverse financial shock in U.S. postwar data leads

to a fall in new firm creation. We also find that the financial shock is associated with a

fall in equity prices. The fall in entry occurs with a lag of several quarters before

becoming significant, while the impact on equity price applies to the short run and

dies away once the fall in firm entry becomes substantial.

     In constructing a DSGE model to explain this pattern in entry and equity prices,

we find that two features are key. Key to replicating the observed magnitude of the

fall in firm entry is a novel specification that firm entry is partly financed by debt as

well as equity, so that when an adverse financial shock raises the cost of borrowing,

this also raises the cost of issuing debt in order to pay the entry cost. The financial

shock also lowers entry by lowering the expected discounted stream of profits a firm

can expect to earn if it enters, but we find that this channel is not sufficient to generate

a large fall in entry in response to a transitory financial shock. Specifying that entry

costs are financed in part by debt is novel in the firm dynamics literature, in which

firms are assumed to finance their sunk setup costs by issuing equity, if the issue of

financing is addressed at all. Nonetheless, there is strong empirical support for a

significant role for debt financing of firm entry relative to equity (see Robb and

Robinson (2013) and Chen, Miao and Wang (2010)). In particular we specify that

firms have an endogenous choice of capital structure between debt and equity

financing, which applies both to incumbents and new entrants. This specification

allows us also to discuss how financial shocks affect the choice of capital structure,
                                             2
and how firm entry influences this choice.

     To explain the positive co-movement of equity price with firm entry after an

adverse financial shock, we make use of the novel observation that the firm entry

condition has features of an asset pricing equation. Free entry requires that firm value,

which equals the discounted stream of expected future profits, be equal to the sunk

cost of entry. By introducing a congestion externality in the entry process, making

sunk entry cost a positive function of firm entry, the model immediately implies that

equity price of the marginal firm commoves positively with firm entry. The

congestion externality makes it optimal to spread the process of new firm entry over

multiple periods, akin to the familiar convex adjustment costs in a model with

physical capital.

     Our model of firm entry provides new insights into the economic adjustment to

an adverse financial shock. Under endogenous firm entry, the impact of a negative

financial shock is split between both a fall in profits (and hence equity price) and a

fall in the number of firms. As an adverse financial shock begins to lower firm profits,

fewer potential firms find it attractive to enter the market, which means that each

existing firm gets a larger share of aggregate profits. The fall in entry thus buffers the

fall in firm equity price relative to a case where there is only one representative firm.

Given that the tightness of the financial constraint depends on the collateral value of

the firm equity, the fact that equity price is less adversely affected than in the case of

no entry means that the financial shock has less bite on borrowing for production.

This suggests that allowing the number of firms to fall after an adverse financial

shock may be a useful margin of macroeconomic adjustment, reducing the overall

effect on aggregate output. Simulation of the calibrated model indicates that the

impact on output of a negative financial shock is reduced by 60% under completely


                                             3
                                                                                             5
free firm entry compared to a benchmark case with a dampened fall in entry.

      A further implication of the free entry condition is that it greatly restricts the

benefits of capital restructuring by incumbent firms. Recent literature posits that firms

can minimize the impact of a financial shock that reduces the collateral value of firm

equity by postponing current dividend payments to the future, thus raising equity

price by raising the discounted stream of future dividends. However, under free entry,

an increase in average future firm dividends induces new firms to enter, which

compete with incumbent firms and appropriate market share and profits. We show that

in a standard simple entry condition, where a constant sunk cost must equal firm value,

any postponement of dividends by incumbents leads to sufficient new firm entry that

there is no effect on expected future profits of the incumbent firms, and hence no rise

in incumbent firm equity value. The benefits of capital restructuring by an incumbent

firm are fully neutralized.

      The model’s specification of the financial friction is related to recent work on

capital restructuring, most notably Jermann and Quadrini (2012). But we know of no

paper that studies the financing of firm entry in this context, or studies the interactions

between firm entry and capital restructuring that we document. Monacelli, Quadrini

and Trigari (2011) study a very different model of entry and financial friction, shaped

by strategic considerations in a labor market game, rather than the capital

restructuring in our model. Macnamara (2012) studies the importance of financial

frictions for entry over the business cycle. We differ in allowing an endogenous and

time-varying choice between equity and bond financing (capital restructuring), which

is a source for our results. In addition, in our model financial shocks affect firm entry


5
  This finding does not contradict claims that a fall in firm entry can also have harmful effects, such as
if new firms are disproportionately responsible for new job creation, as found in Foster et al (2012).
Our model focuses on the implications of entry for the financial constraint and abstracts from
heterogeneity between new and incumbent firms.
                                                     4
by affecting the cost of financing startup costs rather than just through affecting

production and expected future profits. This allows financial shocks of the standard

type to have large effects on firm entry levels in our model. The importance of capital

restructuring in amplifying real impacts of financial shocks is also observed in Gomes

and Schmid (2014). But different from their focus on the role of risk premia as a

channel connecting debt, equity markets and macroeconomic aggregates, we

emphasize the positive co-movement of firm entry and stock market value in response

to financial shocks.

     The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 documents new

stylized facts. Section 3 introduces the DSGE model, and section 4 provides some

analytical results and intuition. Section 5 presents simulation results. Section 6

concludes.


2.   Empirical evidence


     We use a vector autoregression to estimate the dynamic response of firm entry

and stock prices to financial shocks in the U.S. economy. The number of new

incorporations is used as the measure of firm entry, and is obtained from
               6
Economagic. The S&P500 index, which covers 75% of US equities, is used as a

proxy of stock prices. We estimate a 6-variable VAR model at quarterly frequency

from 1963:1 to 1996:3, with variables in the following order: the logarithm of

industrial production, logarithm of CPI, non-borrowed reserves ratio, 3-month

interbank lending rate, logarithm of new incorporations, and logarithm of S&P500

index. Using a Cholesky decomposition on the reduced-form residuals, we impose the


6
 We do not use the establishment births data series of the BLS noted in the introduction because that
data series only begins in 1994 and covers only two recessions, so it is less suitable for time series
analysis.
                                                  5
restriction that firm numbers and stock prices can respond contemporaneously to

production, CPI, nonborrowed reserves ratio, and lending rate, but not vice versa.

     We represent an exogenous financial shock as an innovation to the lending rate

orthogonal to the other macroeconomic variables, including the nonborrowed reserves

ratio. The latter variables are included to help disentangle the effects on the lending

rate due to monetary policy from the effects of an exogenous financial shock.

     Fig. 1 reports the baseline results. It shows that firm numbers respond negatively

and persistently to a credit tightening shock. However, the responses of firm numbers

to the financial shock requires 6 quarters before becoming significant, and the

negative effect lasts 12 quarters. The maximal drop of 0.4% occurs 8 quarters after the

shock. In contrast, stock prices respond instantly to a credit tightening shock. The

negative responses of stock prices last for around 4 quarters, and the maximal drop is

1.4% at the 4th quarter.

     We conclude that financial shocks do have negative effects on firm entry and

equity prices, but that the effect on equity prices is short-lived while that on entry

emerges around the time that the effect on equity prices disappears. Our model

provides a theoretical explanation for this pattern of findings.


3.   Model


     We specify a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model that features a

financing constraint and firm entry, where financing of entry costs is affected by

financial market shocks. Our model’s specification of the financial market draws on

features of Jermann and Quadrini (2012), including a financial constraint that is

subject to direct stochastic shocks as a source of business cycle fluctuations, and the



                                            6
                                                                                           7
ability of firms to alter their equity issue over time through dividend payouts.

     The model considers a closed economy with four different types of agents: (1) a

perfectly competitive final goods sector that combines all available intermediate

goods with a CES aggregator, (2) a monopolistically competitive intermediate goods

sector with endogenous firm entry, (3) a representative investor who finances new and

existing intermediate firms through equity purchase, and (4) a representative worker

who supplies labor to the intermediate firms and purchases bonds from these firms.

     The final goods are consumed by the investor and the worker. As in Perri and

Quadrini (2012), we assume that the investor is less patient than the worker; that is,

the investor has a larger discounting factor than the worker. Because firms are owned

by the investor, the higher discounting of investor implies that in equilibrium firms

borrow from the worker. The investor’s only income is from the equity investment in

the intermediate firms, while the worker finances his consumption through wage

payments and bond investment in the intermediate firms.

     The intermediate goods producers are monopolistically competitive, and each of

these firms produces a distinct variety. They hire labor from the worker and issue

equities and corporate bonds, which are purchased by the investor and the worker,

respectively. To finance production, they must also borrow an intra-period loan.

Because the borrowers may default on their loan repayment, their borrowing is

subject to an enforcement constraint.

     New firms are free to enter the intermediate goods market subject to a one-time

sunk investment, and entrants can finance this startup investment with a mix of debt

and equity financing. Our model of firm entry differs somewhat from the most

common specification, as found in Bilbiie et al. (2012), in that firms are permitted to


7
 These features distinguish the modeling of the financial friction from the more standard specification
in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).
                                                   7
begin production immediately in the period of production. This specification is

required to make firm entry consistent with the specification of the financial

constraint, which is a function of the choice of debt for the current period.


3.1 Final goods sector



         The final goods sector is perfectly competitive. The production of final goods ( Yt )

                                                                                                   
                                                                    n  1   1
is a CES aggregate of all nt existing varieties ( yi,t ), Yt  Nt   t yi ,t di  , where
                                                                                  
                                                                      0



                 
           
N t  nt        1   characterizes the love for variety,  is the substitution elasticity among

varieties.

         The demand for individual variety and the corresponding price indices are thus

given by:
                                                                          
                                                    1       pi ,t         
                                         yi ,t  Nt                  Yt  nt Yt                     (1)
                                                              Pt 

                                                                        
                                                                               1
                                             1         nt
                                                              1             1
                                        Pt                  pi ,t   di              nt1 pit       (2)
                                             Nt       0




3.2 Production, enforcement constraint, and endogenous entry


         Following Jermann and Quardrini (2009, 2012), we assume that firms use equity

(stock share denoted by st ) and debt (denoted by bt ) to finance production. Debt is

preferred to equity because borrowers (firm owners) discount the future more heavily

than lenders (workers). That is, I   .8 Here, I and  represent the discount


8
    This assumption is critical for the results. As Arellano, Bai and Kehoe (2012) stated, "the financial
frictions, by themselves, make internal finance through retained earnings more attractive than external
finance. Absent some other force, firms build up their savings and circumvent these frictions." In the
                                                  8
factor of investors (firm owners) and the household workers, respectively. When

borrowers discount the future more heavily than lenders, the cost of external financing

(through bond issuance) is lower than the cost of internal funds (through equity

issuance). This assumption ensures that the borrowing constraint is not irrelevant.

     The timeline of the economy is shown in Table 1. Each period starts with two

aggregate state variables: the technology shock ( At ), and the financial shock (  t ).

We will describe the financial shocks (  t ) in more detail in the next section. At the

beginning of each period, the economy consists of nt 1 incumbent firms, each of

which has a matured debt repayment bt 1 . There are also net new entrants who enter

the market, hire labor and produce as the existing incumbents, except that these new

entrants do not have a matured debt repayment from last period. The final goods are

constructed over the      nt 1  net    varieties. That is, nt  nt 1  net .

     Then, the incumbents and the new entrants hire labor, issue corporate bonds and

stocks and produce goods, workers supply labor and make consumption and bond

investment decision over the nt varieties, investors purchase goods for consumption


as well as corporate equities of the nt varieties, and goods and labor markets clear.

     At the end of each period after all markets have cleared, there is an exogenous

death shock which applies to all incumbents and new entrants, and which occurs with

a probability of  . Because death shock occurs at the end of each period, only nt

firms remain in the market after the death shock:

                                           nt  1    nt 1  net  .                 (3)




paper we follow Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), assuming impatient entrepreneurs than workers which
makes firm borrow externally through bond issuance. A detailed analysis for the importance of
heterogeneous agents can be found in Quadrini (2011).
                                                 9
3.2.1 Enforcement constraint


     The labor market requires that firms must make factor payments to the worker at

the beginning of the period before the realization of revenue. Thus, following

Quadrini (2012), and Jerman and Quadrini (2009, 2012), we assume that in addition

to the intertemporal debt, bt as described above, firms borrow an intra-period loan at

the amount of wt lit . The intra-period loan is repaid at the end of the period and there

is no interest. As firms may default on their debt repayments, their borrowing ability

is restricted by an enforcement constraint:

                                            t Et (mt 1Vi ,t 1 )  wt li ,t             (4)

                             U CI ,t 1
where mt 1   I 1                   is the discount factor as the firms are essentially
                              U CI ,t


owned by the investor through equity purchases, and Et (mt 1Vi ,t 1 ) is the firm’s

end-of-period equity value. We assume that the dividend from current period can be

easily diverted, and thus only the end-of-period firm value can be used as collateral

and resold.

     This enforcement constraint says that the lenders are willing to lend only if the

liquidation value in case of default is at least sufficient to cover the loaned amount.

Here, the lenders can only liquidate the firms' end-of-period value Et (mt 1Vi ,t 1 ) , but


suffer a liquidation loss (  t  1 ). The stochastic innovation t is a “financing shock,”

which captures the countrywide “liquidity” of firm assets. When market credit

conditions worsen, lenders might have a low probability of finding a buyer, or might

possess low bargaining power in liquidating the firm’s remaining assets.

Consequently, lenders impose tighter constraints on firm borrowing when liquidity
dries up or when firm assets have low liquidity.


3.2.2 Firm production and pricing


     Each incumbent produces a unique variety, requiring only one factor, labor:

                                                         yi ,t  At li ,t ,                (5)


where At is the aggregate productivity common to all firms, and li ,t is the input of

labor by firm i .

     Firm dividends are given by:

                                                                      b      
                                            di ,t   i ,t   bit 1  it    ,
                                                                      Rt                 (6)

                 pi ,t
where  i ,t            yi ,t  wt li ,t defines the operation profit from firm production. The
                 Pt
value function of the firm, representing the beginning of period value before dividends

are paid, is thus,

                                vi,t  bit 1   max{di,t  Et (mt 1vi,t 1  bit )}.   (7)
                                               pi ,t ,b it


The last term in brackets is the end of period firm value, which is our measure of

equity price: qt  Et (mt 1vi ,t 1  bit ) . Firm i chooses a price level, which in turn

determines its production and labor demand, as well as its issue of debt during the

period. These choices maximize its firm value, (Eq. 7), subject to the profit equation,

(Eq. 6), the enforcement constraint, (Eq. 4), and the demand for individual variety (Eq.

1). The optimization implies the following pricing rules and the multiplier associated

with the enforcement constraint:
                                              pi,t             Wt
                                                                    1 t               (8)
                                              Pt              1 At



                                                              11
                                                 1
                                                     Et mt 1
                                                 Rt
                                            t                                                  (9)
                                                  t Et mt 1

where t is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the enforcement constraint. The

presence of the enforcement constraint adds a wedge term, 1  t  , to a typical

pricing rule, as shown in Eq. (8). This wedge term represents the credit channel

introduced by the financing constraint.

     Eq. (9) shows that, first, a worsening financing condition (a fall in t ) is


associated with a rising t , which implies a rising goods price according to Eq. (8),

holding all else constant. Second, in steady state, it is always the case that   0 , as in

                    1    , m  I 1    , and   I since the investor is less
                1
steady state
                R
patient than the worker. As a result, the firm always prefers bond financing from the

worker to equity financing from the investor in steady state.


3.2.3 Firm entry


     A new entrant makes several decisions: whether to enter, how much debt to issue,

and the decision of what price to set, which directly implies the level of production

and labor demand. As noted in Table 1, we assume that all these decisions take place

in the same period, rather than using the more common specification that the entry
                                                                  9
decision is made in the period before production begins. We use this specification of

entry in order to be fully consistent with the specification of the enforcement

constraint (4) above. Because this enforcement constraint is the function of end of

9
 If firms made the entry decision at the end of the period prior to production, they would have no
incentive to use equity financing of the entry cost. The equity price of new firms would be different
from that of incumbent firms, complicating the computing of the equity price index. Our specification
allows us to retain the usual assumption in the firm dynamics literature that the end of period firm
value is the same for new firms and incumbents.
                                                  12
period firm value, in order for new entrants to make the same financing decision and

have the same end of period value as incumbents, entry and financing decision must

take place during the same period. While this entry specification is chosen to facilitate

theoretical consistency of the model, it does not significantly affect the model results.

We also solved a model with the more conventional specification of entry at the end

of the period preceding production, and impulse response are almost identical to our

benchmark case. See Appendix 1 for the list of equilibrium conditions for this
                      10
alternative model.

      Begin by specifying the value function of the new entrant:

                                                             
                                   Vitnew  ditnew  Et mt 1Vit 1  bitnew                   (10)

This represents the beginning of period value of a new entrant, and it is the same as

for the incumbent in Eq. (7), except that the new entrant begins the period with zero

debt. As in Monacelli et al (2011), we assume that the proceeds from initial debt
                                                                                          bitnew
issues are paid out as dividends to firm owners, so that ditnew   itnew                       . This
                                                                                           Rt
differs from an incumbent firm just in that there was already a matured debt payment

                                                b      
for the incumbent, so di ,t   i ,t   bit 1  it    .
                                                Rt     

      New firms enter up to the point that the value of a new entrant equals the cost of

entry ( K tE ), implying the entry condition:

                                K tE   itnew 
                                                   bitnew
                                                    Rt
                                                                                    
                                                           Et mt 1Vit 1  bitnew  .          (11)

One interpretation of this equation is that new entrants have a special issue of equity

to investors at the beginning of the period to pay the full sunk cost, the value of which


10
  The main difference is that we need to impose exogenously that new entrants are required as a
separate constraint to use the same mix of debt and equity financing as incumbent firm, without solving
for this portfolio as an endogenous decision of the new firm.
                                                    13
is equal to K tE . During the period, new entrants pay dividends that include the value

of their initial bond issue. By the end of the period, these special new entrant

dividends have been paid out, and the end of period equity price is the same as for

incumbent firms. In the investor budget constraint, the sum of initial debt issue and

profits of new entrants cancel out, as the equity price investors pay at the beginning of

the period reflects these certain dividends, and they occur in the same period as the

equity purchase.

      An equivalent and perhaps more insightful interpretation of the entry condition

makes use of the fact that the sunk cost of entry is paid at the same period as

production and profits are generated and bonds issued. In this perspective, the new

entrant can draw on its bond issues as well as current period profits to pay for its entry

costs. With debt issue used to pay for sunk costs, there is no special equity issue at the

beginning of the period or special dividend payment for new firms. Either equation is

consistent with the specification of entry condition (Eq. 11). The latter interpretation

highlights that new entrants have multiple sources of financing for firm entry,

including equity, debt, and retained earnings.

      While our model does not include investment in physical capital in the most

typical sense, the sunk entry cost, K tE , representing setup investment including plant

and equipment, functions as a type of capital. In addition, while our enforcement

constraint (4) differs from the published version of Jermann and Quadrini (2012) by

using end of period firm value rather than physical capital as collateral, it closely

resembles the constraint of Jermann and Quadrini if the entry condition is substituted

in, replacing end of period firm value with the sunk entry cost                     K tE :

                           bitnew
t Et ( K tE   itnew           )  wt li ,t .
                            Rt

                                                   14
      We now turn to the financing and pricing/production decision of the new firm.

Just as for the incumbent, the new firm maximizes the beginning of period firm value

(Eq. 10, in this case) subject to the profit equation, (Eq. 6), the enforcement constraint,

(Eq. 4), and the demand for individual variety (Eq. 1). The only difference in the

problem of a new firm from that of an incumbent lies in Eq. (6) for the fact that a new

firm enters the period with no debt. Because the enforcement constraint here is not

affected by the initial bond position, the first order conditions are the same as for an

incumbent (Eqs. 8 and 9), and we can conclude that the choice variables of the new

firm are the same as for the incumbent: bitnew  bit , pitnew  pit . From Eqs. (1), (5) and


(6), we then have that yitnew  yit , litnew  lit , and  itnew   it . In other words, the

incumbents and new entrants are identical except that the new entrants don't have

matured debt repayments from last period but the incumbents do.


3.2.4     Sunk cost specification


      We follow Bergin and Lin (2012) and Lewis (2009), allowing for the
                                                                              11
possibility of a congestion externality associated with firm entry :
                                                                
                                                 ne 
                                           K K  t  .
                                             t
                                              E      E
                                                                                                   (12)
                                                 net 1 

Here, K E is the steady state level of sunk entry costs, and net describes the

number of new entrants who compete with each other. This functional specification of

entry costs has been motivated in terms of an imperfectly elastic supply of a factor

11
  Our functional specification of entry costs more closely resembles that in Lewis (2009) in specifying
the rise in entry cost as a function of the number of new entrants, motivated in terms of an imperfectly
elastic supply of a factor specific to product entry such as advertising. Bergin and Lin (2012) also
allows for the possibility of a congestion externality in entry but specifying the rise in entry cost as a
function of total number of active firms. Their specification is in line with Berentsen and Waller (2009),
which was motivated using a matching externality found in Rocheteau and Wright (2005) and common
in monetary search models.
                                                    15
specific to product entry such as advertising.


3.3 Worker preferences and optimization


     The representative worker derives utility from consuming the basket of goods

( Cw,t ), and disutility from labor supply ( Lt ) in each period, and maximizes expected

lifetime utility,
                                                                                                  C w1,t
                    max E0   t U (C w ,t , Lt ),           with             U (C w ,t , Lt )                 Lt ,
                              t 0                                                                 1 

where   0 is worker’s degree of risk aversion,    0,1 is the subjective

discount factor, and        is the relative utility weight of labor.

     The worker derives income by providing labor services ( Lt ) at the real wage rate


( wt ), and receiving financial income from holding corporate bonds of the nt 1

existing firms ( bt 1 ). The worker then purchases consumption ( Cw,t ), and updates its

corporate bond investment to the                nt 1  net    firms with a price at 1 .
                                                                                                              Rt

     The period budget constraint may thus be written as:
                                                nt 1  net  bt
                                     C w,t                            wt L t +nt 1bt 1 .
                                                       Rt
From the constraint, we see that the worker receives financial income from the nt 1

surviving incumbents, but purchases corporate bonds from both the surviving

incumbents ( nt 1 ) and the new entrants ( net ).

     The worker maximizes his expected lifetime utility subject to the budget

constraint, implying the following first-order conditions:

                                                 U Cw ,t wt  U L ,t  0                                                 (13)


                                         1    Et U C      w , t 1
                                                                            Rt   U Cw ,t                              (14)
                                                            16
where Eq. (13) is the labor-consumption tradeoff condition, and Eq. (14) is the Euler

equation for holding corporate bond.


3.4 Investor preferences and optimization


     The representative investor derives utility from consuming the basket of goods

( CI ,t ) in each period, and maximizes his expected lifetime utility:

                                                                                     CI1,t I
                      max E0   ItU (CI ,t ),           with          U (CI ,t )                  ,
                               t 0                                                   1  I

where I  0 is the investor’s degree of risk aversion, and I   0,1 is the

subjective discount factor.

     The representative investor purchases equities from the intermediate firms. He

doesn't supply labor, but receives income from equity trading. The period budget

constraint may thus be written as:

                             CI ,t   nt 1  net  qt s t  nt 1 st 1  qt  dt                    (15)


where qt is the stock price and d t is the dividend, both in units of final goods. As

noted for the worker's financing investment, the investor receives financial income

from the surviving incumbents ( nt 1 ), but makes financing investment to both the

survivors ( nt 1 ) and the new entrants ( net ).

     The optimization implies the following first-order conditions:

                             I 1    Et UC   I , t 1
                                                               qt 1  dt 1    UC I ,t
                                                                                               qt       (16)

where Eq. (16) is the Euler equation for holding corporate shares. Because the

investor is less patient than the worker, in steady state bond financing is always

cheaper than equity financing.



                                                     17
3.5 Equilibrium


      Shocks are common to all firms; thus, this study solves the symmetric

equilibrium in which firms behave identically. In other words, z t (i )  z t for an

endogenous variable z , independent of firm i .

      As both incumbents and new entrants hire the same amount of labor in

production, the market clearing condition for labor is thus given by:

                                                Lt   nt 1  net  lt .                                   (17)


      Because final goods are consumed by the investor ( CI ,t ), the worker ( Cw,t ), and


the new entrants paying entry costs ( K tE ), the market clearing for the final goods are:

                                          Yt  C w ,t  C I ,t  net K tE .                                 (18)

      The technology and financing shocks are log-normally distributed as follows:

                                log At  log A   A (log At 1  log A)   A,t                            (19)


                                 log t  log    (log t 1  log  )   ,t                           (20)

where  A,t and  ,t are technology and financing innovations, respectively, which

are i.i.d. random variables with homoscedastic variances.

      Equilibrium is a sequence of the following 18 endogenous variables: Cw,t , wt , Lt ,

Rt , yit , pit Pt , net , d t , q t , Vt , bit , l it ,  t , Vt new , nt , CI ,t , Yt , K tE . The 18 equilibrium


conditions are as follows: First, price indices and demands for individual varieties

(1-2). Second, equations from intermediate goods sector: dynamics of firm varieties

(3); conditions for incumbents including firm enforcement constraint (4), production

function, firm profit and value function, and firm first order conditions (5-9);

conditions for new entrants: new entrant’s total firm value (10); entry conditions (11);
                                                       18
entry     cost      specification    (12).    Third,     worker      optimization      conditions:

labor-consumption tradeoff (13) and Euler equations for bond holding (14); investor

optimization conditions: the budget constraint (15), and the Euler equation for stock

holding (16). Last, market clearing conditions for labor (17), and for final goods (18).

The full equilibrium conditions are listed in Appendix 1.


4     Analytical results and intuition


       In this section we highlight how introducing a free entry condition transforms the

analysis and implications of capital restructuring, relative to standard models with a

fixed number of firms.


4.1     Equity price implications


       First, consider how the entry condition constrains the behavior of equity prices. It

is instructive to begin analysis with a simplified version of firm entry, of the type

standard in the recent firm dynamics literature, before extending the analysis to the

somewhat more elaborate entry condition in our model. Suppose that the entry cost is

constant, that is,   0 in Eq. (2), and it must be paid at the end of the period prior to

production (rather than at the beginning of the period of production). Suppose new

entrants only have access to equity financing, and entry investment is in units of final

         12
goods.        The entry condition is simple in this standard case: qt  K E . This condition

implies that the equity prices in the economy are invariant to any shock and have no


12
  A common alternative in the literature is to specify entry costs in units of labor. This case would
imply that the equity price commoves with the wage. We do not see evidence in support of this
prediction, so we use goods units for our benchmark case. Simulation results for a model specifying
entry costs in labor units are available from the authors upon request. It tends to predict entry is
countercyclical in our model, which is counterfactual: the fall in output induced by an adverse shock
tends to lower wages and hence entry costs, encouraging more entry.
                                                 19
volatility, which is clearly a very strong and counterfactual prediction of these

standard firm entry models.

     Next, allow the entry cost to change over time as a function of new entrants as
                                                                                         
                                                                        ne 
specified in our model above. The entry condition then becomes: qt  K  t  .
                                                                                E

                                                                        net 1 

This entry condition links the equity price to new entry in a way that allows the equity

price to move, and implies positive co-movement with new entry. For example, when

an adverse financial shock leads to a drop in firm entry, it will also lead to a fall in the

value of firms. The greater the value of parameter  , the greater will be the effect of

a shock on equity prices relative to firm entry. This model feature will be helpful later

in capturing the empirical regularity that an adverse financial shock lowers both

equity prices and new entry.

     The full entry condition used in our model allows also for bond financing of the

entry cost, so that part of the equity price can be replaced by bond issues. The

inclusion of bonds in the entry condition provides a useful channel by which a rise in

the cost of bond financing reduces new entry. A rise in the cost of debt financing will

increase the effective entry cost, discouraging new firm entry. Given that new firm

choices will be the same as those for incumbents, the entry condition (Eq.11) can be

written:
                                                 
                                         ne        b
                                 qt  K  t    t  t .
                                        E

                                         net 1    Rt

This entry condition allows for a richer relationship between equity prices and firm

entry than does a standard model of firm dynamics. Model simulations to follow will

show the contribution of each of these entry financing features to the dynamics of

firm entry and equity prices.


                                            20
4.2 Implications for capital restructuring


     The entry condition provides a useful shortcut to seeing the workings of capital

restructuring. For simplicity, consider the case with   0 , where the entry condition

                            E   bt
may be rewritten: qt  K           t .   This entry condition is useful because it
                                Rt

summarizes an inverse relationship between the debt issue of a firm bt Rt and its

equity value, qt (holding constant current period profits). Jermann and Quadrini

(2012) also feature such an inverse relationship, which is useful to a firm as a tool to

relax its financial constraint, the tightness of which falls when equity value rises: a

firm that lowers its debt issues and dividends in period t by 1 Rt units, can raise

dividends in period t  1 by one unit, for a given level of current profits, as specified

by the budget constraints for periods t and t  1 . The entry condition provides an

alternative shortcut to demonstrating this relationship, because the equity price is

pinned down by the marginal value of a new entrant.

     A further lesson is that free entry is seen to impose a restriction on the ability of

firms to use capital restructuring to relax their financing constraint. It is no longer

possible for incumbent firms to raise their equity value by postponing current

dividends to the future. While it is still true that the equity price of a firm equals the

expected present discounted value of the firm’s future dividends, future firm sales and

profits are endogenous and will always adjust so that equity price satisfies the entry

condition. If the representative incumbent firm lowers current dividend payments, this

will raise total dividend payments for the economy in the future. But it will induce a

rise in new entrants to compete with incumbents over sales and profits. The rise in

entry will be sufficient that the level of profits of an individual firm will not rise,

making capital restructuring less effective in relaxing the financing constraint.
                                            21
5    Quantitative analysis


     To analyze the full response path of firm entry, equity prices and other key

macroeconomic variables in response to financing shocks, we log-linearize the system

of 18 equilibrium conditions around the unique deterministic steady state. We

calibrate parameters and numerically solve the log-linearized model for the dynamic

responses to exogenous shocks using the method of generalized Schur decomposition.


5.1 Parameter values


     Calibrations of financial shocks are taken from Jermann and Quadrini (2012). A

period is identified as a quarter, and the persistence and standard deviation of

financing shocks are set at   0.97 and    0.0098 , respectively; the technology

counterparts are set at  A  0 . 95 and  A  0.0045 . The means of technology and

financing shocks are set at A  1 without loss of generality and   0.16 as
                                                               13
calibrated in Jermann and Quadrini (2012), respectively.

     In addition, we set   0.995 and  I  0.985 to capture an annual bond

return of 2% and an annual stock return of 6%. The exogenous death shock

probability is set at   0.02 to match the 8% annual job destruction rate in the U.S.

data as documented in the literature (for instance, in Bernard et al. (2010)). The

elasticity of substitution across varieties is set at   6 to deliver a 20% markup of

price over marginal cost (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1992). The risk aversion of the

worker and the investor are set respectively at   2 (Arellano, Bai and Kehoe,


13
   The mean value of financial variable,   0.16 in our model, produces a steady state ratio of
debt over GDP which matches the data. In the data, the average ratio of bond outstandings for the
non-financial business sector based on data from the SIFMA over the period 1984-2010
(http://www.sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx) to business GDP (from National Income and Product
Accounts, http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/data/GDPCA.txt) is 1.5. In our benchmark model, the
steady state ratio of debt over GDP is around 1.6.
                                                   22
2012) and  I  1 (Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz, 2012) to capture a relatively riskier

investor than worker.

     The sunk entry cost does not affect any impulse response. Therefore, we follow

Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012) to set K E  1 . Following their paper, we also set

the weight of the disutility of labor in the period utility function,   1 . Though the

choice of  affects the steady state value of each variable, it does not affect the

relative magnitude of these variables, and thus has no effect on the quantitative results.

Finally, following Bergin and Corsetti (2008), we set the consumer's love for variety

at          .
         1

     Table 2 lists the parameters in the benchmark setting. The entry adjustment cost

parameter         is calibrated at 2.2 to match the standard deviation of new

incorporations in the model to that in the data, as reported in Table 3.


5.2 Impulse responses


     The impulse responses for the benchmark specification and calibration are
                     14
reported in Fig. 2.       An adverse financial shock leads to a fall in new entrants that

builds over 5 quarters to a substantial amount (1.7%). This pattern matches well the

empirical impulse response of new incorporations. The change in new entrants

implies a gradual but persistent fall in the total number of firms. The equity price falls

on impact, but then improves over time. The improvement in equity price reflects the

persistent fall in number of firms, as it raises the expected level of profit per firm.

Output and employment also fall after the adverse financial shock, as should be

expected.


14
   Impulse responses are very similar in the alternative specification with entry at the end of the
preceding period. See Appendix Fig. 1.
                                                23
     Next, we study the role of time-varying sunk costs, by comparing to a case with

a constant sunk cost where   0 . Fig. 3 shows that the impact effect on equity price

is close to zero. Recall from the analytical section above that the co-movement of

equity price and firm entry depends upon a time-varying sunk cost of entry. The

degree to which the sunk cost falls in response to a fall in firm entry dictates the

degree to which the impact of the financial shock is diverted from firm entry to firm

equity price.

     Further, the specification of the entry cost has large consequences for the

transmission of the financial shock to the real economy. Comparing Figs. 2 and 3, the

impact effect on output is 60% larger in the case of a time-varying entry cost (   2.2 )

compared to the case of constant entry cost (   0 ), and the overall standard deviation

of output is 35% higher, as shown in Table 4a. Under a constant sunk cost, less of the

adverse financial shock is passed on to a fall in equity prices and more passed on to a

fall in firm entry, and the smaller drop in equity prices reduces the tightening of the

financial constraint due to the shock. In other words, when there is a reduction in the

number of firms, the remaining firms have a stronger financial position, as a given

level of aggregate profits is split among a smaller number of firms, and a rise in the

level of expected future profit per firm raises equity price of a given firm.

     Next we show how the fact that firm entry is partly financed by bond issue

provides a channel by which an adverse financial shock reduces firm entry. Fig 4

shows responses for a case where firm entry is financed purely by equity issue and

current profit, and not by bond issue. This version of the model sets bit=0 and

suspends the optimal financing decision (Eq. 9). We also must re-calibrate the

parameter  to 1.6 to maintain the standard deviation of ne equal to that in the

data (2.2% as shown in Table 4b).

     Fig. 4 shows that the shock now leads to a rise in new entry rather than fall. This
                                            24
is despite the fact that the adverse shock still lowers the level of output and

employment among incumbent firms. This result reflects the findings of related

papers, such as Macnamara (2012), who find it necessary to add in a separate type of

financial shock in order to make entry fall. However, we find that that we can match

the empirical finding of a fall in entry by introducing bond financing of firm entry.

This specification also differentiates us from the recent firm entry literature, which

has either not addressed the issue of how sunk costs are financed, or assumed

financing by equity issues alone (Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012), Bergin and

Corsetti (2008)).

     The overall conclusion is that an adverse supply shock raises the effective cost of

firm entry by forcing a shift in the financing from cheaper debt to more expensive

equity issues. This rise in the cost of financing firm entry lowers the amount of new

firms entering the market. The equity price of firms also drops, depending on whether

firm entry falls more or less than aggregate profits, which determines whether the

ratio of profits per firm falls. In other words, the impact of the financial shock is split

between a fall in firm entry and a fall in equity prices. Surprisingly, the greater the

share of impact on entry, and hence the smaller the impact on equity prices, the

smaller is the impact of the financial shock on aggregate output. Intuition can be

found in the fact that the fall in entry means that the surviving firms are financially

healthier, and better able to withstand the tightening borrowing conditions created by

the shock.


6.   Conclusions


     This paper studies how firm entry responds to financial shocks, and how it

propagates these shocks to the real economy. First, we document empirically that

                                            25
financial shocks in the U.S. are associated with a fall in firm entry. In particular an

adverse financial shock leads to a fall in new firm creation with a lag, and the effect

on equity prices in the short run dies out once firm entry responds. Second, a DSGE

model that combines firm dynamics with endogenous capital restructuring can explain

these facts. Firms finance a time-varying sunk cost of entry by a mix of debt and

equity issues, which responds to shocks that tighten a borrowing constraint. A key

implication of the model is that when firm entry drops in response to a financial shock,

the surviving firms have greater equity value, which helps relax the financial

constraint for the aggregate economy. This suggests that net exit of firms is a useful

market response to financial shocks. These findings underscore the conclusion that

how a financial shock propagates through the real economy depends fundamentally

upon how it affects firm dynamics.




                                          26
References

Arellano, Cristina and Bai, Yan and Kehoe, Patrick J, 2012. Financing frictions and
fluctuations in volatility. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department
Staff Report 466.

Asturias, Jose and Hur, Sewon and Kehoe, Timothy J and Ruhl, Kim J., 2012. The
Interaction of Entry Barriers and Financing Frictions in Growth. Discussion paper,
University of Minnesota, University of Pittsburgh and NYU Stern.

Bah, El-hadj, and Lei Fang, 2012. Entry cost, financing friction, and cross-country
differences in income and TFP. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Barseghyan, Levon and DiCecio, Riccardo, 2011. Entry costs, industry structure, and
cross-country income and TFP differences. Journal of Economic Theory 146 (5):
1828-1851.

Bilbiie, Florin O., Ghironi, Fabio and Melitz, Marc J, 2008. "Monetary Policy and
Business Cycles with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety," NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2007, Volume 22, pages 299-353 National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.

Bilbiie, Florin O and Ghironi, Fabio and Melitz, Marc J, 2012. Endogenous Entry,
Product Variety, and Business Cycles. Journal of Political Economy 120 (2): 304-345.

Bergin, Paul.R. and Corsetti, Giancarlo., 2008. The extensive margin and monetary
policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(7): 1222-1237.

Bergin, Paul.R. and Lin, Ching-Yi. Lin, 2012. The Dynamics Effects of Currency
Union on Trade. Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Berentsen, Aleksander and Christopher Waller. 2010. Optimal Stabilization policy
with endogenous firm entry. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working paper.

Bernard, Andrew B and Redding, Stephen and Schott, Peter K, 2010. Multi-product
Firms and Product Switching. American economic review 100(1) : 70–97.

Chen, Hui and Miao, Jianjun and Wang, Neng, 2010. Entrepreneurial finance and
nondiversifiable risk. Review of Financing Studies 23(12): 4348-4388.

Foster, Lucia, Haltiwanger, John C., and Syverson, Chad, 2012. The slow growth of
new plants: learning about Demand? NBER working paper 17853.
Gomes, Joao F. and Schmid, Lukas, 2014. Equilibrium credit spreads and the
macroeconomy. Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
                                        27
Hansen, Robert. S. and Torregrosa, Paul. 1992. Underwriter Compensation and
Corporate Monitoring. Journal of Finance, 47(4): 1537-1555.

Jermann, Urban and Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2009. Macroeconomic effects of financing
shocks. NBER Working Paper.

Jermann, Urban and Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2012. Macroeconomic effects of financing
shocks. American Economic Review 102(1), 238-271.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Moore, John, 1997. Credit Cycles. Journal of Political
Economy 105 (2): 211-248.

Lewis, Vivien, 2009. Business cycle evidence on firm entry. Macroeconomic
Dynamics 13(5): 605-624.

Macnamara, Patrick, 2012. Firm Entry and Exit with Financing Frictions.

Monacelli, Tommaso and Quadrini, Vincenzo and Trigari, Antonella, 2011. Financing
markets and unemployment. NBER Working Paper.

Perri, Fabrizio and Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2011. "International Recessions," 2011
"International Recessions," NBER Working Papers 17201, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2011. Financing frictions in macroeconomic fluctuations. Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 97 (3): 209-254.

Robb, Alicia. M., and Robinson, David. T.,2013. The capital structure decisions of
new firms. Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies. NBER Working Paper 16272.

Rocheteau, Guillaume and Wright, Randall, 2005. "Money in Search Equilibrium, in
Competitive Equilibrium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium," Econometrica,
Econometric Society, vol. 73(1), pages 175-202, 01.

Rotemberg, Julio J and Woodford, Michael, 1992. "Oligopolistic Pricing and the
Effects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity," Journal of Political Economy,
University of Chicago Press, vol. 100(6), pages 1153-1207, December.

Shourideh, Ali and Zetlin-Jones, Ariel, 2012. External financing and the role of
financing frictions over the business cycle: Measurement and theory. SSRN 2062357.
2012 Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics.




                                         28
7. Appendix 1: Equilibrium Conditions In Two Economies


                     Benchmark Economy: New Entrants Entry Simultaneously With                                  Economy 2: New Entrants EntryOne
                                                                                       Production                     Period Ahead Of Production
Demand and CPI                                            
                                 1      pi ,t         
                  yi ,t  At                     Yt  nt Yt                                        (1)
                                          t 
                                           P
                                                                                                            Same


                                                            
                                                                   1
                       1             nt
                                              1                 1
                  Pt                      p  i ,t       di              nt1 pit                  (2)
                       At            0


                                                                                                            nt  1    nt 1
                  nt  nt 1  net
Firm Dynamics
                  nt  1    nt 1  net                                                         (3)   nt  1    nt 1  net

Enforcement                                                                                                 same
                  t Et (mt 1Vi ,t 1 )  wt li ,t                                                   (4)
Constraint
Incumbents                                                                                                  same
                  yi ,t =At li ,t                                                                   (5)


                             pi ,t                          b 
                  d i ,t       yi ,t  wt li ,t   bit 1  it 
                             Pt                             Rt                                      (6)

                  vi,t  bit 1   max{di,t  Et (mt 1vi,t 1  bit )}                             (7)
                                           pi ,t ,b it
               pi ,t         Wt
                                  1  t                                       (8)
                Pt          1 At
                    1
                        Et mt 1
                    Rt
               t                                                                 (9)
                     t Et mt 1

New Entrants                               
               Vitnew  ditnew  Et mt 1Vit 1  bitnew                        (10)
                                                                                          same

                                     bit
               d itnew   itnew                                                                  bit 1
                                     Rt                                                   dite 
                                                                                                    Rt
               K tE   itnew 
                                    bitnew
                                     Rt
                                                        
                                            Et mt 1Vit 1  bitnew            (11)


                          ne 
               KtE  K E  t 
                                               

                                                                                  (12)
                                                                                          KtE 
                                                                                                    bitnew
                                                                                                     Rt
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            Et mt 1Vit 1  bitnew    
                          net 1 
                                                                                          same
                                                                                          same
Worker         U Cw ,t wt  U L,t  0                                             (13)


                1    Et U C     w ,t 1
                                                   Rt   U Cw ,t                (14)

                                                                                          same
Investor       C It   nt 1  net  qt s t  nt 1st 1  qt  d t              (15)




                                                                             30
                   I 1    Et U cI ,t 1  qt 1  dt 1    U cI ,t qt        (16)

Market Clearing
                  Lt   nt 1  net  lt                                               (17)   Lt  1    nt 1lt

                  Yt  C wt  C It  net K tE                                           (18)   same




                                                                                   31
Table 1 Timeline
Beginning of t              Before death shock                              Death shock15        Beginning of t+1
(1) Exogenous shocks nt 1 Incumbents: (1) wage payments made Both                    incumbents state variables:
realize: At ,  t           through intra-period loan; (2) financing choice ( nt 1 ) and new nt , bt , At 1 ,  t 1
 (2)    n t 1    producing and revenue realization                         entrants     ( net )
                                                                                                                           nt 1 nt1 net 
firms;                                                                                        surviving with a
(3) Five state variables:                                                                     probability of 1  
nt 1 , st 1 bt 1 , At ,  t   net New Entrants: (1) bond and equity issuance
                                 to finance entry; (2) Labor hiring, production,
                                 profit distributed to investor


                                 Worker: Consumption and bond investment
                                 Investor: Consumption and equity investment




15
 Here, we follow Monacelli, Quadrinni, and Trigari (2011) to specify that the death shock is realized at the end of a period, and a firm hit by a death shock exits from the
economy. This assumption of timing is standard in literature, for instance, in Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012).
Table 2. Parameterization.
Description
Parameters calibrated from literature
Worker Relative risk aversion               2
Investor Relative risk aversion            I  1
Worker discount factor                       0.995
Investor discount factor                    I  0.985
Substitution elasticity across varieties    6
Probability of death shock                   0.02
Entry costs                                KE 1
Love for variety                                      1

Congestion Externality in Entry              2.2
Parameters related to shocks
Technology parameter                       A 1
Enforcement parameter                        0.16
Standard deviation: technology shock        A  0.0045
Standard deviation: financing shock           0 .0 0 9 8

Persistence: technology shock               A  0 . 95
Persistence: financing shock                 0.97




                                              33
Table 3 Description Statistics (quarterly data): in log levels, HP filtered data. (C_X, X: variables)
                          Log of Labor      Log of Industrial                                           Log of New Firm
                                                                Log of Real Wage       Log of CPI                           Log of S&P500
                          Productivity            Production                                                Number
        Mean                9.80E-14              1.01E-13          1.81E-13            6.02E-14           1.39E-13               9.42E-14
      Std. Dev.             0.011119              0.014659          0.008913            0.006436           0.022045               0.083265



Table 4a. Calibration of Tau in the Economy with Both Equity Plus Bonds
                                          0                                      1.5                                 2.2
                                       STD.DEV                                 STD.DEV                                STD.DEV
         ne                              0.0678                                  0.0289                                0.0228
          qi                             0.0058                                  0.0252                                0.0279
          Y                              0.0108                                  0.0137                                0.0146



Table 4b. Calibration of Tau in the Economy with Equity Only

                                          0                                      1.5                                 1.6
                                       STD.DEV                                 STD.DEV                                STD.DEV
         ne                              0.0805                                  0.0234                                   0.022
          qi                             0.0018                                  0.0087                                0.0087
          Y                              0.0068                                  0.0065                                0.0065



                                                                      34
                          Fig. 1. Impulse Responses to Innovation in Interbank Rate
            (a) log of new firms                                         (b) log of stock price index
.004                                                                 .02


.002                                                                 .01


.000                                                                 .00


-.002                                                                -.01


-.004                                                                -.02


-.006                                                                -.03


-.008                                                                -.04
        2      4         6           8          10         12               2         4           6          8           10   12

              Note: Impulse responses generated from a 6-variable VAR model at quarterly frequency from 1963:1 to
              1996:3, with variables in the following order: the logarithm of industrial production, logarithm of CPI,
              non-borrowed reserves ratio, 3-month interbank lending rate, logarithm of new incorporations, and
              logarithm of S&P500 index.




                                                                35
Fig. 2   Impulse Responses to a Negative Financing Shock in Benchmark Calibration of Model (   2.2 )




                                                  36
Fig. 3   Impulse Responses to a Negative Financing Shock in Case with Constant Sunk Entry Cost (   0 )




                                                   37
Fig. 4 Impulse Responses to a Negative Financing Shock in Case of Model with Equity Financing of Entry (   1.6 )




                                                        38
Appendix Fig. 1   Impulse Responses to a Negative Financing Shock for Appendix Model with Entry in Preceding Period (   2.5 )




                                                              39
