                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GOVERNMENT PURCHASES AND
                      REAL INTEREST RATES




                       N. Gregory Mankiw




                     Working Paper No. 2009




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1986




I am grateful to Andrew Abel, James Hines, Kiminori Matsuami,
Andrei Shleifer, Jose Scheinkman, Lawrence Summers, Michael
Winston, and the referees for helpful comments. This research was
funded by the National Science Foundation grant number SES-8520044.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             Working Paper #2009
                                             August 1986




               Government Purchases and Real Interest Rates




                                 ABSTRACT




     This paper examines the dynamic impact of government purchases in a
simple general equilibrium model with both durable and non-durable consumer
goods as well as productive capital. The model generates perhaps surprising
results. In particular, increases in government purchases are shown to cause
reductions in real interest rates. The model thus provides a possible
explanation for the observed behavior of real interest rates around wars.




                                             N. Gregory Mankiw
                                             NBER
                                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
I. Introduction

     The dynamic impact of fiscal policy is a central issue in macroeconomics.

One outstanding puzzle regards the interaction between government purchases

and real interest rates. Standard neoclassical analysis, as presented by

Barro [1984] for example, implies that permanent increases in government

purchases should not affect real interest rates while temporary increases in

government purchases should increase real interest rates.

     Data for the United States, however, provide no support for this

prediction. Wars are the classic example. As Barro [1984, pp. 315—316]

documents, wars are not associated with high real interest rates. To the

extent any systematic effect is present in U.S. data, real interest rates

appear lower during wars.1

     In this paper I study an extention of the standard infinite horizon

neoclassical growth model and propose an explanation for this apparent

anomaly. My analysis is in the spirit of much recent work that examines the

dynamic effects of fiscal policy in neoclassical models.2 Most previous

studies, however, do not explicitly include consumer durable goods.

Introducing consumer durable goods is a natural way of modifying the

consumer's utility function so that it is not separable through time.3

Alternatively, one can view consumer durable goods as being another use of

accumulated wealth.

     I show that a simple neoclassical model incorporating a non-durable

consumer good, a durable consumer good, and a durable producer good generates
                                      —2—


a perhaps surprising dynamic response to changes in government purchases. In

particular, contemporaneous real interest rates and all forward rates fall in

response to a permanent increase in government purchases. In response to a

temporary increase in government purchases, the contemporaneous short-term

rate falls while some forward rates rise.
                                       —3—




II. The Model

       Consider a representative consumer who is infinitely-lived and has

perfect foresight. He gets utility both from his current flow of the

non—durable good, denoted C, and from the services flowing from his stock of

the durable good, denoted 0. His utility function is (omitting the time

subscripts for notational simplicity):



(1)          et   U(C,D) dt



where p (p > 0) is the subjective discount rate.

       Output is produced using a stock of productive capital, denoted K, and

inelastically supplied laDor, according to the production function F(K).

Output may be used for four purposes: consumed as a non—durable good, added

to the stock of the consumer durable good, added to the stock of productive

capital, or taken by the government. Since all these goods are assumed to be

perfect substitutes in production, the relative prices are fixed at unity.

       For simplicity, I assume that both consumer durables and productive

capital depreciate exponentially at the same rate 6. The goods market

adding-up condition is



 (2)        F(K) =   C   +    + oW ÷ G

where

 (3)        W=D+K.
 W is the total stock of physical assets in the economy, and a dot denotes the

 derivative with respect to time.     W is the only state (non-jumping) variable
                                                                      -4-


  in this economy. The division of physical assets between use by consumers a
  and use by producers K is assumed to be
                                                                        instantaneously reversible. While
  it would be plausible to add adjustment costs or non-negativity
                                                                                              constraints,
 neither feature is included here.4

        To obtain the equilibrium of this economy, I solve the social planning

 problem. That is, I find the
                                                       program that maximizes utility in (I) subject to
 the technological constraint (2) and
                                                                 (3). Government purchases are taken as
 exogenous.

        It is straightforward to derive the first-order conditions necessary

 for this optimization problem.
                                                           They are, together again with the
 constraints:


 (4)       UC(C,D) =              A


 (5)       U0(C,D) =              A F'(K)


(6)        W =        0       +       K


              =           —
(7)               p               (F'(K)          —
                                                      6)

              =                   -
(8)               F(K)                    C   -       8W     -   6.

These five equations describe how the economy will evolve given an initial

wealth of the economy W0 and the level of government purchases a.
                                                                                                   To
interpret these five equations, it is useful to note that r =                                      - 8
                                                                                           Ft(K)
is the instantaneous real interest rate.

       Equation (4) defines the costate variable A as the marginal utility
                                      —5—



of the non—durable good. Equation (5) states that the marginal rate of

substitution between the consumer durable and the
                                                     non-durable, U0/U, equals
the implicit rental price of the durable, r +   8.   Equation (6) again defines
W. Equation (7) says that the growth in marginal utility depends on the real

interest rate; it is the Euler equation trading off current and future

non—durable consumption. Equation (8) states again that asset accumulation

is the difference between production on the one hand, and consumption,

depreciation, and government purchases on the other.
                                                    -6—


III. The Etfects of Government Purchases

       This economy is most easily analyzed in terms of the state variable W

and the costate variable A. Given the values of W and A, equations (4), (5),

and (6) determine C, 0, and K. That is, we can write


(9)          C = C(W,A)


(10)         D = D(W,A)


(11)         K = K(W,A)


The Appendix establishes with direct and tedious mathematics that if

U   and F are concave and C and U are normal goods, then C <                  0,   0 <   < 1,
      < 0,   0 <       < 1,   and Kx >    0.   Using (9),   (10),   and (11) to solve (7) and

(8) yields



(12)               =   A(W,A)

and


(13)               =   'f(W,A) — 0.


The Appendix establishes that Aw               > 0, Ax > 0, and     'x   >•

Steady State
        The steady—state conditions are given by equations (12) and (13)

together with           = 0 and       =   0.   These two conditions are graphed in Figure

1. The A = 0 locus is downward sloping, while the W = 0 locus has an
ambiguous slope. Figure 1 is drawn with the latter locus flat; the dynamics
                                      —7—


are the same if it is upward or downward sloping. Stability requires that the

  = 0 locus cut the   = 0 locus from below, as in Figure 1.

     Figure 1 also displays the dynamics implied by the equations of motion in

each of the four regions. For any given value of the state variable, W, the

economy finds itself on the convergent path to the steady state, also shown in

Figure 1.

     Before turning to the dynamic response to changes in government purchases,

it is instructive to examine the differences between a high 6 steady state and

a low 6 steady state. Since Y > 0, the high 6 economy has a higher      = 0

locus than the low 6 economy. The high 6 economy therefore has a lower

stock of wealth W and a higher marginal utility of consumption A. We see in

equation (7) that the marginal product of capital, F'(K), is equal to p + 6 in

steady state; hence, the stock of productive capital (and thus also the

interest rate) is unaffected by the level of government purchases. The

reduction in W is fully borne by the stock of consumer durables. This

comparison of steady states illustrates that consumer durables and producer

durables are differentially affected by changes in government purchases.

Intuitively, the reason is that changes in government purchases alter

permanent income, which affects the desired stock of consumer durables but not

the desired stock of producer durables.



A Permanent Increase in Government Purchases

     Suppose the economy is at the steady state values of W and A for a

given value of government spending. Let us consider an increase in 6 that

is known to be permanent. Equation (13) implies that the      = 0 locus shifts
                                            —8-


 upward, as shown in Figure 2. The marginal utility of the non-durable A

 immediately rises from the old steady state (point A) to the convergent

 path (point B). The economy then converges to the new steady state (point

 C), with A rising and W falling.

       What is the effect on interest rates? Remember that

r =   F(K)   -   a=p   -   X,x. Since   is positive along the convergent path,

the real interest rate falls in response to this permanent

increase in government spending. As A approaches the new steady state, the

real interest rate approaches again its steady state value of p. The

long—term interest rate, a weighted average of current and expected future

short-term rates, also falls initially when 6 is increased, but by less than

the short rate. The real yield curve is therefore upward sloping after the

increase in government purchases.

      The impact of government purchases on the real interest rate can also

be inferred another way. Figure 2 shows that the marginal utility of

consumption A jumps up in response to the increase in government purchases.

Since KA >   0, K jumps up and 0 jumps down. That is, some of the stock of the

consumer durable is converted into productive use. Hence, the marginal

product of producer capital, F'(K), falls. We see again that producer capital

and consumer capital behave very differently in response to fiscal policy.

Increases in government purchases crowd out capital as a whole, W, but

temporarily crowd in producer capital at the expense of consumer capital.

      The result that an increase in government purchases reduces real

interest rates is perhaps surprising. The intuition behind the result is as
                                            —9—


follows. The permanent increase in government purchases causes an equal

reduction in permanent income. If the interest rate remained unchanged,

each consumer would attempt to adjust his consumption of the non-durable and

his stock of the consumer durable to the new lower steady state level

immediately. The reduction in demand due to this accelerator effect on

consumer durables spending would be greater than necessary to equilibrate

the goods market. The real interest rate therefore must fall to stimulate

private spending.


A Temporary increase in Government Purchases

     Again suppose the economy begins at steady state. At time t0

government spending increases, but the increase is known to last only until

time t1 when government spending will return to its original level.

     At t0 the      = 0   locus shifts upward as for a permanent increase in

government spending. In choosing the dynamic path for the economy, however,

one must take account of the fact that this locus will shift back to its

original position at t1. We therefore choose a path during the temporary

surge in government purchases that brings us at 4         to   the path converging

to the original equilibrium.

     The path is shown in Figure 3. At to, the marginal utility of

consumption A rises from point A to point B. During the period of

higher government purchases, the economy travels from point B to

point C, crossing the        = 0   locus, obeying the equations of motion

for the new (high 0) regime. At t1 the            = 0 shifts back, the equations of

motion change, and the economy begins returning from point C to point A.
                                      -10-


     The pattern of the real interest rate can been gleaned from equation (7)

and the time path of A. Immediately after t0,    is positive, implying that

the real rate is depressed by the announcement of the temporary increase in

government spending. When the economy crosses the A = 0 locus, A becomes

negative, implying that the real rate rises above p before t1 and remains

there, gradually falling to p as the economy returns to steady state.

     Note that the path from point B to point C in Figure 3 is below the path

converging to the high G steady state. Therefore, the marginal utility of

consumption A rises less in response to a temporary change in 6 than to a

permanent change of similar size. Since Kx > 0, the stock of productive

capital K also increases less in response to a temporary change. Because

the real interest rate equals the net marginal product of capital, a

temporary change in government spending has a smaller impact on the real

rate than does a permanent change.

     The long-term real interest rate is an average of current and future

short rates.   The rate on a real discount bond between two points in time can

be determined by the change in marginal utility A between those points. Since

A falls below its level at point B at some time in the future, the return of a

long-term bond over that horizon must rise when the temporary increase in

government spending is announced. Remember, however, that actual long—term

bonds are coupon bonds and not discount bonds. Since coupon bonds place a

greater weight on more recent short rates, the rate on long-term coupon bonds

rises by less and might fall.

    As t1 approaches, the long rate must rise above p.   Indeed, since the
                                      —11—


longS rate anticipates future short rates, the long rate will rise above p

before the short rate does. The real yield curve is downward sloping at 4.


An Announced Future Increase in Government Purchases

     Suppose the government announces at time t0 that government purchases

will permanently increase at time 4. How does this news of future

purchases affect real interest rates today?

     During the period from t0 to t1, the laws of motion under the old (low

0) regime continue to hold. The economy, however, must find itself at 4 on

the stable path converging to the new equilibrium. The dynamic path is shown

in Figure 4. At to, marginal utility A rises from point A to point B.

Before the increase in government purchases takes place, wealth W is

accumulated and A continues to rise. At 4 the economy is at point C, from

which it converges to the new equilibrium (point D) with higher A and lower

w.

     The pattern of the real interest rate is again inferred from equation

(7). Since A is rising at all times after the announcement, the

instantaneous real rate is lower than p at a11 times. Hence, like an

immediate (permanent) increase in government purchases, an annnounced future

increase reduces current short rates and a11 forward rates.

     Since both A and W are rising during the period after the

announcement but before the increase in government purchases, equation (11)

implies that the stock of productive capital is rising during this period.

Hence, the instantaneous real interest rate is falling. After the increase
                                      —12—


takes place, the real rate converges back to the steady state value of p.

Of course, long rates anticipate this path of the short rate. The yield

curve is therefore V-shaped after the announcement; that is,

intermediate-term interest rates exhibit the lowest yield to maturity.
                                       -13-




 IV. Conclusion

      I have presented a simple neoclassical model that differs from standard

models by explicitly including consumer durable goods. The model generates

perhaps surprising responses to changes in government purchases. In

particular, increases in government purchases are typically associated with

reductions in real interest rates.

     Future research might attempt to relax some of the assumptions implicit

in this model. A more realistic model might include adjustment costs,

non-negativity constraints, or a time to build technology. Variable labor

supply and distortionary taxation could also be introduced.   Finally, if

individuals had finite horizons, the way in which government purchases were

financed would play a role in determining the effects of these purchases.5

     Future research might also attempt to identify empirically the economic

forces illustrated here. A variety of features of the model, however,

make it clearly inappropriate for examining certain interactions between

government purchases and consumer spending. First, I have implicitly

assumed that government purchases do not affect the marginal utility of

private consumption. More generally, public goods may be substitutes for

private goods (public transportation) or complements (highways). Second, I

have assumed the changes in government purchases are exogenous. More

realistically, however, there are various shocks that affect both public and

private spending. For example, a positive shock to productivity makes society

more wealthy and thus tends to cause both public and private spending to
                                      —14-


increase. In this circumstance, it is inappropriate to attribute the change

in private spending to the change in public spending. Both of these

limitations suggest that the model may not be useful for examining the impact

of government purchases of domestic goods. Spending on highway and school

construction, for example, is likely to affect the marginal utility of

private consumption and is not likely to be exogenous.

     The model may be better suited for examining the impact of the government

spending associated with military conflict. War expenditure plausibly does

not affect the marginal utility of private consumption moreover, wars are

exogeneous events, not merely reactions to technology or other shocks that

might directly affect private spending. These two limitations of the model

therefore may not be empirically important, because most large movements in

government purchases are associated with military conflict.

     The main problem with attempting to study real interest rates around wars

is that one must infer real rates from the nominal rates we directly observe.6

Since variation in the inflation rate around wartime is much greater than

variation is nominal rates, modeling expected inflation is of crucial

importance. It would not be appropriate to use "rolling ARIMA" or similar

models of expected inflation, since the inflation process should not be

expected to remain invariant between peacetime and wartime. The conventional

wisdom is that wars are associated with inflation and followed by deflation.

If inflation expectations reflect this conventional wisdom, the pattern of

real rates tends to confirm the model.

     Wars may not provide the best natural experiment, however. In contrast
                                      —15—


to standard neoclassical analysis, the model presented here implies that

permanent changes in government purchases have greater impact on real interest

rates than temporary changes. The salient feature of World War II may be not

the temporary surge in purchases but rather the increase that persisted past

the end of the war. According to the theory of this paper, this latter

change exerted a depressing effect on real interest rates of all maturities.
                                         —16—


Notes

 1.
        Benjamin and Kochin [1984], however, report the wars are associated with

high (nominal) yields on consols in the United Kingdom for the period 1729 to

1931.


2.      See, for example, Hall (1980], Barro [1981], Abel and Blanchard [1983],

Barro and King [1984], and Judd [1985].


3.      For recent empirical work on durability, see Bernanke [1984], Dunn and

Singleton (19841, Hayashi (1985], and Mankiw (1982,1985].


4.      In an earlier version of this paper, I examined a model without

productive capital. In this alternative model, an exogenous endowment is

available each period which can be consumed as a non-durable, added to the

stock of the consumer durable, or taken by the government. Hence, 0 is a

state (non-jumping) variable. The impact of government purchases on real

interest rates in this alternative model is very similar to their impact in

the model presented here.


5.    For example, see Blanchard (1985].


6.    A second problem with trying to examine the impact on real rates is that

the modePs implications are quite intricate. For example, real short rates

should be low at the beginning of wars but high toward the end of wars. Since

the duration of wars is in fact not known with certainty, it is not clear how

to test this prediction.
                                         —17—


                                    REFERENCES


Abel, Andrew B., and Olivier a.   Blanchard, 1983, An Intertemporal Model of
     Saving and Investment, Econometrica 51. 675—692.

Barro, Robert J., 1981, Output Effects of Government Purchases, Journal of

     Political Economy 69.

Barro, Robert J., 1984, Macroeconomics, (New York: John Wiley).

Barro, Robert J., and Robert G. King, 1984, Time Separable Preferences

     and Intertemporal Substitution Models of Business Cycles,

     Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, 817-839.

Benjamin, Daniel K., and Levis A. Kochin, 1984, War, Prices, and Interest

     Rates: A Martial Solution to Gibson's Paradox, in M.D. Bordo and A.J.

     Schwartz, ed., A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard,

     (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Bernanke, Ben 5., 1984, Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate

     Consumption, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 41-68.

Blanchard, Olivier, 1985, Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons, Journal of

     Political Economy 92, 223-247.

Dunn, Kenneth B. and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1984, Modeling the Term Structure

     of Interest Rates Under Nonseparable Utility and Durability of Goods,

     NBER Working Paper No. 1415.

Hall, Robert E., 1980, Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations,

-
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series 12, 7-34.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1985, The Permanent Income Hypothsis and Consumption
                                     —18—


    Durability: Analysis Based on Japanese Panel Data, Quarterly Journal of

    Economics 100, 1083-1114.

Judd, Kenneth L., 1985, Short—Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Simple

     Perfect Foresight Model, Journal of Political Economy 93, 298-319.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1982, Hall's Consumption Hypothsis and Durable Goods,

     Journal of Monetary Economics 10, 417—426.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1g65, Consumer Durables and the Real Interest Rate,

     Review of Economics and Statistics 67, 353—362.
Appendix

       This appendix establishes the derivatives of A and V with respect to the

state variable W and the costate variable A. First, note from equations (7)

and (6) that


(Al)       Aw =            — F"



'A2'       A
               A
                       —
                       -   — F"      —
                                     dx


(A3)
           w           = E'           —        o-

'A4        V           —
                       —   F'         -
            A                   dx             dx

Next, to obtain the derivatives in the expressions (Alj to (A4), implicitly

differentiate equations (4), (5), and (6). In matrix form, the system is:

                                UCD              0                          dx
                                                               dcl
(AS)           Ucü              UDD             -AF"           dD     =     F'dA
                   0             1               1             dKj          dW


Use Cramer's rule to solve the above system. The resulting total

derivatives are

(A6)               =       — F"UCUCD/A


(A?)               =                  -               +
                           [UDDuC             UCOUD       (Uc)2F"]/[uclsJ

(A8)               =
                           UcUccF"/t


(A9)               =                      -
                           [uccuD             ucDUcI/[UC6]
                                                                           -20-



                    =                        -
(AlO)                       [uccuoD               (tJco)2]/A

                    =                    -
(All)                       [uCDuC               tJCCUD]/[UCA]

where         =                   -                       +
                   UCCUOD              (Uco)2                  UCUCCF".

Concavity of F implies F" <                               0; concavity of U implies UCC c 0, U00 < 0, and
UCCUOD - (UCO)2 >                0.     Normality of both C and 0 implies UODUC - UCDUO                                    <       0, and

UCCUO - UCOUC <             0.        These assumptions imply that                              >   0, CA < 0,   0 <   0       <    1,

Dx <    0,   0 <        c    1, and Kx >                      0.    Using (A6) to (All) to solve (Al) to (A4)

yields



(Al')        A.w =          — F"       [uU00 -


                                                  -
(A2')         Ax = 5 [UCCUD                               tJCOUCI/t


(A3')         'V =          F' [UCCUDU -                                     -        6    +
                                         (UCD)2]/A                                             UC0UCF"/A


                    =                                 —             +             -
(A4')                       [_UCC(F')2                        UDO       2UCOF'            UcF"]/A

The assumptions of concavity and normality imply that Aw > 0 and Ax >                                                  0.
The sum of the first three terms in the bracketed expression in (A4') is

positive by the second-order conditions; hence, Y > o                                                   tw cannot be signei

without additional assumptions; however, its sign is not necessary for

understanding the dynamics of this economy.
         Figure 1
    The System Dynamics




A




                            w= 0




                          i=o

                                w
                      Figure 2
    A Permanent Increase in Government Purchases




A




                      C

                                                   w= 0




                                   A




                                                   0



                                                   w
                        Figure 3
    A   Temporary Increase in   Government Purchases




A




                                          B
                  C




                                      A                 w= 0


                                                  x=0

                                                       w
                  Figure 4
    An Announced Future Permanent Increase
           in Government Purchases




A




    ND                                             w= 0



                                             C




                                 A




                                                 x= 0

                                                  w
