                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MARKET FOR HIGH-QUALITY MEDICINE

                                             Daniel Bennett
                                              Wesley Yin

                                         Working Paper 20091
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20091


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014




We benefited from helpful comments from Kerwin Charles, Leemore Dafny, Jeffrey Grogger, Seema
Jayachandran, Jens Ludwig, Dilip Mookherjee, Andy Newman, Chad Syverson, Glen Weyl, and seminar
participants at Boston University, BREAD, the University of California Berkeley, the University of
Chicago, the University of Maryland, Northwestern University, the Tinbergen Institute, and Yale University.
We thank Pallavi Vyas for excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge the ˝financial
support of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Center for Health Market Innovations at the
Results for Development Institute, the Population Research Center and the Center for Health and the
Social Sciences at the University of Chicago, and the Institute for Economic Development at Boston
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daniel Bennett and Wesley Yin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Market for High-Quality Medicine
Daniel Bennett and Wesley Yin
NBER Working Paper No. 20091
May 2014
JEL No. I1,L15,O1

                                            ABSTRACT

This study examines the effect of chain store entry on drug quality and prices in the retail pharmacy
market in Hyderabad, India. In contrast to prevailing mom-and-pop pharmacies, chains exploit scale
economies to off˙er high-quality drugs at lower cost. With a unique data set and a natural experiment
methodology, we show that chain entry leads to a relative 5 percent improvement in drug quality and
a 2 percent decrease in prices at incumbent retailers. These changes do not depend on the socioeconomic
status of consumers, suggesting that chain entry improves consumer welfare throughout the market.
Despite the likely role of asymmetric information in this market, we show that consumers partially
infer these quality improvements. Our ˝findings suggest that in markets with asymmetric information,
organizational technologies such as chains may play an important role translating greater demand into
higher quality.


Daniel Bennett
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
dmbennett@uchicago.edu

Wesley Yin
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Public Policy
3250 Public Affairs Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
wyin@ucla.edu
1       Introduction

Substandard medicine is a serious public health concern in many developing countries (Bate
and Boateng 2007, Gaurdiano et al. 2007). Counterfeiters produce and sell fake drugs that
appear legitimate (Dondorp et al. 2004). In addition, so-called local manufacturers produce
small drug batches with little regulatory oversight (Corporate Catalyst India 2012). The
public health impact of substandard medicine is potentially severe, since these drugs deny
patients effective therapies, expose people to toxic impurities, and contribute to pathogenic
resistance (Cockburn et al. 2005). Access to effective medicine also has important direct
effects and spillovers on human capital accumulation, labor supply, earnings, and other
economic outcomes (Miguel and Kremer 2004, Baird et al. 2012).
        Although economic growth in developing countries has increased consumer wealth and
the demand for medicine, the effect of these changes on drug quality is ambiguous. Wealth-
ier consumers may demand better drugs if quality is a normal good. With larger markets,
firms can also exploit economies of scale by making fixed investments that enhance quality
(Berry and Waldfogel 2010).1 Growth may allow countries to strengthen legal institutions
and enforce tort laws, which can foster higher product quality (Spence 1977, Landes and
Posner 1987). On the other hand, increases in demand may enhance the market power of
firms in markets with capacity constraints (Tirole 1988, Section 5.3), encouraging firms to
raise prices or reduce quality. Asymmetric information about drug quality may disincentivize
investments in quality, and can reinforce the incentive for suppliers with market power to
reduce quality as demand rises (Dranove and Satterthwaite 1992). Because of these con-
siderations, it is unclear whether economic growth and market development lead to higher
quality, particularly in developing countries with weak regulatory and legal institutions.
        Retail chains may play an important role translating economic growth into higher quality
medicine. Recent economic growth has spurred the entry of pharmacy chains in India,
    1
    Manufacturers can improve quality by strengthening quality control protocols. Distributors and retail-
ers can develop distribution channels that prevent entry by counterfeiters and protect drugs from quality
degradation due to extreme heat and humidity.


                                                    1
where small mom-and-pop stores have traditionally dominated pharmacy markets. Unlike
incumbents, chains are able to exploit scale economies by investing in cost-saving and quality-
enhancing technologies. By creating their own supply chains, chains can buy directly from
manufacturers while standardizing quality control in distribution. Chains can also exploit
scale economies in advertising to signal quality to consumers as a way to help overcome
information asymmetries (Milgrom and Roberts 1986). These attributes may allow chains
to offer high quality medicine despite weak regulation and asymmetric information about
drug quality. Although chains may offer higher-quality drugs, the market-wide impact of
chain entry depends on the response of incumbent mom-and-pop pharmacies. Chain entry
may improve quality among incumbents through retail competition or other mechanisms.
Alternatively it may encourage vertical differentiation in which incumbents specialize in
cheap, low-quality drugs (Shaked and Sutton 1982), potentially lowering average quality or
increasing health disparities.
    This study explores the relationship between market development and drug quality by
evaluating the impact of chain entry. In 2010, we collaborated with a chain pharmacy,
MedPlus, to study the firm’s expansion in Hyderabad, India. The chain identified 18 markets
it wished to enter. We gathered baseline data in 18 candidate entry markets, as well as two
other markets, for a total of 20 markets. Retail space subsequently opened in 7 of the
candidate markets, creating a natural experiment to identify the impacts of chain entry
on the quality and prices sold at incumbents. We resurveyed in all of these markets one
year after the firm opened the new stores. Our data feature a “mystery shopper” audit
of pharmacies, in which auditors purchased two antibiotics, ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin,
under realistic conditions. We chose these drugs because of their wide use and their public
health importance for the treatment of bacterial respiratory and gastrointestinal infections.
We then assessed the quality of the drug samples in a laboratory. We interviewed over
5200 consumers in sample markets, distinguishing between people who had and had not
just shopped at sample pharmacies. We also interviewed pharmacists and enumerated the


                                              2
customer traffic at each pharmacy.
    The validity of our natural experiment methodology and difference-in-differences iden-
tification strategy relies on the assumption that treatment and control markets have similar
counterfactual trends in price, quality, and firm performance. We validate this identification
strategy by showing that treatment and control markets initially have nearly identical base-
line levels of quality, prices, customer traffic, and socioeconomic characteristics. We show
that consumers in treatment and control markets do not exhibit different socioeconomic
trends between the baseline and either the year-one or year-two follow-up survey rounds.
Pharmacy census data show that growth in the number of pharmacies over the study period
is similar for treatment and control markets, which suggests that chain entry is uncorrelated
with the demand for medicine. These patterns support the claim that control markets pro-
vide a plausible counterfactual for treatment markets, and that the “assignment” of suitable
retail space among the candidate entry markets is plausibly exogenous.
    Chain entry causes incumbents to improve quality and lower prices. Compliance with
the Indian Pharmacopeia quality standard improves by 5 percent and prices fall by 2 percent
in treatment markets relative to control markets. Among non-national drug brands, over
which pharmacies have more price and quality flexibility, pharmacopeia compliance rises by
21 percent and prices fall by 12 percent. We assess the market-wide impact of chain entry
by incorporating observations from the chain and interacting chain entry with consumer
socioeconomic status. We find no effect for this interaction, implying that chain entry
improves consumer welfare regardless of socioeconomic status.
    Our results appear to arise primarily through the retail competition, rather than other
channels. By reducing local monopoly power, the presence of the chain increases the quality
elasticity of demand and induces incumbents to improve quality. In principle, the chain,
which buys directly from manufacturers, could affect prices or the product mix in the whole-
sale market. However the wholesale market spans the entire city, and it is unlikely that
chain entry in seven locations would have a large aggregate impact through supply-chain


                                              3
externalities.2 Chain entry also appears to increase the share of consumers who report that
quality as an important drug attribute, which could also encourage higher quality. The
demand increase from this channel alone should increase prices. Our finding that prices
decline suggests that competition is the dominant effect. The retail competition channel
requires that consumers at least partially infer the quality adjustments of firms. We directly
analyze these perceptions by regressing perceived quality on chain entry. Although quality
is imperfectly observable, customers do infer the incumbent quality changes associated with
chain entry to some extent.
      Our findings are related to Basker and Noel (2009), Basker (2005) and Jia (2008), who
show that chain competition has a large effect on prices in the US, and Matsa (2011) who
shows effects of chain entry on quality. We extend this work by studying a context where
information asymmetries may contribute to poor quality. By exploiting economies of scale,
the chain improves quality and lowers prices, both directly and through retail competition.
Incumbents in entry markets are able to achieve the same quality as the chain but at signifi-
cantly higher prices, which may reflect the lower productivity of these firms. Our findings are
also related to Bate et al. (2011) and Bjorkman-Nyqvist et al. (2012) who show that informa-
tion asymmetries contribute to poor drug quality in developing countries. Bjorkman-Nyqvist
et al. (2012) find that an NGO offering subsidized authentic drugs can reduce incumbent
sales of counterfeits. Our study builds upon this work by utilizing natural variation due to
the expansion of a chain to measure the impact of competition on quality. We show that
markets can overcome asymmetric information to improve quality in the absence of strong
regulation and external subsidies by adopting more productive organizational technologies.
      We proceed in Section 2 to provide a theoretical motivation for our empirical approach
and findings. Section 3 describes the context and the data collection. Section 4 explains and
justifies our empirical strategy. In Section 5 we present and interpret our empirical results.
  2
   A sufficiently large chain expansion could make it more difficult for low-quality manufacturers and
wholesalers to exploit scale economies. While this intriguing mechanism may also play a role in quality
improvements as markets develop over longer periods, it is beyond the scope of our study.



                                                  4
Section 6 concludes by discussing the policy implications of our findings. An appendix
describes several other robustness tests and secondary results.


2       Theoretical Motivation

Our analysis focuses on small independent pharmacies, which compete in local neighborhood
markets. Firms compete through price, drug quality, convenience, and other amenities.
Pharmacies have some market power because they are differentiated spatially. Consumers
must search to gather price and quality information from other pharmacies (Salop 1977, Salop
and Stiglitz 1977). We consider the impact of entry by a chain in this setting.3 Chains may
exploit their scale to invest in cost-reducing and quality-enhancing technologies. For present
purposes, we assume simply that the chain is able to produce quality at lower cost than
incumbents. In principle, entry by chains and non-chains has similar competitive effects.
The key distinction between these firms is that chains are more productive, and so have
greater ability to lower prices and improve quality.
        In general, the effect of competition on product quality is theoretically ambiguous. Firms
with market power may exploit their position to lower quality, just as they may raise prices,
and earn positive long-run profits. In the canonical model, competition attenuates market
power, causing firms to increase quality, decrease prices, or both. This decision depends
loosely on the relative magnitudes of the price elasticity and the quality elasticity of demand
(Dorfman and Steiner 1954). Firms are likely to compete through quality if quality improve-
ments translate directly into greater demand. In a setting with fixed prices (e.g. through
regulation), the price elasticity of demand is zero and competition unambiguously improves
quality (Dranove and Satterthwaite 2000). Competition from a high-quality entrant may
also reduce incumbent quality if firms respond by differentiating vertically. In the classic
model with heterogeneous consumers, firms locate along a quality continuum and serve cus-
    3
    Economic development may encourage the entry of chains by creating enough demand so that firms can
exploit economies of scale. By comparing treatment and control markets with similar trends, our empirical
strategy treats this process as exogenous.


                                                   5
tomers who prefer quality in the nearby range (Hotelling 1929, Shaked and Sutton 1982).
Chain entry increases competition in the high-quality market segment, creating an incentive
for incumbents to reduce quality and avoid direct competition. If consumers have hetero-
geneous quality preferences, competition may also affect quality by changing the identity of
the marginal consumer (Spence 1975). In Spence’s framework, the firm’s marginal revenue
from quality is a function of the marginal consumer’s willingness to pay for quality. A quan-
tity expansion (e.g. through competition) changes the identity of the marginal consumer,
which alters firms equilibrium choices of quality. The sign of this response is ambiguous, and
depends upon the specification of preference heterogeneity.
    Asymmetric information about product quality may affect quality provision. In practice,
quality is rarely perfectly observable or unobservable; instead consumers receive noisy but
informative quality signals. Consumers may need to search for quality information (Salop
and Stiglitz 1977) or may learn about quality by consuming so-called experience goods
(Nelson 1970). People also receive quality signals from advertisements (Nelson 1974), pub-
lic announcements, and conversations with peers (Allen 1984). Regardless of the learning
mechanism, these models converge to the completely unobservable case as the quality signal
becomes noisy.
    The effect of competition on quality depends on how well consumers perceive quality.
Within a search model, Dranove and Satterthwaite (1992) explore this relationship by varying
the precision of price and quality signals. The incentive for firms to offer high quality
strengthens as the quality signal becomes precise. With a weak quality signal, the effective
quality elasticity of demand is low, and firms have weak incentives to improve quality in
response to competition. An effect of competition on quality implies that consumers receive
quality signals that are at least somewhat informative.
    In addition to increasing retail competition, chain entry may affect incumbent quality
by reducing the wholesale demand for high-quality medicine. The chain bypasses the whole-
sale market and purchases directly from manufacturers. This shock may reduce wholesale


                                              6
prices, both overall and particularly for high-quality drugs, which could enable incumbents
to improve quality. Finally, chain entry may affect incumbent quality by changing consumer
demand. The chain might inform consumers about the distribution of drug quality or alter
their preferences for high-quality medicine. Either mechanism shifts out the retail demand
for medicine, which should increase the price. The chain may also alter the selection of
customers who shop at incumbent pharmacies, which is a possibility we discuss further in
the appendix.


3     Empirical Context, Data and Chain Entry

3.1     Context

India’s pharmaceutical sector produces 13 percent of global pharmaceutical output (CCI
2012). The industry consists of around 250 large “national manufacturers” and around 8000
small “local manufacturers.” Many national manufacturers work to comply with both domes-
tic and international quality standards. India has 74 FDA-approved manufacturing plants,
more than any country besides the United States. National manufacturers advertise heavily
to establish brand reputation and enhance market power. In contrast, local manufacturers
produce and disseminate small batches of common generic medicines, at times incentivizing
local doctors and pharmacies to push their products. Regulators struggle to provide effec-
tive oversight for the large number of local manufacturers. To accommodate demand for a
wide variety of local brands, retailers commonly stock dozens of brands of popular generic
compounds (Kamat and Nichter 1998).
      Several factors contribute to heterogenous drug quality in India. To achieve consistent
high quality, manufacturers must invest heavily in quality control equipment and protocols
(Woodcock 2004, Yu 2008). Quality control investment is more challenging than procuring
pharmaceutical components, which are cheap and available. With summertime temperatures
that exceed 40 degrees Celsius, distributors and retailers must safeguard inventory from heat


                                              7
and humidity. Corrupt wholesalers may mix counterfeit and authentic drugs. Counterfeits
imitate the appearance of well-known brands but are not intended to be therapeutic. Because
pharmaceutical components are inexpensive, counterfeiters may evade detection by including
active ingredients in their products (Newton et al. 2008).4
     Consumers have difficulty observing drug quality. During the sale, a consumer sees the
brand, the condition of the packaging, and the manufacture and expiry dates. The con-
sumer’s change in health after taking the medicine provides another noisy signal.5 While
they may not know the quality of specific units of inventory, pharmacists are relatively in-
formed about average quality because they maintain longstanding distributor relationships.
A pharmacist can influence drug quality by requesting different inventory, changing distrib-
utors, or changing storage conditions.
     Our audit focuses on ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin, two broad-spectrum antibiotics that
are widely used to treat ear, urinary tract, respiratory, and digestive tract infections. Both
drugs are sold in blister pack “strips” of 8-10 tablets. Patients often use these drugs incor-
rectly to treat viral infections. Consumers have difficulty gauging effectiveness because they
often do not know whether an illness is bacterial. Ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin are suited
to a mystery shopper audit because pharmacies stock many brands of these drugs and sell
them frequently.
     An examination of the quality-price gradient allows us to gauge the information asym-
metry in this market. In a hedonic framework, the price reflects the marginal consumer’s
valuation of the product. Consumers should be unwilling to pay a premium for quality
that they cannot observe. In an approach similar to Bate et al. (2011), Figure 1 shows
the kernel density of price for high-quality and low-quality drugs in our data (described be-
low). High-quality medicine is more expensive on average, which suggests that consumers
    4
      A literature in public health shows that counterfeits are pervasive in developing countries (Cockburn et
al. 2005, Dondorp et al. 2004, Sow et al. 2002, Taylor et al. 2001).
    5
      Without observing a counterfactual, the consumer cannot isolate the drug’s contribution to her change
in health. The consumer’s health may improve through a placebo effect or may fail to improve because the
drug is not the correct therapy.



                                                      8
receive some quality information. The heavy overlap in these distributions indicates that
other factors influence price. In particular, the price distributions are bimodal because of
the different pricing strategies of premium and discount brands. A density plot for residual
prices (conditional on the manufacturer and other observable product features) shows even
greater overlap between high-quality and low-quality drugs. Figure 2 directly considers the
availability of information through a scatterplot of actual and perceived market-wide quality.
The gradient in this figure is positive and significant but the R2 of the regression is 0.08,
which suggests that consumers perceive quality in a noisy fashion.
    The Drugs Control Administration (DCA) is the main pharmaceutical regulator in India.
The agency oversees both manufacturers and retailers. The DCA has a reputation as an in-
effective regulator because it has repeatedly failed to detect substandard medicine (Kashmir
Times 2009). In one instance, the DCA conducted pharmacy audits but did not test the
audit samples for 14 months, by which time many samples had expired (Mahesh 2010). The
DCA seems to provide more thorough oversight of national manufacturers than local manu-
facturers. Despite these shortcomings, the agency appears to limit the flagrant counterfeiting
that is reported in settings with even weaker governance (e.g. Gaurdiano et al. 2007).
    Hyderabad, the fourth largest city in India and the capital of Andhra Pradesh. Small,
independent “mom-and-pop” pharmacies predominate in Hyderabad and elsewhere in India.
These firms offer most common drugs and rarely require a prescription. Shops are typically
small, unenclosed storefronts without air conditioning. In our data, pharmacies occupy a
median of 350 square feet of retail space. Pharmacies usually employ workers without formal
training.
    Pharmacy markets are hyperlocal, with customers shopping a median of 0.5 kilometers
from their homes in our data. Markets in our study contain a median of 24 pharmacies
per square kilometer. Pharmacies advertise through prominent storefront signage. Each
manufacturer determines a “maximum retail price”, which appears on the packaging. The
wholesale price is tied to the MRP, which restricts the retailer’s ability to offer a discount


                                              9
without losing money. However the MRP varies widely across brands (a 10-tablet strip in
our data ranges from US$0.46 to $2.00), so pharmacists can lower the price by substituting
a cheaper brand.
      Conventionally pharmacies obtain inventory from a multilayered wholesale market. Re-
tail pharmacies buy from wholesalers, who buy from regional “super-stockists”, who buy
from “carry and forward” agents, who in turn buy from manufacturers. Pharmacies in our
sample purchase from a median of eight wholesalers. With many agents in the supply chain,
careless or corrupt wholesalers can undermine quality with impunity. The complexity of the
supply chain also inflates wholesale and therefore retail prices. Hyderabad does not have a
centralized wholesale marketplace. Instead wholesalers deliver inventory directly to shops.
      Chain pharmacies have expanded rapidly through Indian cities in recent years. Chains
have catered to relatively affluent customers by offering amenities such as air conditioning
and more knowledgable staff. With over 250 local stores, MedPlus is the largest of three
chains operating in Hyderabad during the study period. MedPlus was established in 2008
and grew rapidly in Hyderabad, Chennai, Bangalore, and elsewhere in southern India. The
firm markets itself as an inexpensive, high-quality provider. It obtains discounts on inventory
by purchasing in bulk directly from manufacturers and in turn offers consumers a 10 percent
discount from the MRP of national-brand drugs. MedPlus also contracts with a handful
of manufacturers to offer “own-brand” alternatives to the non-national brands found at
incumbent pharmacies. Direct purchasing allows MedPlus to offer high-quality medicine by
avoiding the quality issues associated with the wholesale market.


3.2     Data

This study relies on an original data set that measures the quality, price, and performance
of retail pharmacies. We surveyed in 20 markets (described below) from May-July of 2010
(“Round 1”), one year later (“Round 2”) and in a more limited fashion two years later
(“Round 3”). The chain entered seven of the candidate markets between Rounds 1 and 2. In


                                              10
the Empirical Strategy section below, we validate the assumption that entry into candidate
markets was plausibly exogenous. We began by conducting a census of pharmacies within 0.5
kilometers of the center of each market. Within each market, we enrolled the three nearest
incumbent pharmacies to where the chain wished to enter, plus two others at random, for
a total of 100 incumbent pharmacies. For each sample pharmacy, we conducted mystery
shopper audits, drug quality testing, a pharmacy survey and a customer traffic enumeration.
We also surveyed local consumers about recent drug purchases, drug quality perceptions,
demographics, and health. In Round 3, we repeated all surveys except for the audit and
pharmacy surveys. Drug quality and price data are therefore available in Rounds 1 and 2,
but not Round 3. In Rounds 2 and 3, we also included the newly-opened chain pharmacies
in the sample.
      We audited each pharmacy four times per round in order to stratify by drug and auditor
SES.6 Auditors were careful to interact naturally with pharmacists. The auditor requested
the compound (ciprofloxacin or amoxicillin) but allowed the pharmacist to choose the brand.
This approach gave the pharmacist latitude to substitute between brands with different
quality levels and profit margins. The laboratory required three strips (30 tablets) to conduct
quality tests, so auditors revisited pharmacies and bought two more strips of the same brand
several days later. Audit visits comprise a tiny fraction of total customer traffic over the
sample period.
      A laboratory in Delhi tested the drugs samples for compliance with Indian Pharma-
copeia, the official drug quality standard in India. A sample of ciprofloxacin or amoxicillin
complies with Indian Pharmacopeia standards by falling within the official thresholds for ac-
tive ingredient concentration, dissolution, and uniformity of weight. We conducted tests for
all three dimensions of quality. The active ingredient concentration of the samples must be
within 90-110 percent of the labeled dosage. Dissolution indicates the percent of the sample’s
  6
    We validated the distinction between high-SES and low-SES mystery shoppers by asking consumer
survey respondents to identify the SES of auditors from photographs. Respondents nearly always answered
correctly.



                                                  11
active content that dissolves into a known medium within a predetermined time, and must
exceed 80 percent for the sample to comply. To measure uniformity of weight, the analyst
weighs 30 individual tablets. The uniformity parameter is a function of both the minimum
and the maximum absolute deviation in weight within the sample, and must be less than 5
for amoxicillin and less than 7.5 for ciprofloxacin. Figure 3 shows the sample distributions
of these quality components. Drusano (2004) describes how these quality dimensions map
into patient health. Patients respond to antibiotics in heterogenous ways. Small quality
deficiencies may have important health impacts for patients who already respond poorly to
antibiotic treatment.
       Overall, over 96 percent of the audit samples comply with Indian Pharmacopeia. Among
non-national drugs, only 93 percent comply with the quality standard. This rate is similar
for both antibiotics, and is in line with the reported national compliance rate of 91 percent in
2003 (Sheth et al. 2007). Among substandard samples, 69 percent fail the active ingredient
requirement, 22 percent fail the uniformity requirement, and 58 percent fail the dissolution
requirement. Figure 3 plots the densities of these components. Quality is optimized at the
intended active ingredient dosage, and increases monotonically in dissolution and decreases in
uniformity of weight. The positive and negative dispersion in active ingredient concentration
around 100 percent reinforces that quality control is an important quality determinant.
Limited data indicate that pharmacopeia compliance is much higher in developed countries
(Trefi et al. 2007).7
       Our analysis distinguishes between drugs from national and non-national manufacturers.
Retailers have limited discretion over the quality and price of national brands. Customers are
less willing to substitute away from brands with reputations for high quality. Consequently,
many national-brand manufacturers exercise market power and set wholesale prices so that
retailers have slim margins. In contrast, quality is more heterogeneous among local brands,
   7
    Trefi and coauthors find that ciprofloxacin samples from Germany and New Zealand contain 99.3-99.7
percent of the correct active ingredient dosage (n = 8). Bate et al. (2012) audit the authenticity of online
drug purchases shipped to the United States. With the exception of Viagra purchased from uncertified
pharmacies, they find no counterfeit samples.


                                                    12
and retailers have more discretion over pricing and brand selection. A research assistant
collaborated with laboratory officials to categorize each manufacturer as national, local, or
other, based on information from manufacturer websites and direct knowledge of large firms.
In our analysis, we combine “local” and “other” categories. Since pharmacists select the
brand in our audit, the sample’s status as national or non-national is endogenous. However
a regression of national status on chain entry shows no effect (β̂ = 0.004, σ̂ = 0.08, p = 0.96).
      Our consumer survey is a repeated cross-section that measures demographic character-
istics, drug purchases, drug quality perceptions, and health. We enrolled half of the sample
from among people who had just visited sample pharmacies (n = 2602) and half from among
other adults who were present in the area (n = 2632). This approach allows us to measure
the characteristics of both actual and potential pharmacy shoppers. To enumerate customer
traffic, surveyors counted the number of customers entering each pharmacy from 6-7PM and
from 7:30-8:30PM on randomly chosen days. We selected these windows because in pilot
data the bulk of customer traffic occurs in the evening.


3.3     Chain Entry

In the spring of 2010, MedPlus executives assisted us by identifying 18 candidate markets
it wished to enter. At the time, MedPlus operated over 250 stores throughout the city and
had nearly exhausted its local expansion opportunities. After the 2010 expansion, the firm
shifted its focus toward growth in other cities. These 18 markets are middle-class. Because
the firm had already entered the most affluent neighborhoods and had nearly exhausted entry
possibilities in the city, candidate entry markets are more socioeconomically homogeneous
than the city as a whole. Between Rounds 1 and 2, MedPlus entered 7 of the 18 candidate
entry markets. We surveyed in all 18 markets with the expectation that suitable retail space
would not become available in every candidate market, and that non-entry markets could
serve as controls in this study. Our budget permitted data collection in two additional
markets, which we selected for their similarity to the 18 candidate markets and the absence


                                               13
of chain pharmacies. Compared to the 18 candidate markets, the two additional markets
exhibit lower socioeconomic status. Our findings are robust to the exclusion of these two
markets.8 Among the 18 candidate markets, the availability of suitable retail space was the
main factor determining entry. The firm was not always able to find available retail real
estate in the desired location that was suitable in size and configuration for one of its stores.
Figure 4 shows the locations of these markets within the city. Entry markets are an average
of 3.4 kilometers farther from the city center than control markets. As we discuss in the
appendix, results are not sensitive to limiting the sample to treatment and control markets
that have similar proximities to the city center.
        Table 1 compares the chain stores to incumbents in Round 2. We prefer to draw a
comparison to incumbents in control markets, since chain entry may have influenced the
characteristics of treatment incumbents. The table shows that prices are 6 percent lower
(p = 0.02) and pharmacopeia compliance is 6 percentage points higher (p = 0.46) at the
chain. All MedPlus stores are air conditioned, compared to just 12 percent of incumbents.


4       Empirical Strategy

4.1       Empirical Approach

In this section, we estimate the effect of chain entry on incumbent drug quality and prices
using a difference-in-difference approach. In the following specification, s indexes the audit
scenario, i indexes the pharmacy, m indexes the market, and t indexes the time period:


                    ysimt = β1 P ostt + β2 P ostt × Entrym + Ωmt + αm + εsimt                         (1)


P ostt is an indicator for Round 2 and Entrym is an indicator for entry markets. Market
fixed effects, αm , control for baseline market heterogeneity. Some regressions include market
    8
    Appendix Table 1 reproduces price and quality results for only the 18 candidate entry markets. Results
are very similar to estimates that include the two additional markets.



                                                   14
demographic and health controls, Ωmt .9 We cluster standard errors by market, which may
lead us to underestimate the standard errors with only twenty markets (Donald and Lang
2007). Therefore we also report the p-value for each coefficient of interest using Cameron,
Gelbach and Miller’s (2008) wild cluster bootstrap.


4.2      Identification

For our approach to identify treatment effects, unobserved time-varying determinants of
quality and other outcomes must be uncorrelated with chain entry. Differential trends in the
supply and demand of high-quality medicine in treatment and control markets could violate
this assumption. We examine this assumption in several ways. The comparability of treat-
ment and control markets was built into the chains market selection and expansion process.
As we discuss above, chain executives directly report that they had plans to enter 18 candi-
date markets they considered middle-income neighborhoods. As the last few neighborhoods
the chain considered entering in Hyderabad, the 18 candidate markets are relatively simi-
lar, and fall within a relatively narrow band of income. Furthermore, the chain executives
report that eventual entry within the candidate markets was determined by the availability
of suitable retail space, and not any forecast of market conditions subsequent to the initial
selection of candidate markets. Our pharmacy and consumer survey data validate the iden-
tifying assumption that entry was not correlated with measures of demand for medicine, or
trends in those measures. Our pharmacy census indicates that chain entry is not associated
with the closure of an incumbent pharmacy, which could otherwise suggest a shift in demand
toward high-quality medicine. Furthermore, non-chain entry occurred in a similar fashion in
treatment and control markets, with an average of 1.14 entrants in treatment markets and
1.15 entrants in control markets between Rounds 1 and 2.
       To assess the identifying assumption further, Table 2 compares baseline characteristics
   9
    Regressions that use pharmacy fixed effects yield very similar estimates. Demographic controls include
education, income, household size, caste, and vehicle ownership. Health controls include the prevalence of
diarrhea, fever, cough and cold, and injuries. We use the non-shopper sample to calculate market × time
averages for all variables.

                                                   15
of pharmacies and consumers in treatment and control markets. In Panel A, audit samples
from treatment and control markets have nearly identical prices and quality. The price per
tablet differs by US$0.001 (p = 0.75) and the rate of Indian Pharmacopeia compliance differs
by 0.005 (p = 0.92). Samples have similar values for active ingredient concentration and
dissolution. Uniformity is somewhat higher in entry markets but does not account for any
Indian Pharmacopeia failures in Round 1. In Panel B, treatment and control pharmacies are
comparable in terms of air conditioning, cleanliness, and customer traffic. Panel C reports
consumer characteristics and focuses on the non-shopper sample. Log income, educational
attainment, household size, and vehicle ownership are comparable for treatment and control
consumers. Treatment consumers are more likely to belong to a scheduled caste or tribe.
The baseline similarity of treatment and control markets is consistent with the comparability
of candidate markets and the plausible exogeneity of entry.
       Finally we test whether treatment and control markets exhibit differential changes in
demographic characteristics, which may shift the demand for high-quality medicine. We may
spuriously attribute the effect of a demand shock to chain entry if the chain selectively enters
markets with rising demand for high-quality medicine. As one test of the identifying assump-
tion, we examine whether chain entry is correlated with changes in observable demographic
characteristics of non-shopping consumers. Table 3 reports the difference-in-differences for
these variables. We do not find significant differences in exogenous demographic trends across
treatment and control markets between Rounds 1 and 2. Trends in these key variables con-
tinue to be similar across markets through Round 3, nearly two years after entry into the
treatment markets.10 This pattern suggests that changes in the composition of pharmacy
customers do not influence our estimates. Appendix Table 2 finds no correlation between
chain entry and the composition of customers at incumbent pharmacies.
  10
    We have not identified administrative data that would allow us to test for differential pre-trends. In
principle, we could use the Indian census to calculate 10-year demographic changes from 2001 to 2011,
which would encompass Rounds 1 and 2 of our survey. We have not pursued this approach because census
geographic units align poorly with the markets in our data set and because 10-year differences do not seem
informative for identification.



                                                   16
4.3       Trends by Treatment Status

Our estimates are identified through the differential change in price and quality in entry
markets relative to control markets. Figure 5 shows this variation by plotting the trends in
price and pharmacopeia compliance. After adjusting for inflation, the price of audited drugs
in control markets is constant over time while the price declines by around 2 percent in entry
markets.
       The figure shows that quality falls by 5 percentage points in control markets but remains
constant in entry markets. Marked climate changes from Round 1 to Round 2 may explain
this pattern. Humidity and temperature are the most important environmental determinants
of quality for antibiotics (Peace et al. 2012). According to weather data from NOAA, peak
relative humidity during the data collection was 8.7 points higher (p = 0.04) for Round 2
than for Round 1.11 The combination of high heat and humidity is particularly harmful
to drugs (Kiron et al. 2011, Mubengayi et al. 2013). Using a temperature threshold of 30
degrees Celsius and a relative humidity threshold of 60 percent, the share of audit days with
poor conditions rose from 54 percent in Round 1 to 97 percent in Round 2 (p < 0.001).12
  11
     Weather readings are from the Hyderabad International Airport. We obtain similar results if we include
the two weeks prior to the audit, when some drugs may have been in inventory.
  12
     The combination of demand growth and incumbent capacity constraints may also contribute to this
pattern. The limited availability of retail space creates a capacity constraint for firms, which may create
market power by allowing firms to avoid price competition (Kreps and Scheinkman 1983). Increases in
demand accentuate market power as long as capacity lags behind demand. Chain competition in treatment
markets counteracts this incentive by reducing excess demand. Table 4 shows that customer traffic grew
rapidly for control incumbents but did not change for treatment incumbents. Across markets, the correlation
between the changes in customer traffic and pharmacopeia compliance is -0.16, which indicates that quality
worsened in markets where demand rose. Customer waiting times, which are available through the mystery
shopper audit, proxy for the presence of capacity constraints. We find that the quality change is small and
insignificant for the first three quartiles, ranked by wait times. For pharmacies with the longest waiting
times, quality falls by 11 percentage points.




                                                    17
5        Results

5.1        The Impact of Chain Entry

Chain entry has a dramatic effect on incumbents. Table 4 shows the effect of chain entry
on log customer traffic and market exit. The table shows that shows that customer traffic
increased by 25 percent over two years for control incumbents but stagnates for treatment
incumbents. 96 percent of control incumbents who were present in Round 1 remain in Round
3, compared to 91 percent of treatment incumbents. Both of these results are statistically
significant.13
         Regression estimates for drug quality appear in Table 5. Columns 1 and 2 use the full
sample of drug manufacturers. Column 1, which is the regression analog of the quality graph
in Figure 5, shows that chain entry increases pharmacopeia compliance by 4.3 percentage
points. This effect rises to 6.6 percentage points after controlling for demographic and health
characteristics in Column 2. The rest of the table distinguishes between drugs from national
and non-national manufacturers. In Columns 3 and 4, we find no effect of chain entry on the
quality of national brands. In contrast, Columns 5-7 show a large and significant effect on the
quality of non-national brands: pharmacopeia compliance rises by 20-24 percentage points
relative to control markets. Effects are significant using either market-clustered standard
errors or Cameron et al.’s (2008) wild cluster bootstrapped standard errors.
         Pharmacies may change quality by substituting within or across manufacturers. Qual-
ity factors related to distribution and storage, such as counterfeits and climate control,
contribute to within-manufacturer quality heterogeneity. Columns 6 and 7 quantify this
decomposition by excluding and including manufacturer fixed effects. Controlling for man-
ufacturer fixed effects in Column 7 attenuates the treatment effect estimate by 38 percent,
which suggests that substitution within manufacturers is responsible for 62 percent of the
    13
    The pharmacy census, which is the source for market exit results, encompasses all firms in the 20 sample
markets. Results for quality, price, and customer traffic are based on a sample of 100 pharmacies. Only
one of these pharmacies exits from Round 1 to Round 2. Our data do not indicate whether firms with
high-quality or low-quality medicine differentially exit.


                                                    18
treatment effect for non-national drugs.
       We analyze the impact of chain entry further by examining the impact the components
of drug quality. Figures 6 and 7 show the change over time in the distributions of both
active ingredient concentration and dissolution in treatment and control markets. A similar
graph for uniformity (for which we find no effect) is available from the authors. In Figure
6, quality worsens in control markets because mass shifts from the 95-100 percent range
to the 85-90 percent range. The distribution shifts leftward, particularly at the low end of
the distribution, where there is an increase in the mass below 90 percent, the minimum for
pharmacopeia compliance. In the lower panel, quality improves in entry markets because
mass shifts from the 105-115 range to the 95-100 percent range, which reduces high-end
failures. In Figure 7, the modal value for dissolution shifts to the right in both treatment
and control markets. However, mass in the left tail (which is the source of pharmacopeia
failures) is eliminated in treatment markets but expands in control markets.14 We analyze
these effects further further in the appendix.
       As we describe in Section 3.2, a sample complies with Indian Pharmacopeia by exceeding
predetermined thresholds for active ingredient concentration, dissolution, and uniformity of
weight. Table 6 shows the impact of chain entry on these components for the full sample
(Panel A) and the sample from non-national manufacturers (Panel B). Columns 1-3 report
results for active ingredient concentration.15 The quantity of active ingredient declines by
6.86 mg in control markets and by 3.33 mg in treatment markets, leading to a (statistically
insignificant) treatment effect estimate of 3.53 mg in Column 1.16 Because quality is non-
monotone for active ingredient concentration, and is optimized at the labeled dosage, Column
2 reports the effect on the absolute percent deviation from the labeled dosage. This estimate
  14
     All of these shifts are statistically significant. Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-values are 0.002 and 0.034 in the
upper and lower panels of Figure 6 and are less than 0.001 for both panels of Figure 7.
  15
     Figure 3 shows the frequency distributions for these quality components, pooling samples of ciprofloxacin
and amoxicillin from all sample manufacturers.
  16
     Column 1 excludes seven observations with a labeled dosage of 250 mg. Pharmacists provided these
samples as substitutes for the 500 mg samples the auditors requested. Normalizing the dosage to 100
percent and including these observations does not affect the estimate.



                                                     19
is pronounced and statistically significant for non-national drugs. Column 3 shows that chain
entry increases the probability of compliance with the active ingredient requirement by 4.2
percentage points overall and by 18 percentage points for non-national drugs.
      The rest of the table shows the impact on dissolution and uniformity of weight. In
Columns 4 and 5, chain entry improves dissolution because dissolution improves in treatment
markets while it remains constant or declines slightly in control markets. These changes lead
to significant effects on this aspect of pharmacopeia compliance. We find no effect of chain
entry on uniformity of weight. Because low values indicate greater uniformity, Columns 6 and
7 show that average uniformity rises but pharmacopeia compliance declines in both treatment
and control markets. A plot of the uniformity distribution before and after entry (available
from the authors) resolves this discrepancy by showing that the uniformity distribution shifts
leftward and also incorporates a larger right tail.
      Table 7 shows the impact of chain entry on log price. As above, we examine the full
sample and then distinguish between national and non-national drugs. Columns 1 and 2
show an insignificant 2-4 percent effect on price in the full sample. The effect on price for
national drugs is also insignificant in Columns 3 and 4. However chain entry leads to a
significant 12-15 percent price decline for non-national drugs. Columns 6 and 7 decompose
this effect into inter-manufacturer and intra-manufacturer components. The coefficient is
the same in both specifications, which suggests that firms reduce prices by offering discounts
rather than substituting toward cheaper brands.


5.2     Robustness Tests

We investigate the robustness of our results by controlling for the interaction of P ostt and
baseline observable characteristics. If unobservable trends are correlated with these char-
acteristics, these regressions will attenuate the treatment effect estimate. Table 8 reports
these robustness tests for the quality and price of non-national drugs. Columns 1, 2, 5, and
6 control for the interaction of P ostt and baseline market demographic or health character-


                                              20
istics. Columns 3 and 7 control for the interaction with baseline pharmacy characteristics,
including customer traffic, age, signage, and space allocated to medicine. The treatment
effect on quality is statistically significant and varies from 0.14 to 0.22, compared to 0.20 as
reported in Table 5. The treatment effect on log price is also significant (except for Column
7) and ranges from -0.10 to -0.20, compared to -0.11 in Table 7.
      Our results may arise because of regression toward the mean if the chain enters mar-
kets where quality is unexpectedly low or price is unexpectedly high. We investigate this
possibility by interacting P ostt with the baseline value of the dependent variable (averaged
by pharmacy) in Columns 4 and 8 of Table 8. These controls do not affect the magnitude
or significance of our treatment effect estimates. We carry out several additional robustness
tests in the appendix.


5.3     Consumer Perceptions

Next we examine the effect of chain entry on perceived quality. Quality competition is
only profitable if consumers perceive quality adjustments and increase demand at firms that
improve quality. The consumer survey elicits the respondent’s perception of quality on a
four-point Likert scale for “nearby pharmacies” and for “national brand” and “local brand”
drugs. We focus on the subsample of non-shopping consumers because shoppers are a selected
sample whose quality perceptions are more difficult to interpret. Results for shoppers, which
are available from the authors, closely resemble the estimates below.
      Table 9 reports the effect of chain entry on perceived quality. With three consumer
survey rounds, we estimate separate effects for Rounds 2 and 3. Columns 1 and 2 show a
positive and significant effect of chain entry on the perceived quality of nearby pharmacies.
Standard errors are smaller and effects are more significant in Round 3 because the data
from Round 2 have a higher intracluster correlation. Columns 3 and 4 show a generally
insignificant effect on the perceived quality of national drugs. These findings are consistent
with the small actual impact on quality for these drugs; however the large coefficient in


                                              21
Column 4 suggests that consumers sometimes hold inaccurate perceptions. In contrast,
Columns 5 and 6 show a large and significant effect for local drugs, which is consistent with
actual increases in quality in entry markets over this period.17


5.4      Interpretation

Retail competition is the most plausible explanation for our results. Chain entry reduces the
demand and increases the elasticity of demand for treatment incumbents. These effects are
particularly clear for non-national drugs, over which firms have the greatest discretion. These
effects appear to arise through chain competition. In addition to seven MedPlus stores, an
average of 1.15 non-chain stores enter treatment markets and 1.14 non-chain stores enter
control markets from Round 1 to Round 2, an insignificant difference. The key distinction
between treatment and control markets is the entry of a chain store, which suggests that
chain and non-chain pharmacies have distinct competitive effects. The chain’s impact may
be especially large because the chain competes aggressively through price and signals quality
more effectively than mom-and-pop firms.
       Alternatively, chain entry may affect incumbent quality via the wholesale market. By
purchasing directly from manufacturers, the chain reduces the wholesale demand for medicine.
However, our results are unlikely to arise through this channel because the wholesale market
spans the city and is geographically diffuse. Any impact on wholesale demand is localized in
treatment markets, which are a very small subset of all markets in the city. The seven new
chain stores represent less than three percent of MedPlus stores, and less than 0.2 percent
of pharmacies in the city
       Chain entry may directly increase the demand for high-quality medicine by shifting
consumer perceptions or quality preferences. In the consumer survey, respondents indicate
whether drug quality, store convenience, and store familiarity are important considerations
  17
    Firms may signal higher quality in either observable or unobservable ways. Appendix Table 3 shows
mixed and statistically insignificant evidence of pharmacy and drug improvements in terms of several ob-
servable dimensions. We discuss quality signaling further in the appendix.



                                                  22
when purchasing medicine. We restrict the sample to non-shopping consumers; the responses
of shoppers are more difficult to interpret because these respondents have elected to purchase
medicine. Appendix Table 5 shows that chain entry increases the importance that consumers
report placing on drug quality, which suggests that the chain increases the preference for high-
quality medicine. Chain entry does not increase the perceived importance of other pharmacy
characteristics. An increase in demand for high-quality medicine cannot, alone, explain our
findings on its own because greater demand should increase prices. The price reductions in
Table 7 suggest that competition over price and quality is the dominant channel.


5.5     The Market-wide and Distributional Impacts

Although incumbents respond to chain entry by lowering prices and improving quality, they
remain at a competitive disadvantage to the chain. In Table 10, we restrict the sample to
treatment markets after entry and regress pharmacopeia compliance and log price on an
indicator for the chain. Columns 1 and 2 show that while quality is similar, the chain offers
6 percent lower prices than incumbents in entry markets (p = 0.16). Columns 3 and 4 focus
only on brands that both the chain and incumbents carry. For these brands, drugs from the
chain are 5 percentage points more likely to comply with the pharmacopeia standard and
are priced 9 percent lower. These patterns suggest that the chain continues to benefit from
its distinctive supply chain even after incumbents have responded to entry.
      A welfare assessment of chain entry should incorporate both the presence of the chain
and the incumbent response. We measure the market-wide impact of chain entry by in-
cluding observations from the seven new chain outlets in Round 2. We also weight the
regressions by customer traffic to account for heterogeneity in pharmacy size. Estimates
of the market-wide impact of chain entry appear in Table 11. In Columns 1 and 2, chain
entry increases pharmacopeia compliance by 5-7 percent, which is a slightly larger than our
previous estimate. In Columns 5 and 6, chain entry reduces price by 5-6 percent, which is
roughly double the previous result. Including observations from the chain strengthens the


                                              23
price result because the chain consistently underprices incumbents.
    We also examine whether the effect of chain entry depends upon the socioeconomic
status of consumers. High-SES consumers may better perceive drug quality heterogeneity
and more strongly prefer high-quality medicine. Similarly, low-SES consumers may be more
price sensitive, leading to greater price competition for these customers. These consumer
attributes could influence the optimal incumbent response to chain competition. Firms may
cater to consumers of a particular socioeconomic status or may discriminate by treating
high-SES and low-SES consumers differently.
    The remainder of Table 11 explores possible heterogeneous treatment effects by consumer
SES. In Columns 3 and 4, we compute the average education of each pharmacy’s shoppers and
distinguish between pharmacies that are above and below the median. Column 3 shows that
quality rises differentially (but insignificantly) for pharmacies that serve high-SES customers.
With a positive coefficient on P ostt × Entrym , chain entry also improves the quality of low-
SES shops. Columns 4 and 8 exploit the audit stratification by mystery shopper SES to
investigate possible SES-based discrimination. The regressions show small and insignificant
interactions with auditor SES, which suggests that firms do not discriminate across customers
within stores. Therefore, both high-SES and low-SES consumers appear to benefit from the
competitive effects of chain entry.


6   Conclusion

We show that chain entry leads to higher quality and lower prices, both for incumbent
pharmacies and for the overall retail market. This impact is the greatest for non-national
brands, which have the most baseline quality heterogeneity, and over which pharmacies
have the most quality and price discretion. The lack of clear socioeconomic heterogeneity
in these effects suggests that chain entry has broad market-wide consumer benefits. The
chain’s ability to undercut incumbents in terms of price suggests that chains will continue
to succeed in Indian pharmacy markets.

                                              24
    Our results are informative about the information asymmetry between pharmacies and
consumers, and possible channels through which quality improvements can take place in light
of information asymmetries and weak regulatory institutions. Consumers accurately infer
quality changes associated with chain entry, which indicates that they do receive informative
quality signals. In the appendix, we show mixed evidence of investment in quality signals
and discuss how incumbents may communicate quality information to consumers in other
ways.
    Markets plagued by information asymmetries typically call for regulation. However im-
plementing strong regulation is not usually feasible in developing countries. This study
suggests that in settings with weak regulation, productivity-enhancing technologies such as
chains may help overcome information asymmetries. The results also imply that policymak-
ers may be able to encourage drug quality by facilitating pharmacy chains. While dynamic
considerations are beyond the scope of this study, we note that by Round 2, incumbents are
able to achieve the quality levels attained by the chain, but at higher cost. The productiv-
ity differences suggest that chains may replace mom-and-pop pharmacies as the dominant
organizational model. In the short run, the implications for quality and price as incumbents
exit are ambiguous. In the long run, this scenario is likely lead to competition among more
productive chains, a pattern seen in more developed countries.




                                             25
            20
            15
   Kernel Density
        10  5
            0




                       .05               .1                 .15             .2              .25
                                               Price per 500mg Tablet (USD)

                                  IP Compliant Samples                 IP Non−Compliant Samples

Figure 1: The Price Distribution for IP Compliant and Non-Compliant Samples
            3.4
            3.2
   Perceived Quality
           32.8
            2.6




                             .8               .85                 .9             .95              1
                                                    Marketwide IP Compliance

                              Figure 2: Actual and Perceived Quality by Market


                                                            26
                               Active Ingredient Concentration




         .2    .15
Kernel Density
      .1 .05
         0




                     80   85       90         95       100           105   110   115
                                            % of Correct Level


                                             Dissolution
         .15 .1
 Kernel Density
.05      0




                     30   40       50          60         70         80     90   100
                                                Dissolution


                                              Uniformity
         .3 .2
Kernel Density
.1       0




                     0     2            4           6            8         10     12
                                                Uniformity



                 Figure 3: The Distribution of Quality Components


                                                27
Figure 4: The Location of Sample Markets in Hyderabad




                         28
                                       100%
Percent Compliance with Indian Pharmacopeia
 90%     92%    94%      96%     98%




                                              1                                                    2
                                                                Survey Round

                                                    Control Markets            Treatment Markets
                       .17
Price per Tablet (2010 USD)
      .16           .165
                       .155




                                              1                                                    2
                                                                Survey Round

                                                    Control Markets            Treatment Markets


                                                  Figure 5: Quality and Price Changes

                                                                      29
                                         Control Markets

             .2    .15
    Kernel Density
          .1 .05
             0




                         80   85   90       95        100      105       110   115
                                          % of Correct Level

                                         Round 1               Round 2



                                        Treatment Markets
             .2    .15
    Kernel Density
          .1 .05
             0




                         80   85   90       95        100      105       110   115
                                          % of Correct Level

                                         Round 1               Round 2


Figure 6: The Density of Active Ingredient Concentration for Non-National Drugs

                                               30
                                           Control Markets

         .15   .1
  Kernel Density
.05      0




                    30      40       50        60         70    80       90       100
                                                Dissolution

                                           Round 1             Round 2



                                          Treatment Markets
         .15   .1
  Kernel Density
.05      0




                    30      40       50        60         70    80       90       100
                                                Dissolution

                                           Round 1             Round 2


                    Figure 7: The Density of Dissolution for Non-National Drugs

                                                 31
Table 1: Characteristics of MedPlus and Control Incumbents After Entry
                                                                            Control
                                                           MedPlus        Incumbents
                                                             (1)              (2)
 Panel A: Drug and Pharmacy Characteristics
 Price per 500mg Tablet (USD)                                0.148           0.160∗
 Complies with Indian Pharmacopeia                           0.964            0.927
 Air conditioning                                             1.00           0.12∗∗∗
 Cleanliness (1-5)                                             4.9           4.0∗∗∗
 Panel B: Shopper Characteristics
 Log Monthly household income (USD)                           5.36            5.36
 Education (years)                                            11.7            11.8
 Distance from home                                           1.53            1.66
Note: The table reports characteristics in Round 2. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    32
Table 2: Baseline Characteristics of Treatment and Control Markets
                                                        Control          Treatment
                                                        Markets           Markets
                                                          (1)               (2)
 Panel A: Drug Sample Characteristics
 Price per 500mg Tablet (USD)                            0.161              0.163
 Complies with Indian Pharmacopeia                       0.969              0.971
 Active ingredient (deviation from 100%)                 0.025              0.023
 Uniformity                                               3.27              3.09∗
 Dissolution                                              89.6               89.6
 Days until expiry                                        608                640
 Sample size                                              517                276
 Panel B: Pharmacy Characteristics
 Air conditioning                                         0.16               0.09
 Cleanliness (1-5)                                        4.03               3.97
 Customer traffic                                         71.5               69.5
 Sample size                                               65                 35
 Panel C: Consumer Characteristics
 Log monthly household income (USD)                       5.30              5.37
 Education (years)                                        12.2              12.0
 Household size                                            4.1               4.0
 Scheduled caste/tribe                                    0.06             0.17∗∗∗
 Owns a vehicle                                           0.64              0.57
 Sample size                                              317                177
Note: Stars indicate significant differences with Column 1. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                   33
     Table 3: Trends in Socioeconomic Status Among Non-Shoppers
                                                                 Rounds 1 and 2                                Rounds 1 and 3
                                                           First Difference       DD                     First Difference       DD
                                                        Control     Treatment   (2) - (1)             Control     Treatment   (5) - (4)
                                                          (1)           (2)        (3)                  (4)           (5)        (6)
      Log monthly household income (USD)                  0.05            -0.03           -0.08         0.05        0.03         -0.08
                                                         (0.07)          (0.15)          (0.15)        (0.07)      (0.15)       (0.15)
      Education (years)                                   0.05            -1.19           -1.23         0.05        -1.18        1.23
                                                         (0.53)          (0.75)          (0.88)        (0.53)      (0.75)       (0.88)
      Household size                                      0.18            0.18           -0.002         0.18        0.18        -0.002
                                                         (0.19)          (0.17)          (0.24)        (0.19)      (0.17)       (0.24)
      Scheduled caste/tribe                               0.03            -0.02           -0.05         0.03        -0.02        -0.05
                                                         (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)
      Owns a vehicle                                      -0.07           -0.03           0.04          -0.07       -0.03        0.04
34




                                                         (0.08)          (0.08)          (0.11)        (0.08)      (0.08)       (0.11)
      Sample size                                         970             601             1571             1293     845          2138
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 4: Chain Entry, Customer Traffic, and Market Exit for Incumbents
 Dependent variable:                        ln(Customer Traffic)             Market Exit
                                              (1)        (2)                (3)        (4)
 Round 2                                   0.19∗∗∗         0.12∗         -0.021∗∗      -0.031∗∗
                                           (0.052)        (0.057)        (0.0099)      (0.015)
 Round 2 × entry market                    -0.27∗∗∗       -0.20∗∗         -0.0055       0.0064
                                           (0.069)        (0.083)         (0.016)       (0.021)
 Round 3                                   0.26∗∗∗          0.20         -0.042∗∗∗     -0.086∗∗
                                           (0.045)         (0.20)         (0.013)      (0.033)
 Round 3 × entry market                    -0.24∗∗∗       -0.19∗∗         -0.055∗∗      -0.047∗
                                           (0.078)        (0.074)         (0.026)       (0.026)

 Market demo and health controls               -            Yes              -            Yes
 Wild bootstrap p-value:
  Round 2 × entry                           0.002           0.16            0.07          0.01
  Round 3 × entry                           0.05            0.21            0.03          0.04
 Observations                                298            298            1053          1053
 R2                                          0.26           0.27           0.05          0.05
Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed
effects. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    35
     Table 5: Chain Entry and Incumbent Drug Quality
      Dependent variable:                                                             Complies with Indian Pharmacopeia
      Manufacturers:                                                All                       National                  Non-National
                                                            (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)                    (7)
      Post entry                                         -0.043∗∗         -0.078∗∗∗     -0.0030      -0.063∗∗∗       -0.15∗∗      -0.21∗∗∗        -0.11
                                                         (0.019)           (0.013)      (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.058)      (0.062)        (0.080)
      Post entry × entry market                          0.043∗∗          0.066∗∗∗        -0.018      0.0067         0.20∗∗∗       0.24∗∗∗        0.15∗
                                                         (0.019)          (0.017)        (0.025)      (0.025)        (0.067)       (0.044)       (0.076)
      Market demo and health controls                        -              Yes             -           Yes             -            Yes           Yes
      Manufacturer fixed effects                             -               -              -            -              -             -            Yes
      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)                0.04             0.03          0.50          0.95          0.005         0.12          0.34
      Observations                                          796             796           520           520            276           276           265
      R2                                                   0.062           0.073         0.062         0.086          0.246         0.347         0.551
36




     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed effects. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Table 6: The Impact on Quality Components
      Quality Component:                                 Active Ingredient Concentration                 Dissolution           Uniformity
      Dependent variable:                                Raw      Abs. % Dev.       Pass               Raw       Pass        Raw       Pass
                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
      Panel A: All Manufacturers
      Post entry                                        -6.86∗∗∗         0.018            -0.018       0.11       -0.024∗   -0.50∗∗∗   -0.020∗∗
                                                         (1.37)          (0.28)          (0.016)      (0.50)      (0.013)   (0.081)    (0.0092)
      Post entry × entry market                           3.53            -0.24          0.042∗∗       1.30       0.032∗     -0.11     -0.0036
                                                         (2.45)          (0.37)          (0.019)      (0.89)      (0.015)   (0.18)     (0.014)

      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)               0.20            0.53             0.05            0.19    0.05      0.56        0.80

      Panel B: Non-National Manufacturers
      Post entry                                        -9.21∗∗          1.69∗∗          -0.12∗∗∗      -0.90       -0.050   -0.64∗∗∗    -0.029
                                                        (3.27)           (0.61)          (0.035)      (1.42)      (0.033)    (0.17)    (0.030)
37




      Post entry × entry market                           1.06           -2.10∗∗         0.18∗∗∗      3.76∗        0.11∗∗   -0.093     0.0026
                                                         (4.94)          (0.83)          (0.055)      (2.01)      (0.045)   (0.23)     (0.039)

      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)               0.82            0.01            < 0.01           0.09    0.03      0.69        0.93
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Table 7: The Impact of Chain Entry on Prices
      Dependent variable:                                                            ln(Price per Tablet)
      Manufacturers:                                             All                  National                       Non-National
                                                          (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)              (6)          (7)
      Post entry                                       0.0047           0.019     -0.016      -0.016        0.046       0.045        0.049
                                                       (0.024)         (0.031)   (0.022)     (0.032)       (0.047)     (0.051)      (0.074)
      Post entry × entry market                         -0.024          -0.040    0.021       0.037        -0.12∗∗     -0.15∗∗       -0.15
                                                       (0.030)         (0.040)   (0.036)     (0.046)       (0.053)     (0.066)      (0.089)
      Market demo and health controls                      -            Yes         -          Yes            -          Yes         Yes
      Manufacturer fixed effects                           -             -          -           -             -           -          Yes
      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)              0.53           0.49      0.57         0.59         0.07         0.19        0.21
      Observations                                       787            787        520         520          267          267         265
      R2                                                0.124          0.130      0.155       0.161        0.180        0.221       0.658
38




     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Table 8: Robustness to Unobservable Trends
      Dependent variable:                                           Complies with IP                                 ln(Price per Tablet)
                                                          (1)        (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)            (8)
      Post entry                                         -1.91       -0.032      -0.82∗∗     0.57∗∗∗       -2.18∗       0.24        -0.63∗∗     0.55∗∗∗
                                                        (1.49)       (0.31)      (0.37)      (0.17)        (1.11)      (0.17)       (0.26)      (0.16)
      Post entry × entry market                          0.22∗∗      0.16∗∗      0.14∗∗∗      0.19∗∗      -0.20∗∗∗     -0.13∗∗      -0.096      -0.084∗
                                                        (0.082)     (0.058)      (0.047)     (0.068)      (0.065)      (0.057)     (0.062)      (0.046)
      Post entry × baseline:
      -Market demographic controls                        Yes          -            -           -           Yes           -           -            -
      -Market health controls                              -          Yes           -           -            -           Yes          -            -
      -Pharmacy characteristics                            -           -           Yes          -            -            -          Yes           -
      -Dependent variable (pharmacy mean)                  -           -            -          Yes           -            -           -           Yes
      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)              0.07         0.02        0.02         0.01         0.10         0.07        0.36         0.08
      Observations                                        271         271          269         271          261          261         259          261
39




      R2                                                 0.272       0.278        0.337       0.276        0.207        0.199       0.250        0.430
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed effects. All regressions are limited to the sample
     of non-national brands. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 9: Chain Entry and Perceived Quality among Non-Shoppers
 Dependent variable:                                               Perceived quality of:
                                            Nearby pharms            National brands        Local brands
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)
 Round 2 × entry market                     0.081          0.19       0.19     0.49∗∗       0.37    0.62∗∗
                                           (0.095)        (0.11)     (0.20)    (0.21)      (0.26)   (0.26)
 Round 3 × entry market                     0.10∗∗     0.17∗∗         -0.13     0.10       0.28∗∗   0.52∗∗∗
                                           (0.046)    (0.065)        (0.10)    (0.16)      (0.14)   (0.13)
 Market demo and health controls               -           Yes          -       Yes          -       Yes
 Wild bootstrap p-value:
  Round 2 × entry                            0.44         0.20        0.39      0.10       0.20     0.08
  Round 3 × entry                            0.05         0.004       0.26      0.57       0.05     0.002
 Observations                               2143          2143        1677      1677       1505      1505
 R2                                         0.05          0.05        0.11      0.16       0.19      0.23
Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed effects.
Dependent variables are measured on a scale of 1 (low) to 4 (high). * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     40
Table 10: Quality and Prices in Entry Markets
 Sample:                                                    Overall           Common Brands
 Dependent variable:                                  Quality   ln(Price)    Quality ln(Price)
                                                       (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)
 Chain pharmacy                                       -0.0068     -0.061       0.051      -0.090∗∗
                                                      (0.032)    (0.037)      (0.051)     (0.032)

 Wild bootstrap p-value (Chain pharmacy)               0.80       0.17         0.49         0.05
 Observations                                          361        359           98           98
 R2                                                    0.00       0.01         0.01         0.24
Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. The regressions in Columns 3 and 4 only
include brands that both the chain and incumbents carry. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 41
     Table 11: The Market-wide Impact of Chain Entry
      Dependent variable:                                        Complies with IP                                    ln(Price per Tablet)
                                                     (1)          (2)        (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)             (8)
      Post entry × entry market:
         –                                         0.049∗∗      0.068∗∗∗       0.023        0.054        -0.055       -0.073∗       -0.043       -0.055
                                                   (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.026)      (0.037)      (0.035)       (0.036)      (0.052)      (0.041)
         × high-education customers                                            0.048                                                -0.017
                                                                              (0.035)                                              (0.066)
         × high-SES mystery shopper                                                         -0.010                                              0.00021
                                                                                           (0.064)                                              (0.036)
      Market demo and health controls                 -           Yes             -            -            -           Yes            -            -
      Wild bootstrap p-value:
       Post × entry                                 0.03          0.05          0.27         0.17         0.16         0.13          0.77         0.21
42




       Post × entry × customer educ.                  -             -           0.71           -            -            -           0.13           -
       Post × entry × shopper SES                     -             -             -          0.89           -            -             -          0.87
      Observations                                   824          824           824          824          813           813          813          813
      R2                                            0.057        0.069         0.058        0.059        0.135         0.146        0.141        0.138
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed effects. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
A     Appendix

A.1     Differences Between Treatment and Control Markets

This subsection explores three potential differences between treatment and control markets.
First, our sample includes two control markets that were not candidate entry markets. Con-
sumers in these markets have lower socioeconomic status, with 23 percent lower household
income and 1.7 fewer years of schooling (p < 0.01 for both variables). Including these mar-
kets leads to greater socioeconomic heterogeneity and allows us to gauge the relationship
between SES and drug quality. Panel A of Appendix Table 1 reproduces our main estimates
while excluding these markets. Estimates closely resemble our baseline estimates in Tables
5 and 7, which indicates that our findings are not sensitive to whether these markets are
included.
    Secondly, treatment markets are located further from the city center than control mar-
kets on average. The average distance to the center is 13.0 kilometers for treatment markets
and 9.6 kilometers for control markets (p = 0.19). The distance to the center is not signif-
icantly correlated with the demographic characteristics of consumers. To explore this issue
further, Panel B of Appendix Table 1 reproduces our main results for a subsample of 15
markets for which the distance from the city center ranges from 8 to 16 kilometers. This
approach reduces the difference in city-center proximity between treatment and control mar-
kets. Estimates for quality closely resemble our baseline results. Estimates for prices are
qualitatively similar but smaller. The comparability of these results suggests that this form
of spatial heterogeneity is not a serious confound.
    Next we compare the growth in customer traffic in treatment and control markets after
accounting for chain traffic. Table 4 excludes the chain in order to focus on the impact
for incumbents. As another test of the identifying assumption, we include chain traffic in
order to compare total traffic growth in treatment and control markets. This exercise is not
straightforward for several reasons. We only observe traffic for a subset of each market’s


                                             43
pharmacies, which creates measurement error for market-wide traffic estimates. Secondly,
our consumer survey indicates that chain shoppers purchase 25 percent more medicine by
volume than incumbent shoppers.
       Nevertheless, we examine traffic growth by treatment status, and find that traffic growth
is slightly lower but insignificantly different in treatment markets once we include traffic at
the chain. Traffic in treatment markets is 3 percent lower in Round 1 (p = 0.75), 12 percent
lower in Round 2 (p = 0.15), and 8 percent lower in Round 3 (p = 0.40). We account for
heterogeneity across stores in the quantity per customer using estimates from our consumer
survey. Scaling customer traffic by the average quantity per customer does not change
these estimates but cause the differences by treatment status to become highly insignificant
(p > 0.5).
       Panel C of Appendix Table 1 explores this issue further by estimating our main results
for a subsample of 14 markets for which traffic growth is comparable across treatment and
control markets.18 There is no difference in average traffic growth across treatment and
control markets under this restriction. The table shows that quality results closely resemble
our baseline estimates. Price results are weaker but are qualitatively similar to our main
findings.


A.2       The Composition of Shoppers

Chain entry may affect incumbent prices or quality by changing the selection of incumbent
shoppers. Because the chain offers both higher quality and lower prices, it does not necessar-
ily draw away high-SES or low-SES customers differentially. If it steals high-SES customers,
the chain may encourage incumbents to cater to the remaining low-SES customers through
lower prices and quality. Because both quality preferences and drug demand are positively
correlated with SES, customer selection cannot explain why chain entry has different effects
on quality and prices. We investigate the role of selection further by regressing the demo-
  18
    We restrict the sample to markets for which the change in traffic from Round 1 to Round 2 ranges from
-61 to 85, which excludes several high-growth control markets.

                                                   44
graphic characteristics of incumbent customers on chain entry in Appendix Table 2. With
estimates that are small and statistically insignificant, the table shows no effects of chain
entry on shoppers characteristics. These results cast doubt on selection-based explanations
for the price and quality effects of chain entry.


A.3     Quality Signaling

We argue in Section 5.4 that treatment incumbents improve quality in order to compete
with the chain. For this mechanism to explain our findings, consumers must perceive and
reward incumbents for quality improvements. Table 9 shows that consumers perceive higher
quality after chain entry, but it is unclear how firms communicate this information. An
industrial organization literature considers how firms signal quality in theory (e.g. Nelson
1974, Allen 1984), but no studies (to our knowledge) address whether or how firms signal in
this market. Pharmacies may make costly investments such as air conditioning, advertise,
or improve visible product attributes. Alternatively, they may communicate directly to
consumers, relying on repeated interaction to establish credibility.
    This subsection shows the effect of chain entry on incumbent signaling behavior. Our
survey records the tidiness of the store, whether the store has air conditioning, and the
number of storefront signs. We also track the packaging condition and the days until expiry
for samples in the mystery shopper audit. Appendix Table 3 shows the effect of chain entry
on these outcomes. Estimates are mixed and statistically insignificant. In the strongest
result, chain entry is associated with an increase of 0.4 incumbent signs, although this result
is not significant.
    We may fail to find effects for several reasons. Firms may not signal through any of
these channels. Margins like air conditioning and the tidiness of the physical space may be
difficult to adjust in the short run. Signaling by the pharmacist - for example, through more
productive customer service, or non-productive advertising - may be a more relevant in the
short run, but were not measured in our study. Similarly, commercial advertising, by the


                                               45
pharmacies or local brand manufacturers, through local print media was not measured, but
may be another mechanism by which suppliers signal quality improvements.


A.4     Treatment Spillovers

This subsection discusses the possibility that chain entry could indirectly affect prices and
quality in control markets. We proxy for markets spatially using the area within a 0.5
kilometer radius from the candidate entry site. Markets do not overlap or share borders.
For control markets, the closest treatment market is an average of 8.1 kilometers away and
a minimum of 2.4 kilometers away, suggesting that spillovers are unlikely. More formally,
Appendix Table 4 tests whether results are sensitive to the proximity of treatment and control
markets by excluding nearby control markets from the analysis. Odd columns exclude four
control markets that are within 5 kilometers of a treatment market while even columns
exclude eight control markets that are within 10 kilometers of a treatment market. The
remaining control markets are an average of 10 kilometers away from a treatment market
under the first restriction and 12 kilometers away under the second restriction. Estimates
in the table closely resemble our baseline estimates, suggesting that treatment spillovers do
not confound our results.


A.5     Changes over Time for Non-National Brands

Treatment effect estimates for non-national brands are identified through changes over time
in quality and price within this subsample. To clarify this source of variation, Appendix
Figure 1 reproduces the plots in Figure 5 for non-national manufacturers. Pharmacopeia
compliance is initially 5 percentage points higher in control markets (p = 0.22). The non-
national treatment effect estimate of 0.20 (Column 5 of Table 5) is based on a 5 percentage
point quality improvement in treatment markets over time and a 15 percentage point dete-
rioration in control markets. As we discuss previously, the secular decline in quality is most
likely caused by the marked increased in both humidity and temperature during the second

                                             46
survey round. Prices are initially 8.4 percent higher in treatment markets (p = 0.09). The
12 percent price decline (Column 5 of Table 7) is based on a 5 percent increase in control
markets and a 7 percent decrease in treatment markets.




                                           47
                                    100% 105%
   Percent Compliance with Indian Pharmacopeia
    80%     85%    90%      95%




                                                 1                                                  2
                                                                 Survey Round

                                                     Control Markets            Treatment Markets
                          .16
   Price per Tablet (2010 USD)
       .14            .15 .13




                                                 1                                                  2
                                                                 Survey Round

                                                     Control Markets            Treatment Markets


Appendix Figure 1: Quality and Price Changes for Non-National Drug Samples

                                                                       48
     Appendix Table 1: Sample Selection Robustness Tests
      Dependent variable:                                              Complies with IP           ln(Price per Tablet)
      Manufacturers:                                                    All    Non-Nat.             All      Non-Nat.
                                                                        (1)       (2)               (3)         (4)
      Panel A: Only Candidate Entry Markets
      Post entry × entry market                                       0.046∗         0.22∗∗        -0.019         -0.11∗
                                                                      (0.022)       (0.077)       (0.031)        (0.062)
                                                                       [0.05]       [0.005]        [0.59]         [0.07]

      Panel B: Comparable Distances to the City Center
      Post entry × entry market                                       0.057∗∗       0.24∗∗       -0.00063         -0.046
                                                                      (0.026)       (0.10)        (0.030)        (0.051)
                                                                       [0.04]       [0.01]         [0.98]         [0.36]

      Panel C: Comparable Traffic Growth
49




      Post entry × entry market                                       0.050∗        0.25∗∗         -0.061         -0.057
                                                                      (0.028)       (0.11)        (0.035)        (0.052)
                                                                       [0.10]       [0.01]         [0.12]         [0.28]
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. Wild cluster bootstrap p-values appear in brackets. All
     regressions include market fixed effects. Panel A includes 18 candidate entry markets. Panel B includes 15 markets that
     are 8-16 kilometers from the city center. Panel C includes 14 markets with changes in measured customer traffic from
     -62 to 85. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Appendix Table 2: Chain Entry and Incumbent Shopper Characteristics
                                                                        Household       Scheduled          Owns a
      Dependent variable:              ln(Income)       Education         size          caste/tribe        vehicle
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
      Round 2 × entry market             -0.045            -0.41           0.18            -0.010           0.033
                                         (0.17)           (1.00)          (0.23)          (0.079)           (0.13)
      Round 3 × entry market             0.0085           -0.033           -0.27           -0.027           0.084
                                         (0.14)           (0.86)          (0.17)          (0.056)          (0.097)

      Wild bootstrap p-value
        Round 2 × entry                   0.81             0.73            0.45             0.90             0.82
        Round 3 × entry                   0.96             0.97            0.16             0.62             0.42
      Observations                        2224             2224            2224             2224             2224
      R2                                  0.06             0.06            0.07             0.03             0.04
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. The sample is limited to shoppers at incumbent phar-
50




     macies. All regressions include market fixed effects. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Appendix Table 3: Chain Entry and Observable Signaling by Incumbents
                                                        Pharmacy           Number             Air            Days Until       Packaging
      Dependent variable:                               Cleanliness        of Signs       Conditioning        Expiry          Condition
                                                            (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)
      Post entry                                           -0.034           0.050             -0.034             3.53           -0.22∗∗∗
                                                          (0.082)           (0.20)           (0.032)            (23.5)          (0.072)
      Post entry × entry market                             -0.17            0.35             0.034              -18.1           -0.045
                                                           (0.14)           (0.27)           (0.032)            (28.8)           (0.11)

      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)                 0.24             0.20              0.28              0.54             0.71
      Observations                                          199              199                199              1605            1642
      R2                                                   0.142            0.408              0.265             0.022           0.105
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed effects. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
     p < 0.01.
51
     Appendix Table 4: A Test for Treatment Spillovers into Control Markets
      Dependent variable                                            Complies with IP                              ln(Price per Tablet)
      Manufacturers                                             All             Non-National                    All             Non-National
                                                        (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)            (5)          (6)        (7)      (8)
      Post                                             -0.044      -0.070∗    -0.18∗∗       -0.25      0.034        0.043       0.10       0.17∗
                                                      (0.026)      (0.036)    (0.085)      (0.15)     (0.029)      (0.037)    (0.067)     (0.094)
      Post × entry market                              0.045       0.071∗      0.24∗∗      0.30∗       -0.052       -0.061    -0.15∗∗     -0.22∗∗
                                                      (0.026)      (0.036)    (0.091)      (0.15)     (0.035)      (0.042)    (0.071)     (0.097)

      Drop control markets within                      5 km        10 km      5 km        10 km        5 km        10 km       5 km        10 km
      Wild bootstrap p-value (post × entry)            0.14         0.07      < 0.01       0.01        0.17         0.21       0.05         0.06
      Observations                                     629          472         202         149        629          472         202         149
      R2                                               0.06         0.05        0.26        0.28       0.13         0.13        0.24        0.20
     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. Odd columns omit 4 control markets that are within 5 kilometers by road of the
     nearest treatment market. Even columns omit 8 control markets that are within 10 kilometers by road of the nearest treatment market. * p < 0.1,
52




     ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Appendix Table 5: The Impact of Chain Entry on Consumer Preferences
                                                                        Perceived Importance of:
                                                   Drug Quality            Store Convenience            Store Familiarity
                                                   (1)      (2)             (3)        (4)               (5)        (6)
      Round 2 × entry market                     0.28∗∗∗      0.28∗∗∗       0.045         0.076         -0.014      0.0065
                                                 (0.077)      (0.079)      (0.063)       (0.053)       (0.069)      (0.092)
      Round 3 × entry market                     0.28∗∗∗      0.30∗∗∗      -0.0025        0.019        -0.13∗∗       -0.11
                                                 (0.074)      (0.073)      (0.014)       (0.050)       (0.047)      (0.071)
      Market demo and health controls                -          Yes           -            Yes            -           Yes
      Wild bootstrap p-value:
       Round 2 × entry                           0.0005       0.0001        0.51          0.26          0.84         0.95
       Round 3 × entry                            0.003       0.001         0.87          0.74          0.01         0.20
      Observations                                2575         2575         2632          2632          2631         2631
      R2                                          0.08         0.10         0.09          0.12          0.23         0.24
53




     Note: Market-clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All regressions include market fixed effects. * p < 0.1, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
References
Allen, Franklin, “Reputation and Product Quality,” Rand Journal of Economics, Autumn
    1984, 15 (3), 311–327.

Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel, “Worms
    at Work: Long-run Impacts of Child Health Gains,” March 2012. Unpublished
    manuscript.

Basker, Emek, “Selling a Cheaper Mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s Effect on Retail Prices,” Journal
   of Urban Economics, 2005, 58, 203–229.

     and Michael Noel, “The Evolving Food Chain: Competitive Effects of Walmart’s
    Entry into the Supermarket Industry,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy,
    Winter 2009, 18 (4), 977–1009.

Bate, Roger and Kathryn Boateng, “Bad Medicine in the Market,” American Enterprise
    Institute Health Policy Outlook, June 2007, 8.

    , Ginger Zhe Jin, and Aparna Mathur, “Does Price Reveal Poor-Quality Drugs?
    Evidence from 17 Countries,” Journal of Health Economics, 2011, 30, 1150–1163.

    ,    , and      , “In Whom We Trust: the Role of Certification Agencies in Online
    Drug Markets,” March 2012. NBER Working Paper 17955.

Berry, Steven and Joel Waldfogel, “Product Quality and Market Size,” Journal of
    Industrial Economics, March 2010, 58 (1), 1–31.

Bjorkman-Nyqvist, Martina, Jakob Svensson, and David Yanagizawa-Drott,
    “Can Good Products Drive Out Bad? Evidence from Local Markets for (Fake?) Anti-
    malarial Medicine in Uganda,” August 2012. Unpublished manuscript.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller, “Bootstrap-based Improve-
   ments for Inference with Clustered Standard Errors,” Review of Economics and Statis-
   tics, August 2008, 90 (3), 414–427.

Cockburn, Robert, Paul Newton, E. Kyeremetang Agyarko, Dora Akunyili, and
   Nicholas White, “The Global Threat of Counterfeit Drugs: Why Industry and Gov-
   ernments Must Communicate the Dangers,” PLoS Medicine, April 2005, 2 (4), 302–308.

Corporate Catalyst India, “A Brief Report on India’s Pharmaceutical Industry,” March
   2012.

Donald, Stephen and Kevin Lang, “Inference with Difference-in-Differences and Other
   Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, may 2007, 89 (2), 221–233.

Dondorp, AM, PN Newton, M Mayxay, W Van Damme, FM Smithuis, S Yeung,
   A Petit, AJ Lynam, A Johnson, TT Hien, R McGready, Farrar JJ, S Looa-
   reesuwan, NPJ Day, MD Green, and NJ White, “Fake antimalarials in Southeast

                                          54
    Asia are a major impediment to malaria control: multinational cross-sectional survey
    on the prevalence of fake antimalarials,” Tropical Medicine and International Health,
    December 2004, 9 (12), 1241–1246.

Dorfman, Robert and Peter Steiner, “Optimal Advertising and Optimal Quality,”
    American Economic Review, December 1954, 44, 826–36.

Dranove, David and Mark A. Satterthwaite, “The Industrial Organization of Health
   Care Markets,” in A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics,
   Volume 1, 2000, pp. 1093–1139.

     and Mark Satterthwaite, “Monopolistic Competition When Price and Quality are
    Imperfectly Observable,” RAND Journal of Economics, Winter 1992, 23 (4), 518–534.

Drusano, George, “Antimicrobial Pharmacodynamics: Critical Interactions of ‘Bug and
   Drug’,” Nature Reviews Microbiology, April 2004, 2, 289–300.

Gaurdiano, Maria Cristina, Anna Di Maggio, Emilia Cocchieri, Eleonora An-
   toniella, Paola Bertocchi, Stefano Alimonti, and Luisa Valvo, “Medicines in-
   formal market in Congo, Burundi and Angola: counterfeit and sub-standard antimalar-
   ials,” Malaria Journal, February 2007, 6 (22).

Hotelling, H., “Stablity in Competition,” Economic Journal, 1929, 39, 41–57.

Jia, Panle, “What Happens When Walmart Comes to Town: an Empirical Analysis of the
     Discount Retailing Industry,” Econometrica, November 2008, 76 (6), 1263–1316.

Kamat, Vinay and Mark Nichter, “Pharmacies, Self-Medication, and Pharmaceutical
   Marketing in Bombay, India,” Social Science and Medicine, 1998, 47 (6), 779–794.

Kashmir Times, “Spurious Drugs’ Menace,” December 17 2009.

Kiron, S, Arun Shirwaikar, and Saritha M, “Influence of Storage Conditions on the
    Potency of Amoxicillin Dispersible Tablets Stores in Hospital and Community Phar-
    macies in Different Regions of Kerala,” Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical
    Research, 2011, 4 (3), 101–102.

Kreps, David and Jose Scheinkman, “Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand Compe-
   tition Yield Cournot Outcomes,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1983, 14, 326–337.

Landes, William and Richard Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law, Harvard
   University Press, 1987.

Mahesh, Koride, “Drug Analysis Reports Come After Expiry Date!,” The Times of India,
   January 26 2010.

Matsa, David, “Competition and Product Quality in the Supermarket Industry,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, August 2011, 126 (3), 1539–91.



                                           55
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
   Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, January 2004, 72
   (1), 159–217.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “Price and Advertising Signals of Product Quality,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 1986, 94 (4), 796–821.

Mubengayi, C. Kalonji, Y. Ramli, M. El Karbane, M. Azougagh, Y. Cherrah,
   and E. M. Essassi, “Study of the Accelerated Stability of Amoxicillin Made in DR
   Congo,” Journal of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Research, 2013, 5 (4), 126–132.

Nelson, Philip, “Information and Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
    March-April 1970, 78 (2), 311–29.

    , “Advertising as Information,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82 (4), 729–54.

Newton, PN, FM Fernandez, A Plancon, DC Mildenhall, MD Green, Z Li,
   EM Christophel, S Phanouvong, S Howells, E McIntosh, P Laurin, N Blum,
   CY Hampton, K Faure, L Nyadong, CWR Soong, B Santoso, Z Wang,
   J Newton, and K Palmer, “A Collaborative Epidemiological Investigation into the
   Criminal Fake Artesunate Trade in South East Asia,” PLoS Medicine, February 2008,
   5 (2), 209–219.

Peace, Nwokoye, Oyetunde Olubukola, and Akinleye Moshood, “Stability of Re-
    constituted Amoxicillin Clavulanate Potassium under Simulated In-Home Storage Con-
    ditions,” Journal of Applied Pharmaceutical Science, 2012, 2 (1), 28–31.

Salop, Steven, “The Noisy Monopolist: Imperfect Information, Price Dispersion, and Price
    Discrimination,” Review of Economic Studies, October 1977, 44 (3), 393–406.

     and Joseph Stiglitz, “Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model of Monopolistically Competi-
    tive Price Dispersion,” Review of Economic Studies, October 1977, 44 (3), 493–510.

Shaked, Avner and John Sutton, “Relaxing Price Competition Through Product Dif-
   ferentiation,” Review of Economic Studies, January 1982, 49 (1), 3–13.

Sheth, Prafull, Brijesh Regal, Madhulika Kaushal, Kaustav Sen, and D. B. A.
    Narayana, “Extent of Spurious (Counterfeit) Medicines in India,” Technical Report,
    SEARPharm Forum 2007.

Sow, PS, TSN Gueye, E Sy, L Toure, C Ba, and M Badiane, “Drugs in the Parallel
   Market for the Treatment of Urethral Discharge in Dakar: Epidemiological Investigation
   and Physicochemical Tests,” International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2002, 6 (2),
   108–12.

Spence, A. Michael, “Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics,
   Autumn 1975, 6 (2), 417–29.



                                           56
Spence, Michael, “Consumer Misperceptions, Product Failure, and Producer Liability,”
   Review of Economic Studies, October 1977, 44 (3), 561–572.

Taylor, RB, O Shakoor, RH Behrens, M Everard, AS Low, J Wangboonskul,
    RG Reid, and JA Kolawole, “Pharmacopoeial Quality of Drugs Supplied by Nigerian
    Pharmacies,” Lancet, June 16 2001, 357, 1933–36.

Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
    1988.

Trefi, Saleh, Veronique Gilard, Myriam Malet-Martino, and Robert Martino,
    “Generic ciprofloxacin tablets contain the state amount of drug and different impuri-
    ties profiles: A 19F, 1H and DOSY NMR Analysis,” Journal of Pharmaceutical and
    Biomedical Analysis, 2007, 44, 743–754.

Woodcock, J, “The Concept of Pharmaceutical Quality,” American Pharmaceutical Re-
   view, 2004, 7 (6), 10–15.

Yu, Lawrence X., “Pharmaceutical Quality by Design: Product and Process Development,
    Understanding, and Control,” Pharmaceutical Research, April 2008, 25 (4), 781–91.




                                            57
