NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG TERM IMPACT OF CASH TRANSFERS TO POOR FAMILIES
Anna Aizer
Shari Eli
Joseph Ferrie
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Working Paper 20103
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20103
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We are grateful to a large number of RAs who helped us collect the data for this project. We are also
grateful to Federico Bugni and Bo Honoré for their help with the econometric issues. We received
many useful comments from Martha Bailey, Hoyt Bleakley, Janet Currie, Robert Jensen, Andrew Foster,
Robert Margo and seminar participants at Columbia University, Cornell University, the University
of Chicago, the University of Michigan, the University of Wisconsin, the London School of Economics,
Harvard University, John Hopkins University, the NBER Universities Research Conference, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, University of California Davis, and L'Institut d’études politiques (IEP) de Paris. This
project received funding from the California Center for Population Research (CCPR), the Brown
University Population Studies and Training Center and the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Long Term Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families
Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 20103
May 2014
JEL No. I12,I38,N32
ABSTRACT
We estimate the long-run impact of cash transfers to poor families on children’s longevity, educational
attainment, nutritional status, and income in adulthood. To do so, we collected individual-level
administrative records of applicants to the Mothers’ Pension program—the first government-sponsored
welfare program in the US (1911-1935) —and matched them to census, WWII and death records.
Male children of accepted applicants lived one year longer than those of rejected mothers. Male
children of accepted mothers received one-third more years of schooling, were less likely to be
underweight, and had higher income in adulthood than children of rejected mothers.
Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu
Shari Eli
University of Toronto
Department of Economics
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
shari.eli@utoronto.ca

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20093

Joseph Ferrie
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
ferrie@northwestern.edu
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
alleras@ECON.UCLA.EDU

I.

Introduction

More than one in five US children was living in poverty as recently as 2010.1 A growing
literature documents that early-life exposure to disease, nutritional deprivation and other factors
associated with poverty can have adverse long-term effects on education, labor market outcomes,
and ultimately, mortality (Almond and Currie 2011). In the United States and elsewhere, welfare
programs—broadly defined as cash transfers to poor families—were established primarily to
help children. While parental income has been shown to be one of the strongest predictors of
children’s educational attainment (Barrow and Schanzenbach, 2012; Reardon, forthcoming) and
children’s health in adulthood (Case et al. 2002), it is still not known whether cash transfers to
poor families improve children’s lifetime outcomes (Currie 1998).
We ask whether targeted cash transfers improve children’s long-run outcomes, with a
particular focus on longevity, by studying the Mothers’ Pension (MP) program—the first
government sponsored welfare program for poor families with dependent children in the United
States (1911-1935). The intent of the MP program was to improve the conditions of “young
children that have become dependent through the loss or disability of the breadwinner”
(Children’s Bureau, 1933). The transfers generally represented 12-25% of family income, and
typically lasted for three years. In 1935, the MP program was replaced by the federal Aid to
Dependent Children (ADC, later Aid to Families with Dependent Children, and now TANF).
One of the main challenges in evaluating whether cash transfers (or any public program)
improve outcomes is identifying a plausible counterfactual: what would children’s lives have
been like in the absence of receiving transfers? Our main strategy is to use as a comparison
group the children of mothers who applied for transfers but were denied. This strategy of
comparing accepted and rejected applicants for program evaluation has been used successfully in
studies of disability insurance (von Watcher et al. 2011, Bound 1989). Its validity depends on
the extent to which accepted and rejected mothers and their children differ on unobservable
characteristics. We document that rejected mothers were on average slightly better-off based on
observable characteristics at the time of application, consistent with the information in
administrative records that applicants were most often rejected because they were deemed to
have sufficient support. Under the assumption that accepted and rejected applicants are otherwise
similar, the outcomes for boys of rejected mothers provide a best-case scenario (upper bound) for
1

http://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/acsbr10-05.pdf. Accessed 8/30/2013.

1

what could be expected of beneficiaries in the absence of transfers. Thus our estimates are, if
anything, likely to understate the benefits of the program. We also construct alternative
counterfactual groups based on differences in eligibility across counties to examine the
robustness of our findings.
The second challenge is to obtain data containing long-term outcomes for a large sample of
recipients and plausible comparison groups. Existing survey data are insufficient for two
reasons: they suffer from substantial attrition and they are too recent. For example, in the NLSY
and PSID surveys, forty percent of children who received welfare are lost to follow-up after
twenty years. Even without such high attrition, the data would not allow us to study longevity
because the children of the NLSY and PSID are not sufficiently old. Administrative individual
records from the early years of the ADC program (1935-1962) have been lost or intentionally
destroyed. Although records do exist for recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC), the program that replaced ADC in 1962, these cohorts are too young for us to evaluate
the impact on longevity. Another important limitation of studying AFDC recipients is that they
were also eligible for multiple in-kind transfers such as Medicaid, housing and food stamps,
which makes it impossible to evaluate the impact of cash transfers alone.2
Instead, we use administrative records from the precursor to the ADC program—the
Mothers’ Pension program (1911-1935). These data have the advantage of (1) being available in
large numbers and containing both accepted and rejected applicants; (2) containing identifying
information that allows us to link the children with other datasets to trace their outcomes; and (3)
including children who were born sufficiently long ago that we can measure their longevity.3
Using data on 16,000 children from eleven states who wereborn between 1900 and 1925 and
whose mothers applied to the Mother’s Pension program, we find that receiving cash transfers
increased longevity by about one year. These effects are driven by the poorest families in the
sample; for them, the longevity increases are larger (about 1.5 years of life). These results are
very robust to alternative functional form specifications, alternative counterfactual comparisons
(e.g. divorced women in some counties, but not others, were eligible for MP benefits), and our

2

We have been unable to find early AFDC records that contain identifying information that would allow us to match
with data to measure long-term outcomes. Survey data for AFDC recipients exist for 1967 and later, but these do not
include (and do not allow for) any long-term follow-up, or the construction of control groups.
3
We focus on the cohorts born 1900-1925, most of whom have died by 2012. See
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/NOTES/pdf_studies/study089.pdf

2

treatment of attrition. Because income transfers were the only major public benefit that poor
children were eligible for until 1950 (with the exception of public schooling), we can interpret
our results as the effect of cash transfers alone.
To investigate potential mechanisms behind the positive effect on longevity, we explore
whether cash transfers in childhood are associated with improvements in education, income and
nutritional status, since previous work has documented that all three have positive and
independent effects on mortality. To do so, we match a subset of our records to WWII enlistment
and 1940 census records. The results suggest that cash transfers reduced the probability of being
underweight by half, increased educational attainment by 0.4 years, and increased income by 14
percent during adulthood (ages 20-45).
Our analysis has some important limitations. We cannot examine outcomes for girls because
women typically changed their name upon marriage, making it extremely difficult to track longterm outcomes. Nor can we study African-Americans because they are not well represented in
our states or our samples. Finally, though our results are based on larger samples with lower
attrition than current panel surveys, there is still some attrition in our sample. To confirm that
attrition is not driving our results we collected additional data for the population from Ohio,
thereby significantly reducing attrition for that state. The results remain unchanged when we
reduce attrition in this way.
We conclude that cash transfers to poor families during the first part of the twentieth century
ameliorated early life conditions enough to improve both medium- and long-term outcomes of
boys growing up in poverty. While conditions today differ significantly from those at the
beginning of the twentieth century, suggestion caution in drawing conclusions as to the
anticipated impact of cash transfers in the twenty-first century, three important similarities
remain and suggest the current relevance of the effects we document. First, both the MP program
and current welfare programs target children in female-headed households. These children were,
and continue to be, the poorest children. Second, historical comparisons presented in the last
section of the paper reveal that income played an important role in producing positive child
outcomes, both today and at the beginning of the twentieth century, when the MP program
operated. Finally our short- and medium-term effects on education and health are consistent with
contemporary evidence on the effect of poverty-reduction programs in the US and in developing
countries. Altogether these results suggest that targeted cash transfers are also likely to improve
lifetime outcomes today. Though we acknowledge our study’s limitations, the historical evidence
3

we employ are the only means presently available to assess the impact of cash transfers across
the entire life course. We return to the related literature and policy implications in the final
section of the paper.

II.

Mothers’ Pension Programs: History and Characteristics

The MP program was a needs-based program, established on a state-by-state basis between 1911
and 1931. It lasted until it was replaced by ADC in 1935, at which time 200,000 children were
receiving MP benefits (Katz 1996). Several factors prompted the enactment of MP legislation. At
the time, children of destitute parents were routinely sent to orphanages, and these children were
thought to fare very poorly.4 Moreover, among those who remained with their mothers,
prominent judges of juvenile courts5 argued that maternal absence, due to full-time employment,
was the main reason why many of these children became delinquent.6 MP programs were seen
as a cheaper7 and better alternative for children since transfers would allow mothers to care for
their children.8 There was also a growing sense that poverty was not being adequately addressed
by private charity. The spirit of the legislation is well captured in Colorado’s law, declaring,
“This act shall be liberally construed for the protection of the child, the home and the states and
in the interest of public morals, and for the prevention of poverty and crime.”
States had complete discretion in establishing the program, setting eligibility criteria and
providing funding. Moreover, the state MP laws only established guidelines—it was up to
individual counties to create, fund and administer their own programs. As a result, there was both
substantial cross-state and within-state variation in program characteristics. Below we describe

4

The conditions in institutions for children were also often deplorable: “[T]he year before the Foundling Asylum
was closed the death rate of foundling babies in the asylum was fifty-nine out of a hundred. After the Associated
Charities put the babies into foster-homes, where they are given a mother’s care, the death rate dropped to six out of
a hundred.” The 1914 Kingsbury commission inspected 38 institutions for children in NYC and found, 26 of them to
be substandard “institutions in which beds were alive with vermin, in which antiquated methods of punishment
prevailed and in which the children were given little else save religious instruction.” (Bullock 1915)
5
Notable judges actively supportive of the legislation included Judge Portfield of Missouri, Judge Wilbur of LA,
Judge Pinckney of Chicago, Judge Neely of Milwaukee and Judge Lindser of Denver (Bullock 1915).
6
Indeed, some claimed that MP laws lowered juvenile crime (New York Times, January 11, 1915).
7
San Francisco gave institutions at most $11/month per child committed, compared with $6.25/month to MP
widows. In general MP is about 1/3-2/3 the cost of boarding. The 1922 Children’s Bureau report cites additional
numbers that suggest that ex-post the cost of MP was indeed lower than that of institutionalization.
8
The White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children strongly recommended allowing poor children to
stay at home, justifying this with the claim that the “best person to care for a child, save in exceptional cases, is its
own mother” (New York Times, May 11, 1913).

4

how the programs in the eleven states we study varied in terms of eligibility, generosity, duration
and conditions for receipt, for 1922, the median application year in our data (Table 1).9
Eligibility. All states required the mother to be poor and for her husband to be either
missing or incapacitated (physically or mentally), but neither income nor property thresholds
were specified. All states made widows eligible, but varied with respect to deserted or divorced
women or women whose husbands were in prison or hospitalized. Citizenship was not required
in most states, but even when it was, the intention to become a citizen was sufficient to qualify.
Evidence suggests that by limiting eligibility to mothers with dependent children, the MP
program succeeded in targeting the poorest children. Examining data from the 1915 Iowa
census—the only individual survey of households that collected income prior to 1940, we find
that boys under the age of 18 growing up in households without a married male (11% of all boys)
were significantly poorer. They had half the income and were substantially more likely to be at
the bottom of the income distribution than boys in households with a married male present
(Table S5).
Generosity. The state-legislated maximum benefit for the first child varied across states from
a low of $10.00 in Iowa, to a high of $35.00 in Ohio, with the total monthly amount increasing
non-linearly with the number of children in the family. In practice, generosity in benefit levels
varied widely within states, and across counties as well.10
Duration. In most states the transfers would be given until the pension was revoked, but five
states required reapplication. The shortest re-application duration was in Montana and Oregon (3
months) and the longest was in Minnesota and Washington (1 year).
Additional Requirements or Conditions. While most states required the mother to stay at
home, Illinois, Minnesota, Montana, Ohio, Oregon and Wisconsin allowed counties to require or
regulate maternal work. Many laws explicitly required that the mother be of “good morals.”
However, in the records that include information on reason for discontinuation (Table 2), there
are very few instances in which a mother or child’s failure to comply with conditions is listed as

9

Comparing the characteristics of the programs in our eleven states with the characteristics of MP programs in
states for which we were unable to obtain individual records suggest that they are similar (Table S1) and thus the
MP programs examined here are representative of the existing programs.
10
For example, we calculate that across counties in Ohio in 1925, the level of benefits for a family of three ranged
from a low of $3 per month to a high of $38 per month.

5

the reason for discontinuation. We conclude that the MP programs we study should, in general,
be considered as an unconditional cash transfer.

III.

Data

a. MP records
We have attempted to collect all the MP records that survive. Our efforts have yielded
approximately 80,000 individual records of MP recipients who applied between 1911 and 1935
in eleven states: Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin. These data include the full universe of families who
received MP benefits in the county, state and year. For some states we have the full universe of
counties that provided MP benefits, while for others we have only a subset of counties—but if a
county has records, the universe of records is available. These data appear to be representative of
the MP population at the national level based on a comparison of our data for 1930 with
published statistics for the nation in 1931 (Table S2).11
From the MP records, we observe each mother’s first and last name, the county or town of
her residence, the full names of her children, their dates of birth, the reason for her application
(widowed, abandoned, etc.), and whether the application was accepted or rejected. If the
application is accepted, we observe the monthly amount of the pension, and dates of receipt. For
some counties we have additional information, such as the reason why transfers were
discontinued. For a single county (Clay County, Minnesota) we have data from a detailed 1930
study based on home nurse visits to all 62 families in the MP program at that time.
b. Sample selection
For this analysis we keep only male children (under age 18) born 1900-1925, whose mothers
applied to the program prior to 1930. By imposing these restrictions, we have a sample of
individuals who are most likely deceased by 2012 and who did not apply as a result of the Great
Depression. We drop individuals without a year of birth or year of application as well as those
without a first or last name. We only keep counties where data on rejected applicants are
available. We limit our analysis to males because matching females based on names is
substantially more difficult since women often change their names upon marrying. Table S3
11

Published statistics by state are available in 1921 for selected states, and in 1928, but the most detailed and
comprehensive statistics are available for 1931.

6

shows the final sample: about 16,000 males in 60 counties from eleven states. Among those, 14
percent were rejected applicants, with the share rejected ranging from a low of 5 percent in
Minnesota, to a high of 17 percent in Ohio, which is also the state for which we have the largest
number of records, accounting for 34 percent of our sample.
The average transfer ranges from 10 to 30 dollars per month. To better understand the
generosity of the benefits, we compare the monthly transfers to the average wages in
manufacturing in the state (Table S4). The average monthly MP transfer was equal to 17 percent
of weekly manufacturing wages and never exceeded 29 percent.12 However, relative to maternal
income, which was considerably lower, evidence suggests that MP transfers represented a greater
share of income. In a subsample of counties in Illinois which collected information on maternal
income, MP transfers represented about 29 percent of the median maternal monthly income of
$60.13 Overall these comparisons suggest that MP transfers represented a substantial source of
income for poor mothers, but did not move them into the middle class. We cannot say
definitively whether or how MP transfers may have crowded-out private transfers, but the
historical evidence does not support strong crowd-out.14
c. Mortality data and matching
Each male child of every MP applicant was matched to records from the Social Security Death
Master File (DMF). The DMF contains name, date of birth, date of death, and Social Security
number for 88 million individuals whose deaths were reported to the SSA from 1965 until 2012.
In a study of the completeness of the DMF, Hill and Rosenwaike (2001) conclude that reporting
has increased over time and is nearly complete for older individuals (age 65 and older) since the
early 1970s.15 We matched individuals based on their first name, last name, middle name, as well
as day, month and year of birth. Details of the matching procedure are in Appendix I.

12

Alternatively in 1919, MP transfers ranged from 8 to 22 percent of the total household income in urban two parent
households or 20 to 60 percent of a farm laborer’s income.
13
In real terms (1982 dollars), MP transfers were half the size of 2010 transfers, (Table S4). However in some
states, like Iowa, the MP transfers were very close in real terms to current TANF benefit levels, whereas in others,
like Connecticut, TANF transfers are much larger today. It is worth noting that the relative generosity of states
during this period mirrors the generosity of the welfare transfers today.
14
For example, in Pennsylvania, the 1926 survey of families receiving MP pensions showed that 11 percent of
families were receiving additional aid from private charity (Lundberg 1928). If present, crowd-out would lead to a
downward bias in the estimated effects of the transfer.
15
By the early 1970s, the authors conclude that 95 percent of deaths of persons 65 years of age and older and 75
percent of deaths of those ages 25-64 were included in the DMF.

7

We were able to match 48 percent of our sample to a unique SSA death record, 4 percent to
multiple records, and 48 percent have no match, providing us with information on age at death
for 52 percent of our sample (Figure S1). Using life tables, we computed the number of
individuals who would be expected to die prior to the existence of comprehensive DMF data
(around 1975). These calculations suggest that about 32 percent of those in the MP records
should have died prior to the DMF; therefore we find at least one match in the DMF for more
than 77 percent of the individuals whose death records should be in the DMF, assuming the MP
applicants are a representative sample.16 However, given that these families are poor and existing
evidence links poverty to shorter life expectancy, one would reasonably expect a smaller share of
the MP applicants to be found in the DMF files.
d. Other state and county data
We include as controls all the time-varying characteristics of the MP laws described previously
and listed in Table 1. We also include state-level, time-varying characteristics that we believe
might have affected the existence or generosity of the program: the ratio of state manufacturing
earnings to national manufacturing earnings, laws governing school attendance, and expenditures
on social programs, education and charitable institutions, hospitals and prisons.17 For Ohio we
were also able to obtain county-level expenditures for several years, including expenditures on
total relief, outdoor relief, and children’s homes (see Appendix II for details). These data allow
us to rule out possible confounding and bias in the estimates if MP program characteristics (i.e.,
generosity and rejection rate) are influenced by other resources available for the poor in the
county.

IV.

Empirical Strategy and identification of the effects on transfers

a. Basic empirical model
We estimate the effect of cash transfers on outcomes using the following logit model:
16

For comparison, we computed follow-up rates for the 2 data sets that have been used for evaluating the effects of
welfare on children’s outcomes: the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979 (NLSY hereafter) and the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID hereafter). We kept only male children whose mother was receiving welfare when
they were first interviewed and used the latest wave of the survey to see how many had died and what the follow-up
rate is in these prospective samples. There are about 1400 boys in the NLSY and 1066 in the PSID (born between
1951 and 1968 in the case of the PSID) whose mothers received welfare during their childhood, and within 20 years
about 40 percent are lost to follow-up, and none are known to have died. Thus, these samples are substantially
smaller and suffer from much larger attrition than our data.
17
These state-level variables were available for several of the years and we interpolated in between cross sections.

8

P(survived to age a=1)iftcs = f(θ0 + θ1 MPf + θ2 Xif + θ3Zst + θc + θt

+ εif)

(1)

where the outcome is the probability of surviving past age a for individual i in family f born in
year t living in county c (state s), MPf , is defined as an indicator for whether the child’s family
received MP benefits, and X is a vector of relevant family characteristics (marital status, number
of siblings, etc.), and child characteristics (year of birth and age at application). We can also
control for county-level characteristics in 1910, and state characteristics in the year of application
(Zst). In our preferred specification we include county fixed effects (θc) and cohort fixed effects
(θt). Thus, the effect of the program θ1 is identified by comparing the average survival of
accepted boys to rejected boys within county and year of birth, conditional on other observables.
Because we have multiple children per family, standard errors are clustered at the family level.
We also estimate an Accelerated Failure Time (AFT) hazard model of the type:
log(Age at death)ifts = θ0 + θ1 MPf + θ2 Xif + θ3Zst + θc + θt

+ εif

(2)

where the dependent variable is the natural log of the age at death for a given individual, and all
other explanatory variables are defined as in Equation (1).
Using matched administrative data poses three challenges. The first is attrition. Based
on evidence from life tables, it is reasonable to assume that those without a match in the DMF
were deceased by 1975 (the start of comprehensive reporting in the DMF) and to include them in
our estimation sample for survival (but not the AFT hazard models because we cannot observe
age at death for this group). We can then compare survival regression results using the full
sample to results when using only individuals matched in the DMF.
In addition to missing matches (i.e., attrition), we have multiple matches for a few
records (4 percent of matches have multiple possible matches and thus outcomes), as well as
possible measurement error in matching (i.e., even if we find a unique match, we are not certain
that it is the correct match.) We developed estimation procedures to account for both multiple
matches and measurement error in estimating (1) and (2).18 We also present our results using
only the unique matches, as is typically done in the literature, for comparison.
b. Identification strategy: Rejected applicants

18

Programs (in STATA) and documentation available at http://www.econ.ucla.edu/alleras/research/data.html.

9

For identification of causal effects, we use rejected applicants as the counterfactual. This
strategy has been used by others to estimate program impacts (e.g., Bound 1989; Von Wachter et
al. 2011). The rationale for using rejected applicants is that they are likely similar to recipients on
observable and unobservable characteristics. Not only are they likely to face similar economic
conditions at the time of application, but they are also likely to share the same level of
(unobserved) factors such as “motivation” and knowledge of the MP program.19 To assess the
comparability of these groups, we investigate reasons for rejection, and we compare the observed
characteristics of accepted and rejected applicants.
Table 2 reports the distribution of rejection reasons for those for whom this information
was reported (about 60 percent of rejected applicants). The most common reason for rejection
was insufficient need (35 percent), in which case the rejected applicants represent an upper
bound on what could be expected of the beneficiaries in the absence of pension receipt. Marriage
or remarriage is a common reason for rejection, while ineligibility due to insufficient length of
residency and non-citizenship appear very uncommon. Case studies that examined reasons for
rejection from specific counties are consistent with the statistics we report. For instance in
Chicago during 1911-1927, it was reported that sufficient means accounted for half of all
rejected and most cancelled pensions (Goodwin 1992). In Clay County, Minnesota, where we
have detailed information for all families, the most commonly reported reason for
discontinuation of a pension was that the family was judged capable of self-support.
On observables, accepted and rejected applicants look similar but not identical. On
average, rejected applicants were slightly older and had somewhat smaller families, and the
average age of the children in the family was higher, particularly the age of the youngest child
(Table 3). Marital status of the mothers also differed. Among the accepted, there are more
children of widows and fewer children of mothers with unknown/unreported marital status.
Interestingly, among accepted children, the date of birth of the child is more likely to be missing.
We speculate that this could be a potential marker for illiteracy, given that heaping (rounding) in
reports of age is correlated with illiteracy (see A’Hearn and Baten 2006 and references therein).
When we examine which family characteristics are associated with acceptance and, conditional
on acceptance, generosity of transfer received in a regression framework, the same patterns
19

Others (Dale and Krueger 2002) have justified using rejected applicants as the counterfactual (in the context of
college admission) by arguing that rejected applicants apply because they have good reason to believe, based on
observables and unobservables, that they should be accepted.

10

emerged (Table 4). Large families with younger children were more likely to be accepted, were
given more money and (for those for whom we observe the duration) were helped for longer
periods. Illiterate mothers (as proxied by missing DOB of the child) were also helped more.
To assess whether these differences in family characteristics correlate with differences in
family income, we estimate the income of accepted and rejected MP applicants based on
observable characteristics of the family using the 1915 Iowa census data. Specifically, we
regress family income on the family characteristics we observe in the MP records (family size,
age of all siblings, maternal marital status, length of family name).20 With these coefficient
estimates (Table S6), we then predict average income (in 1915) for accepted and rejected
applicants based on their observable characteristics. We find that on average, rejected mothers
have predicted income that is 35 percent higher than that of accepted mothers, consistent with the
reasons for rejection.21
A related concern with this strategy of comparing accepted and rejected applicants is
evidence of racial discrimination in the MP program. In a 1931 survey and analysis of the MP
program, the US Department of Labor determined that 96 percent of MP recipients were white
despite the fact that black mothers were at least as likely to be in need. Only in Ohio and
Pennsylvania did black mothers appear to receive MP benefits at expected rates (Children’s
Bureau 1933). Without information on race in the applications, this raises the possibility that
blacks may be disproportionately represented among the rejected applicants, biasing our
estimates. We present evidence from multiple sources that this is not likely the case in our
sample. First, as shown above, accepted applicants appear to be worse off on observables than
the rejected, which is inconsistent with blacks being disproportionately rejected. Second, we
observe the race of accepted and rejected applicants who are linked with their 1940 census or
WWII enlistment records. Third, we present results in which we drop from the sample all
counties with a disproportionate share of black residents. Fourth, we present results for Ohio
only, one of just two states in which blacks received MP benefits at appropriate rates according
20

We use coefficient estimates from a Tobit, also presented in Table S6, because of zero reported income and the
need to avoid predictions of negative income. The table shows that the main unobserved determinants of poverty
aside from location are whether or not the household owned property, the presence of ill or old individuals, and race.
21
The county characteristics, as measured in 1910, are roughly similar for the accepted and rejected applicants
(Table 3, Panel B). Since we restrict our sample to counties with both accepted and rejected applicants, the mean
differences reported here reflect underlying differences in the shares of accepted and rejected across counties.
Accepted applicants are more likely to be in urban counties, implying the acceptance rate was higher in urban
counties, but otherwise the characteristics are similar.

11

to the Children’s Bureau 1933 report. All four exercises suggest that blacks do not constitute a
large share of rejected applicants and therefore are not biasing our results.22
c. Differential attrition and matching to mortality records
Next we investigate the possibility of differential attrition and matching to the mortality records
based on observable characteristics of the mother and child. Table 3 presents summary statistics
by accepted/rejected status for the entire sample, the sample with a match to mortality data, and
for the sub-sample with unique matches. The characteristics of individuals we find are very
similar across samples of rejected or accepted applicants. Thus, conditional on
acceptance/rejection, there appears to be no systematic difference in the characteristics of those
with a match in the mortality records and those without a match. However, the accepted are
eight percent more likely to be found in the mortality records (Panel A of Table 5), and this is
true with or without controlling for covariates. This can be explained by either lower mortality
rates among the accepted, or identical mortality but rejected children being harder to find in the
mortality records. Later, we present evidence in favor of the lower mortality explanation.

V. Mortality results
a. Preliminary visual evidence
Accepted boys lived on average to age 73.3, about 0.8 of a year longer than rejected boys (Table
3). We estimate the density of the age at death for accepted and rejected applicants, using all
matches (Figure 1a), and using unique matches only (Figure 1b). Both Figures show that the
distribution of the age at death of accepted applicants is shifted to the right of the distribution of
rejected applicants, suggesting that accepted applicants lived longer. The distributions are
statistically different at the five percent level. The largest differences are observed between ages
60 and 80, where the distributions are the densest.
b. Main Results
We start by presenting estimates of the effect of the MP program on the probability of survival
past age 60, 70 and 80, using all matches and assuming those without a match died prior to 1975
(Panel A, Table 6). Column 1 includes only state and cohort dummies, column 2 adds all

22

The most likely explanation is that the discrimination was such that black women did not bother even applying to
the program, knowing that they would be rejected.

12

individual controls, county characteristics in 1910 and state characteristics at the time of
application. Column 3 adds county fixed effects. The results are not very sensitive to the
covariates we include. The implied marginal effects suggest statistically significant increases in
the probability of survival past age 70 (10-20 percent), and the probability of survival past age 80
(9-15 percent).
We perform a number of robustness checks. These include using the date of birth from
the death certificate instead of the one from the MP records, which differ in less than 10% of our
sample (column 4),23 dropping those without age at death instead of assuming they died (column
5), or using unique matches only (column 6). In the last column, we drop counties with a share
of blacks in the top quarter for the state (never higher than five percent). The effects remain
positive and are somewhat larger for surviving past age 60. Next we abandon the arbitrarily
chosen cutoffs of ages 60, 70 and 80 and estimate our survival model using ML and the fully
saturated specification for each age at death between 58 and 88, which correspond to the 10th and
90th percentiles of the distribution of the age at death. Figure 2 shows the marginal effects as a
percentage of the survival rate of rejected applicants, computed using coefficients from
estimation with and without imputing the missing observations as 0s. All coefficients are positive
and significant after age 67, regardless of whether we impute missing values as 0.
In panel B of Table 6 we present estimates for longevity from the AFT hazard model.
This analysis is based on all matched records, dropping those with no match (i.e., missing date of
death). Again the coefficient on acceptance is positive in all specifications and the implied
effects are large: acceptance increased life expectancy by about a year, relative to a mean of
72.5, among the rejected. The estimates range from 0.7 to 1.4 years of life depending on the
specification and sample.
We also present estimates that take advantage of our ability to predict family income
using the 1915 Iowa census to further limit our comparison to accepted and rejected applicants
who appear most similar in terms of resources (income) available to them. To do so, we split the
sample into low income (below median predicted income) and high income (above median
predicted income) and compare accepted and rejected within these two broad income groups.
23

If the date of birth in the MP and DMF records differ, it is sometimes the case that the DOB occurs later in the MP
records. We believe this is likely due to mothers underreporting the age of their children in an effort to increase
length of eligibility, in addition to just errors in recording. Reasons for discontinuation from Clay County,
Minnesota support this.

13

The effect of the MP program appears to be larger among those poorest in the sample (Figure 3).
Table 7 presents the estimates separately by predicted income, for survival (Panel A) and age at
death (Panel B). Two features are worth noting. First, the average survival rates and age at
death are always larger for the sample that is predicted to have larger incomes, which suggests
that our predicted income is indeed correctly classifying individuals into income categories,
since income is a well-known predictor of mortality. Second, the results confirm that the poorest
individuals in the sample benefitted substantially more than those coming from relatively richer
households. For the poorest boys, the gain in longevity is about 1.5 years of life.
c. Additional robustness checks
We conduct several additional robustness checks for the probability of survival past 70, (Table
S7). The results are robust to using a standard logit models (Panel A) or to using the logit
maximum likelihood model we develop in Bungi, Honore and Lleras-Muney (2013) to properly
account for multiple matches and measurement error (Panel B) ; to using only unique matches,
using the highest quality matches or using all matches; to allowing for measurement error; to
matching accepted and rejected on propensity scores; and to dropping individuals with three or
more matches from the sample. Although the coefficients differ in magnitude when we change
the sample, the marginal effects remain similar across all specifications.
In addition, we find that the estimated positive effects of the programs are not a function
of the number of rejected applicants or their share. If characteristics of the control group vary
with the rejection rate (i.e., counties who reject few (many) families apply a looser (stricter)
standard for acceptance), we can interpret this as further evidence that the results are not driven
by different characteristics of the treatment (accepted) and control (rejected) groups.
d. Results for Ohio
We present separate estimates for the state of Ohio (34 percent of our sample) as a final
robustness check for three reasons. First, as the 1931 Children’s Bureau study reported, there
was no evidence of discrimination against black women in Ohio’s MP program. If the estimates
are unchanged when we limit the sample to the state of Ohio, this would suggest that
discrimination against blacks in other MP programs is not driving the results.

14

Second, for Ohio we can include data on county expenditures on social programs at the
time of application, eliminating a potential source of bias in our estimates if counties are more
likely to reject applicants when there are other sources of support in the community. The results,
presented in Panel C of Table S7 with and without controls show that the estimated effects are
essentially unchanged, though perhaps slightly larger, for the Ohio sample. Thus discrimination
against black mothers and potential correlation with other social programs are not biasing our
results. Finally, Ohio maintains death records going back to 1958, allowing us to match Ohio
boys to earlier death records. We also manually searched for unmatched children of accepted and
rejected Ohio MP applicants on Ancestry.com, a database that includes deaths from WWII and
other wars, as well as other death records (e.g., cemetery listings). When we do this, we increase
our match rate to 60 percent. (Figure S1, Panel C). There are three notable results from this
exercise. First, the estimates are unchanged when we extend our records in this way. This is
visible in Figure 4, which depicts the densities of the age at death, and in Table S7, Panel C
which reports the estimates for surviving past 70. Second, we continue to find death records for
accepted applicants at higher rates, suggesting that the higher match rate does indeed correspond
to a real mortality effect (Table 5, Panel B). Third, the age at death among rejected applicants
whom we did not find in the DMF records is 66.3, compared to age at death among accepted
applicants of 67.2 (a difference of nearly one year of life). Since this is exactly what we estimate
using the full data, this suggests that our inability to link the MP applicants to death records prior
to the mid-1970s is in fact related to the higher mortality of the rejected applicants.
About 60 percent of the newly found death records show deaths prior to age 70, but only
about 30 percent died before age 60. We conclude that the assumption that the missing are dead
is reasonable for survival past 70, but not for survival at younger ages, which might explain why
our results for survival past age 60 are small and sometimes insignificant.
e. Alternative counterfactuals from the 1900-1930 censuses
For comparison, we constructed two alternative “control” groups from the 1900, 1910, 1920 and
1930 censuses and matched them with their death records in the DMF (see Appendix III for
details).24 The two alternative counterfactual groups are orphans and children of ineligible
mothers (e.g., single or divorced mothers in states that excluded these groups).
24

For this analysis we also include data on MP recipients in Colorado and Connecticut. These two states were
excluded from the previous analysis because we do not have information on rejected applicants for these two states.

15

Orphans are identified as children living in institutions in the census. Since MP programs
were developed in large part to prevent institutionalization of children by allowing them to
remain home, orphans represent an appropriate counterfactual in this context. We find that the
orphans are very similar to the rejected applicants in terms of longevity, with both living shorter
lives than accepted applicants (Panel A, Figure 5).
The second counterfactual group is comprised of children of single or divorced women
drawn from the census, in states where these women were not eligible for the MP program. We
compare this group of ineligible women to accepted MP children whose fathers are disabled or
institutionalized (but not widows) because on observables these children appear more similar.
Children of accepted women lived longer than this alternative control group of ineligible
children of single and divorced women (Figure 6 Panel B).25

VI. Results for Educational Attainment, Health and Income in the Medium-Term
We explore potential mediating factors to understand the ways in which income transfers in
childhood improved longevity. Previous work has shown a significant relationship between
education, income and being underweight with mortality. More specifically, an increase in
schooling of 0.25 years is associated with a 0.15 year increase in longevity in OLS regressions
(Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2008); those with income in the top 5 percent of the distribution live
25 percent longer than those in the bottom 5 percent (Deaton 2002); and being underweight in
adulthood is associated with a relative risk of mortality that ranges from 1.38 to 2.3 (Flegal et al.
2005). In this section we estimate the effect of the MP program on these medium-term adulthood
outcomes by linking the MP sample with WWII enlistment records and 1940 census records.

a. WWII enlistment records
We can match the MP records with WWII enlistment records for individuals who enlisted in
the Army during 1938-1946.26 For all enlistees we observe education, marital status, and two
health measures (weight and height), which are markers of nutritional deprivation in childhood.
Height, in particular, has been linked with childhood nutrition, as well as adult cognitive ability
and labor market outcomes (Case and Paxson 2008).
25
26

If we include MP widows, the results are even larger.
Enlistment records are available for 9 million (of the 16.5 million) individuals who served in WWII.

16

The WWII results should be viewed as suggestive rather than definitive for two reasons.
First, our match rate is quite low—lower than our match rate for mortality (Table 5, Panel C).
This is because WWII records do not contain date of birth, though they contain state of birth,
which we add to our matching criteria. Second, the WWII records are not a complete or random
subset of the male population because of induction rules and exemptions. Table S8 shows that
our matched sample is younger—this is to be expected because males aged 18-25 in 1942 served
at much higher rates than older men (Hogan 1981) and they are also likely otherwise healthier
given the mental and physical requirements of enlistment. Consistent with this positive selection
into the WWII records, we find accepted applicants at higher rates than rejected applicants
(Table 5, Panel C).
Evidence of the effects on educational attainment from WWII records is presented in Figure
6 and Table 8. The education outcome is censored below at 8 years of schooling (the minimum),
and is also censored for those still in school. We find that children of accepted families are 20
percent more likely to have more than 8 years of school (Table 8, column 1 without controls and
column 2 with controls). When we estimate a censored model that accounts for the two sources
of censoring, we find that MP recipients complete a third of a year more school than rejected
applicants, and the effect is marginally significant. However, when we include the full set of
controls, the point estimates generally remain similar, but are no longer precisely estimated,
which is not surprising given the small sample size for this analysis.
MP receipt also significantly reduces the probability of being underweight (Figure 8).
Estimates in Table 8 imply a statistically significant 50 percent reduction, with similar results
with and without controls. The estimates for height, weight and BMI (measured continuously)
are positive but not significant. Our results showing the greatest impact of MP receipt at the
lower tail of the distribution of weight suggest that the effects of cash transfers may be greatest
for the most disadvantaged. The detailed records from Clay County nurse visits noted
malnutrition as one of the most commonly observed health problems among families in the MP
program. These results suggest that the transfers helped families improve the nutrition of their
children. Finally, in the last row of Table 8 we show that, in WWII records, accepted applicants
are more likely to be black than rejected applicants. Although this difference is not statistically
significant it again suggests that black children are not over-represented among rejected
applicants.
17

b. 1940 Census Records
We present the distribution of longevity, education, income and log(income) for accepted and
rejected MP applicants matched to 1940 census data in Figure 8. The distributions of income for
accepted and rejected applicants are significantly different, with the accepted applicants less
likely to be found in the bottom half of the distribution of income and more likely to be found in
the top half of the income distribution (Figure 7). The results from regression analyses presented
in Table 9 suggest that MP recipients have incomes nearly 14 percent higher than their rejected
counterparts in 1940, when they are young adults (Panel A, Table 9). The results with respect to
years of schooling are similar to those from WWII records (0.4 more years of school). We also
examine whether rejected applicants are more likely to be black using the 1940 census records
which contain race. Again, we find no large or significant relationship between race and rejection
in these records.

VII. Interpretation and policy relevance
This is the first study to document that cash transfers to mothers of poor children substantially
increase children’s longevity. Our additional findings suggest that underlying nutrition,
educational attainment and income in adulthood are all likely mediating factors. While
conditions today differ significantly from those at the beginning of the twentieth century, three
important similarities remain. Then and now, women raising children alone (whether divorced,
unmarried, widowed, abandoned, etc.) represent the most impoverished type of family. In fact,
the income gap between children in two-parent versus single-mother families has only grown
over time (Table S9). Secondly, the relationship between parental income and the development
of child human capital is similar in these two periods. Using census data from 1915, 1940, 1960,
1980 and 2010, we estimate the relationship between log(real family income) and child grade in
school for all children ages 7-14 (Table S10). The relationship between parental income and
child human capital in 2010 is remarkably similar to that found in 1915.27 Finally, our estimated
short and medium-term effects are consistent with estimates of the impact of contemporary antipoverty programs on short and medium-term outcomes. Recent work in the US has found
27

Consistent with this, Dow and Rehkopf (2010) estimate that the relationship between income and mortality was
high at the beginning of the twentieth century, subsequently declined over the course of the middle of the century,
but has risen steadily since then.

18

positive effects of food stamps on pregnancy outcomes (Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach
2011) and adult obesity (Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond, 2012), as well as positive effects
of cash transfers through the tax code in the US and Canada on child cognitive achievement and
health (Dahl and Lochner 2012; Milligan and Stabile, 2008).28

Likewise, in developing

countries, there have been numerous evaluations (often based on randomized controlled trials) of
conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs, which require participants to enroll their children in
school, get regular check-ups, etc. as a condition of receipt. These CCTs are estimated to have
significant short-run effects on such outcomes as infant mortality and school enrollment (Barham
2011; Barham and Rowberry 2012), but there is still uncertainty about their long-term effects on
learning, total years of education, wages or anthropometric outcomes. Our results suggest that
the short and medium-term improvements observed in these contemporary programs are likely to
generate large benefits over the lifetime of the recipients.
Recent theoretical and empirical work (Cunha and Heckman 2007 and Heckman 2007) on
the development of human capital emphasizes the importance of conditions in early childhood in
determining long-term outcomes. Evidence from a randomized trial with primates shows that
deprivation in early-life has large effects on long-term health (Conti et al. 2012). Bleakley (2007)
estimates large effects of a public health de-worming campaign in the American South on
children’s educational outcomes and their adult income; these estimates are consistent with those
from randomized de-worming campaigns in Kenya (Miguel and Kremer 2004). Even earlier,
prenatal conditions have long-term consequences for children’s health and on socio-economic
outcomes (Barker 1995; Almond 2006).
None of these studies address whether cash transfers effectively or efficiently alleviate these
adverse early-life shocks and improve lifetime outcomes. Current aid to poor women takes the
form of in-kind and cash transfers, with the US generally favoring in-kind transfers. Proponents
of in-kind transfers argue that cash transfers may not encourage consumption of goods and
services that benefit children (Currie and Gahvari 2008). In addition, welfare receipt can be
stigmatizing and can create incentives for parents to modify their behavior in order to remain
eligible for program benefits by, for example, remaining unmarried or out of the labor force, or
by having more children (Moffitt 1992; Kearney 2004). On the other hand, cash transfers have
28

Akee et al (2010) also find that a government cash transfer to families on American Indian reservations are
associated with improved medium term outcomes including educational attainment and criminal activity.

19

the advantage of being less costly to deliver and of not constraining recipient consumption
choices, allowing families to respond to unforeseen shocks as necessary. Overall our findings
suggest the net effect of cash transfers on longevity is positive. Whether cash transfers are more
or less cost-effective than in-kind transfers or conditional cash transfers is an important question
for future research.

References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. “Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled
Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.” American
Economic Review, 102(5):1832–1856, 2012.
Akee, Randall, J. Costello, W. Copeland, G. Keeler and A. Angold. “Parent’s Incomes and
Children’s Outcomes: A Quasi- Experiment with Casinos on American Indian Reservations,” ,
American Economics Journal: Applied Economics, Volume 2, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 86-115
Almond, Douglas. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero
influenza exposure in the post-1940 U.S. population.” Journal of Political Economy,
114(4):672–712, August 2006.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 25(3):153–72, 2011.
Almond, Douglas, Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. “Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes” Review of Economics and Statistics
XCIII (2): 387-403, 2011.
A´Hearn, Brian and Joerg Baten. “Quantifying Quantitative Literacy: Age Heaping and the
History of Human Capital,” 2006.
Bailey, Martha. “Fifty Years of Family Planning: New Evidence on the Long-Run Effects of
Increasing Access to Contraception.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2013: 341409, 2006.
Barrow, Lisa and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. “Education and the Poor.” Oxford Handbook
of the Economics of Poverty. Ed. Philip N. Jefferson. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Barham, Tania. “Providing a Healthier Start to Life: The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfer
Programs on Infant Mortality,” Journal of Development Economics, 94(1), 74-85, 2011.
Barham, Tania and Jacob Rowberry. “Living Longer: The Effect of Conditional Cash
Transfers on Elderly Mortality in Rural Mexico,” mimeo, July 2012.

20

Berger, Lawrence, Paxson, Christina and Jane Waldfogel. “Income and Child Development.”
Child Youth Services Review, 31(9):978-989, 2009.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux. « Recent Developments in Intergenerational Mobility.”
NBER Working Paper # 15889, 2010.
Bleakley, Hoyt. “Disease and development: Evidence from hookworm eradication in the
South.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):73–117, 2007.
Bound, John. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.” American
Economic Review, 79(3): 482-503, 1989.
Bugni, Federico, Bo Honoré and Adriana Lleras-Muney. “Estimation and Inference with
imperfectly matched data.” Mimeo, 2013.
Bullock, Edna D. “Selected articles on Mothers’ Pensions,” Debaters’ Handbook Series, The
H.W. Wilson Company, White Plains NY and NYC, 1915.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. “Economic status and health in
childhood: The origins of the gradient.” American Economic Review, 92(5):1308–1334,
December 2002.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. “Stature and status: Height, ability, and labor market
outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3):499–532, 2008b.
Children’s Bureau. “Laws relating to Mothers’ Pensions in the United States, Denmark and New
Zealand.” Government Printing Office, Washington, 1914.
Children’s Bureau. “Proceedings of Conference on Mothers Pensions” Bureau Publication No.
109, Washington GPO, 1922a.
Children’s Bureau. “County Organization for Child Care and Protection,” Bureau Publication
No. 107, Washington GPO, 1922b.
Children’s Bureau. “Public Aid to Children in Their Own Homes. A Tabular Summary of State
Laws in Effect November 1, 1922”. Bureau Publication, Legal Chart No.3. Washington GPO,
1922c.
Children’s Bureau. “Administration of Mothers’ Aid in Ten Localities with special Reference to
Health, Housing, Education and Recreation.” Bureau Publication No. 184. Government Printing
Office, Washington, 1928a.
Children’s Bureau. “Public Aid to Mothers with Dependent Children. Extent and Fundamental
Principles” Bureau Publication No. 162 (revised), Washington GPO, 1928b.
Children’s Bureau. “Mother’s Aid 1931.” Bureau Publication 220. Government Printing Office,
Washington, 1933.
21

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman. “The technology of skill formation.” American Economic
Review, 97(2):31–47, May 2007.
Currie, Janet and Nancy Cole. “Welfare and child health: The link between AFDC participation
and birth weight.” The American Economic Review, 83(4):971–985, 1993.
Currie, Janet. “The Effect of Welfare on Child Outcomes: What We Know and What We Need
to Know,” in Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior: Research Perspectives, Robert
Moffitt (ed.), Washington D.C.: National Academy Press, pp.177-204, 1998.
Currie Janet and Firouz Gahvari, “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the Data,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2): 333-383, June 2008.
Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner. “The impact of family income on child achievement:
Evidence from the earned income tax credit.” American Economic Review, 102(5):1927-1956,
August 2012
Deaton, Angus. “Policy Implications of the Gradient of Health and Wealth” Health Affairs.
21(2):13-30, 2002.
Dow, W. and D. Rehkopf, “Socioeconomic gradients in health in international and historical
context.” In N. Adler and J. Stewart (eds.) Biology of Disadvantage. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1186:24-36, 2010.
Ferrie, Joseph and Karen Rolf. “Socioeconomic status in childhood and health after age 70: A
new longitudinal analysis for the U.S., 1895–2005.” Explorations in Economic History, 48(4):
445–460, 2011.
Flegal KM, Graubard BI, Williamson DF, Gail MH. “Excess Deaths Associated With
Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity.” Journal of the American Medical Association
293(15):1861-1867. doi:10.1001/jama.293.15.1861, 2005.
Goodwin, Joanne. “Employable Mothers’ and ‘Suitable Work’: A Re-Evaluation of Welfare and
Wage-Earning for Women in the Twentieth-Century United States.” Journal of Social History,
Vol. 29, No. 2:253-274, 1995.
Heckman, James. “The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability
formation.” PNAS, 104(33):13250–13255, August 2007.
Hill, Mark E. and Ira Rosenwaike. The Social Security Administration's Death Master File: The
Completeness of Death Reporting at Older Ages. Social Security Bulletin, 64(1):45-51,
2001/2002.
Hoynes, Hilary, Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore and Douglas Almond. “Long Run Impacts of
Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” NBER Working Paper # 18535, 2012.
22

Katz, Michael. In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A Social History of Welfare in the United States.
New York, NY Basic Books, 2nd edition, 1996.
Kearney, Melissa. “Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Based on Fertility Behavior: A
Look at the Family Cap” Journal of Human Resources. 39(2):295-325, 2004.
Levine, Phillip B. and David J. Zimmerman. “Children’s welfare exposure and subsequent
development.” NBER Working Paper # 7522, 2000.
Lindeboom M., F. Portrait and GJ Van Den Berg. “Economic conditions early in life and
individual mortality.” American Economic Review 96, 290-302, 2006.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile. “Do child tax benefits affect the wellbeing of children?
Evidence from Canadian child benefit expansions.” NBER Working Paper # 14624, 2008.
Moehling, Caroline. “Mothers’ Pension Legislation and the Cross-State Variation in Welfare
Generosity.” August 2006.
Moffit, R. “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma” American Economic Review. 73(5): 10231035, 1983.
Moffitt, R. “Incentive effects of the U.S. Welfare System: a review.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 1– 61 (March), 1992.
National Archives and Records Administration. U.S. World War II Army Enlistment Records,
1938-1946 [database on-line]. Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com Operations Inc, 2005. Original
data: Electronic Army Serial Number Merged File, 1938-1946 [Archival Database]; World War
II Army Enlistment Records; Records of the National Archives and Records Administration,
Record Group 64; National Archives at College Park, College Park, MD.
New York Times. “Thirteen States now have laws pensioning mothers” May 11, 1913.
New York Times. “Mothers’ pensions cut juvenile crime” January 11, 1915.
Reardon, Sean F. (in press). The Widening Socioeconomic Achievement Gap: New Evidence
and Possible Explanations. Social Inequality and Economic Disadvantage. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution
Skocpol, Theda, Marjorie Abend-Wein, Christopher Howard, and Susan Goodrich Lehman.
“Women’s Associations and the Enactment of Mothers’ Pensions in the United States.” The
American Political Science Review, 87(3): 686-701, 1993.
von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. “Trends in Employment and Earnings of
Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Program.”
American Economic Review, 101(7): 3308-29, 2011.
23

Table 1: Mothers’ Pension Program Characteristics in 1922
States with MP Records Collected

Eligibility
State
(year MP
enacted)

Deserted
or
divorced

Husband
in
institution

Child
age
elig.

Requirements
Residency

Citizen

Prop
limit

Work

Reapply?

Benefits
1st
child

add’l
child

Connecticut
No
no
16
No
No
**
**
(1919)
Idaho
No
yes
15
Yes
No
10
5
(1913)
Illinoisa
No
yes
14
Yes
Yes
yes
yes
25
15
(1911)
Iowa
No
yes
16
No
No
12
12
(1913)
Minnesota
Yes
yes
16
Yes
Yes
yes
yes
yes
20
15
(1913)
North
No
no
14
Yes
No
15
15
Dakota
(1915)
Ohio
Yes
yes
16
Yes
No
yes
yes
35
10
(1913)
Oklahoma
No
yes
14
Yes
No
10
5
(1915)
Oregon
No
yes
16
Yes
Yes
yes
yes
yes
15
10
(1913)
Washington
No
no
15
Yes
No
yes
15
5
(1913)
Wisconsin
Yes
yes
14
Yes
No
yes
yes
15
10
(1913)
Source: Children’s Bureau (1922c).
*Colorado’s law did not determine any minimum or maximum amounts but specified that amounts should be
deemed “sufficient”.
**Connecticut’s law had a more complicated schedule of payments depending on the family characteristics.
a. larger amounts were given in counties with populations with more than 300,000. For smaller areas the amounts
were 15/10
“Work” consists of laws that specified that maternal employment could be demanded and constrained in terms of
the number of days/hours at work.
“Citizenship” consists or requiring either citizenship or the intention of becoming one.

24

Max

No
No
60
No
No
No

No
No
60
No
No

Table 2: Reasons for Rejection
Distribution in all Records and in Estimation Sample
A. All records
Reason MP
Reason MP
denied
ended
Other means
Ineligible
Ineligible, reason unspecified
Married or husband returns
Moved from county
No children eligible
Doesn't meet residency requirement
Not a citizen
Other Reasons
Withdrew
Application incomplete
Immoral/unfit
Not dependent for long enough
Mother lied in application
Child delinquent
Divorced
Mother died/hospitalized/in prison
N observations with data

35.26%
29.53
7.95
3.58
2.03
1.36
0.32
8.29
4.09
3.80
1.93
0.51

B. Boys in sample
Reason
Reason
MP denied MP ended

17.38%

37.42%

20.01%

43.13
27.25

19.24
6.97
6.52
2.12
2.73
0.76

39.97
25.34

3.22

3.64
6.97
4.24
5.61
1.36

4.39

1.62
0.70
0.64
3,738

4.23

1.06
1.36

4.11

13,794

660

4,692

Panel A includes information from any record with non-missing values in original MP data. Panel B
includes information only from those records with non-missing values, from boys born between 19001925 who applied before 1930 and in counties with records from rejected applicants

25

Table 3: Summary Statistics for Estimation Sample
Boys ages 0-18, Born 1900-1925 in Counties with Rejected Applicants Only

Age at death

Full sample

Sample matched to
Death certificate

Sample with unique
matches

Rejected Accepted
72.58
73.34

Rejected Accepted
72.58
73.34

Rejected Accepted
72.53
73.34

A. Individual characteristics
Year of application
YOB of child
Child age (years)
Number of kids in family
Age of oldest kid in family
Age of youngest kid in family
Length of family name
Widow
Divorced
Husband abandoned/prison/hospital
Mother's marital status unknown
Missing age at death
Day or month of birth missing
Number of matches
Quality of merge with DMF file

1920.8
1912.1
8.72
3.6
11.86
5.59
6.39
0.51
0.04
0.18
0.27
0.54
0.02
0.48
1.19

1921.7
1913.4
8.22
3.77
11.48
4.81
6.45
0.54
0.03
0.19
0.25
0.49
0.03
0.54
1.18

1921.0
1912.2
8.84
3.52
11.82
5.65
6.33
0.53
0.03
0.18
0.26
0
0.01
1.04
1.19

1921.9
1913.6
8.3
3.74
11.48
4.84
6.35
0.55
0.03
0.19
0.23
0
0.03
1.06
1.18

1921.0
1912.2
8.84
3.54
11.85
5.63
6.35
0.53
0.03
0.18
0.26
0
0.01
1
1.18

1921.9
1913.6
8.31
3.73
11.47
4.85
6.36
0.55
0.03
0.19
0.23
0
0.02
1
1.17

B. 1910 county characteristics
Duncan socio-economic Index
SD of SEI
% living in urban areas
% females that are widowed
% under 16 living with only mom
% workers with SEI<20th %
% women 16+ in the labor force
% children 10-15 working
Average value of farm land
Duration of transfers in years
Monthly amount - 1982 dollars

24.21
20.85
0.34
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.18
0.07
84.46
3.09
0

24.43
20.52
0.4
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.18
0.07
92.82
4.13
311.21

24.31
20.79
0.36
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.18
0.07
81.48
3.2
0

24.71
20.55
0.42
0.06
0.05
0.1
0.18
0.07
94.11
4.26
311.5

24.33
20.81
0.36
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.18
0.07
81.49
3.2
0

24.94
20.72
0.42
0.06
0.06
0.1
0.18
0.07
95.15
4.27
311.38

2219

14070

1,353
75
2,264

8,131
75
14,514

1,028
640
75
1,073

7,217
4,229
65
7,661

995
616
75
995

6,914
4031
64
6,914

Number of children
Number of families
Number of counties
Number of observations

26

Table 4: Determinants of Acceptance and Generosity of Transfers
Dependent variable:
Model:
Child age (years)
Number of kids in family (imputed)
Age of oldest kid in family record
Age of youngest kid in family record
Length of family name
(Widowed is the excluded category)
Divorced
Husband abandoned, in prison/hospital
Mother's marital status unknown
Day or month of birth missing

County and cohort FE?
State characteristics (year of
application)
Mean of Y

Accepted
=1
Logit

Log(monthly Log(duration
amount)
in years)
OLS
OLS

Log (lifetime
transfer)
OLS

-0.00218
[0.003]
0.00348
[0.003]
0.000344
[0.002]
-0.0053**
[0.002]
0.00132
[0.002]

0.00830**
[0.003]
0.111***
[0.005]
0.000641
[0.002]
-0.0251***
[0.002]
-0.000570
[0.003]

-0.0160
[0.011]
0.0407***
[0.011]
0.00997*
[0.006]
-0.0327***
[0.005]
0.00365
[0.008]

-0.0173
[0.012]
0.132***
[0.013]
0.0178***
[0.006]
-0.0551***
[0.006]
0.00328
[0.009]

-0.0589**
[0.025]
-0.00990
[0.011]
-0.0962**
[0.040]
-0.0185
[0.030]

0.000729
[0.022]
0.00104
[0.013]
-0.0303
[0.040]
0.0594*
[0.035]

-0.106
[0.066]
-0.116***
[0.039]
-0.000755
[0.105]
0.415**
[0.185]

-0.100
[0.073]
-0.0922**
[0.043]
-0.00595
[0.120]
0.519***
[0.199]

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

0.864

5.511

1.306

6.647

Number of individuals
16,288
13,963
6,868
6,806
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05. State characteristics at the time of application include manufacturing
wages, education/labor laws (age must enter school age can obtain a work permit and whether a
continuation school law is in place), state expenditures in logs (education, charity and total
expenditures on social programs) and state laws concerning MP transfers (whether citizenship is
required, whether there is a residency period in county required, the maximum legislated amount
for the fits child and the legislated amount for each additional child).

27

Table 5: Differential Attrition and Matching of Males in MP Records
Coefficient on Accepted =1 from Logit specification
Panel A: MP matched to DMF
Missing match=1
(M=0.527, N=16,288)
More than one match=1
(M=0.0718, N=8,247)

-0.200**
[0.051]

-0.174**
[0.052]

-0.176**
[0.052]

-0.130**
[0.053]

-0.110**
[0.055]

0.261
[0.192]

0.271
[0.193]

0.0687
[0.205]

0.0851
[0.205]

0.0808
[0.216]

-0.200**
[0.089]

-0.126
[0.093]

-0.160*
[0.095]

-0.179
[0.109]

-0.205*
[0.112]

-0.243**
[0.115]

-0.193**
[0.069]

-0.199**
[0.069]

-0.231**
[0.071]

-0.149**
[0.075]

0.147
[0.178]

0.152
[0.178]

0.224
[0.183]

0.232
[0.205]

Panel B: Ohio MP matched to additional death records
Missing match=1
-0.206**
-0.198**
(M=0.205 N=5,469)
[0.088]
[0.089]
More than one match=1
(M=0.578, N=3,495)
-0.167
-0.168
[0.107]
[0.109]
Panel C: MP matched to WWII records
Missing match=1
-0.212**
(M=0.848, N=16,288)
[0.068]
More than one match=1 (if
matched) (M=0.139, N=2,895)
0.144
[0.177]

Individual Characteristics
x
x
x
x
Match Quality
x
x
x
State-year & 1910 county controls
x
x
County and cohort dummies
x
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05. Individual controls include child age at application, age of oldest and
youngest in family, number of siblings, number of letters in name, year of application, and
dummies for the marital status of the mother. Match controls include a dummy for whether date
of birth is incomplete. County controls for 1910 include all characteristics listed in Panel B of
Table 4. State characteristics at the time of application include manufacturing wages,
education/labor laws (age must enter school age can obtain a work permit and whether a
continuation school law is in place), state expenditures in logs (education, charity and total
expenditures on social programs) and state laws concerning MP transfers (whether citizenship is
required, whether there is a residency period in county required, the maximum legislated amount
for the fits child and the legislated amount for each additional child).

28

Table 6: Cash Transfers and Long-Term Mortality
1

2

3

Main results
(DOB from MP records)
Panel A: Effects on survival, Logistic model
P(survived to 60)
0.192*** 0.111**
0.0984*
[0.047]
[0.049]
[0.051]
N
16,289
16,288
16,288
% effect
11%
6%
6%
P(survived to 70)

4
DOB
From
DMF

5
drop
missing
DOD

6
unique
matches
only

7
counties
with few
blacks

0.0912*
[0.051]
16,288
5%

0.0440
[0.118]
8,244
1%

0.0558
[0.118]
7,908
1%

0.112*
[0.058]
11,694
7%

0.263***
[0.052]
16,289
19%

0.199***
[0.053]
16,288
14%

0.201***
[0.055]
16,288
14%

0.185***
[0.055]
16,288
13%

0.252***
[0.075]
8,244
10%

0.266***
[0.075]
7,908
11%

0.242***
[0.063]
11,694
18%

0.229***
[0.066]
16,289
20%

0.182***
[0.067]
16,288
16%

0.170**
[0.070]
16,288
15%

0.171**
[0.071]
16,288
15%

0.146*
[0.080]
8,244
10%

0.152*
[0.080]
7,908
11%

0.206**
[0.080]
11,694
18%

Panel B: Effects on longevity, AFT model
Log(age at death)
0.0101
0.0089
[0.007]
[0.007]
effect (yrs)
1.01
1.01
N
8,255
8,254

0.0117*
[0.007]
1.01
8,254

0.0100*
[0.006]
1.01
8,251

0.0177***
[0.006]
1.02
7,908

0.0139*
[0.008]

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

N
% effect
P(survived to 80)
N
% effect

State FE
Cohort FE
State charac.
County 1910 char.
County FE
Individual controls

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

5,820

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05. % effects computed relative to the average for rejected boys. Individual controls include child
age at application, age of oldest and youngest in family, number of siblings, number of letters in name, a dummy for
whether date of birth is incomplete, year of application, and dummies for the marital status of the mother. County
controls for 1910 include all characteristics listed in Panel B of Table 4. State characteristics at the time of
application include manufacturing wages, education/labor laws (age must enter school age can obtain a work permit
and whether a continuation school law is in place), state expenditures in logs(education, charity and total
expenditures on social programs) and state laws concerning MP transfers (work required, reapplication required, the
maximum legislated amount for the first child and the legislated amount for each additional child).

29

Table 7: Effects of Cash Transfers by Initial (Predicted) Family Income
Poorest

Richest

Panel A: Effects on survival, Logistic model
P(survived to 60)
0.109*
0.0563
[0.061]
[0.097]
N
11,982
4,557
Mean for rejected
0.397
0.463
% effect
6.57%
3.02%
P(survived to 70)
N
Mean for rejected
% effect
P(survived to 80)
N
Mean for rejected
% effect

0.212***
[0.066]
11,982
0.267
15.54%

0.107
[0.101]
4,557
0.326
7.21%

0.194**
[0.085]
11,982
0.132
16.84%

0.105
[0.127]
4,557
0.178
8.63%

Panel B: Effects on longevity, AFT model
Log(age at death)
0.0198**
-0.0091
[0.008]
[0.012]
N
6,080
2,425
Mean for rejected
71.88
73.95
effect (years)
1.423224
-0.67295
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05. Both panels estimates models like those in column 3 of Table 7. Panel A uses the MLE
procedure we developed, using all matches, imputing missing observations as dead and controlling for all
observables. Panel B estimates models using the GMM method we developed, does not include individuals with
missing age at death and include all controls in the estimation.

30

Table 8: The MP Program and Medium-Term Outcomes:
Education and Health from WWII Records
Unique Matches, OLS or Logit Coefficients Reported

Dependent variable
A. Education
Has exactly 8 years of school
Education -- left and right
censored
B. Anthropometrics
Height (cms)
Weight (pounds)
BMI
Underweight
Obese
C. Race
Black=1

No
Controls

All
controls

N

Mean
rejected

-0.0677**
[0.030]
0.348*
[0.196]

-0.0355
[0.032]
0.238
[0.209]

2,446

0.330

1.346
[1.067]
3.879*
[2.157]
0.537*
[0.299]
-0.690**
[0.272]
0.416
[0.474]

1.142
[1.229]
3.417
[2.330]
0.464
[0.355]
-0.638*
[0.336]
0.998
[0.612]

1844

174.5

1706

144.7

1706

22.06

1706

0.09

1706

0.03

0.282
[0.352]

0.0284
[0.381]

1691

0.038

10.38

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05. Model in Column 2 is estimated using county and cohort fixed effects and include
individual characteristics at the time of application. State characteristics at the time of application include
manufacturing wages, education/labor laws (age must enter school age can obtain a work permit and
whether a continuation school law is in place), state expenditures in logs (education, charity and total
expenditures on social programs) and state laws concerning MP transfers (work required, reapplication
required, the maximum legislated amount for the fits child and the legislated amount for each additional
child).

31

Table 9: The MP program and Medium-Term Outcomes:
Education and Income from 1940 Census Records
Coefficient on Accepted reported. OLS models
No
All
N
Dependent variable
Controls
controls

Mean
rejected

A. Income and Education
Annual Income in 1939
Years of schooling

B.
Black =1

76.76
[50.053]
0.464**
[0.181]

89.50*
[48.461]
0.368*
[0.197]

0.00440
[0.006]

0.00319
[0.007]

1,960

666.2

2,058

9.363

2099

0.008

Race

C. Effect on age at death
Log age at death
0.0281** 0.0357***
[0.012]
[0.013]

2,099

69.34

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05. Subsample of MP applicants matched to the preliminary release of the 1940 census. Estimation
sample restricted to 1900-1925 cohorts in states and counties with rejected applicants. All models are estimated
using county and cohort fixed effects and include state characteristics at the time of application. State characteristics
at the time of application include manufacturing wages, education/labor laws (age must enter school age can obtain
a work permit and whether a continuation school law is in place), state expenditures in logs (education, charity and
total expenditures on social programs) and state laws concerning MP transfers (work required, reapplication
required, the maximum legislated amount for the fits child and the legislated amount for each additional child).

32

Fig. 1: Distribution of Age at Death.
Boys of Accepted and Rejected Applicants
a. All matches

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

Distribution of age at death

20

40

60
80
Age at death MP DOB

100

120

Accepted
Rejected
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.7564

b. Unique matches

0

Density
.01
.02

.03

Distribution of age at death - unique matches only

20

40

60
80
Age at death MP DOB

100

120

Accepted
Rejected
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.7832

We reject the null that the distributions are the same using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test (unique matches).

33

Fig. 2: Effects by Age
Marginal effects of accepted by age

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

as a percent of the mean survival rate of rejected applicants

60

70

80

90

Age
All-missing assumed dead

Unique matches missing dropped

Each dot represents the marginal effect of “Accepted = 1” as a percent of the survival rate
to a given age. Coefficients for surviving past ages 63 are all significant at the 10 percent
or higher for both sets of estimates.

34

Fig. 3: Estimates by predicted family income

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

.04

Distribution of age at death among poorest in sample

20

40

60
80
Age at death MP DOB

100

120

Accepted
Rejected
unique matches only

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

Distribution of age at death among richest in sample

20

40

60
Age at death MP DOB
Accepted
Rejected

unique matches only

35

80

100

Fig. 4: Ohio, matching to additional death records.

0

.01

Density

.02

.03

Distribution of age at death in Ohio

20

40

60
80
Age at death - all sources

100

Accepted
Rejected
Unique matches only

Records matched first to Death Mortality Files (DMF). Unmatched records were
then manually imputed by searching individual records in Ancestry.com.
Unmatched records were then matched to Ohio and Illinois state death records.

36

Fig. 5: Alternative counterfactuals
Panel A: Orphans from the 1900-1930 Census

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

Age at death of MP boys and Census orphans

20

40
60
80
Child's age in years at death, YOB from census

100

Orphans
Rejected
Accepted
Unique matches only. Ophans defined as children living in institutions.

Panel B: States where single and divorced are ineligible

Age at death for children of poor non-widows

0

.01

Density
.02
.03

.04

In states where divorced/abandoned mothers are ineligible

20

40
60
80
Child's age in years at death, YOB from census
Poor mothers
Accepted
Rejected

Unique matches only

37

100

Fig. 6: Effect of MP on outcomes from WWII records

Distribution of years of education in WWII
records
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

Rejected

0.15

Accepted

0.1
0.05
0
8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

18

0

.05

Density
.1

.15

Distribution of BMI in WWII records

0

20

40
bmi
Accepted
Rejected

graph from unique matches only

38

60

Fig. 7: Effect of MP on outcomes for 1940 Census Sample

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

.04

Distribution of longevity in matched data 1940 census

20

40

60
Age at death MP DOB

80

100

Accepted
Rejected
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 2.1341

0

.05

Density
.1

.15

.2

Distribution of years of school 1940 census

0

5

10
Educational attainment, years
Accepted
Rejected

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.5176

39

15

20

0

.0002

Density
.0004 .0006

.0008

Distribution of income 1940 census

0

2000

4000
Annual Income in 1939

6000

8000

Accepted
Rejected
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 152.6086

0

.2

Density

.4

.6

Distribution of log income 1940 census

0

2

4
6
Log of Annual Income in 1939
Accepted
Rejected

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1698

40

8

10

