                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHEN DOES REGULATION DISTORT COSTS? LESSONS FROM FUEL PROCUREMENT
                  IN U.S. ELECTRICITY GENERATION

                                               Steve Cicala

                                         Working Paper 20109
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20109


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014




I am grateful to Joseph Aldy, Thomas Covert, Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Tim Ganser, Matthew
Gentzkow, Edward Glaeser, Joshua Gottlieb, David Hémous, William Hogan, Richard Hornbeck,
Lawrence Katz, Greg Lewis, Morten Olsen, Ariel Pakes, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Robert Stavins,
Ariel Dora Stern, Richard Sweeney, Andrew Waxman, Stan Veuger and two anonymous referees for
helpful comments and suggestions. I also benefited from the comments of seminar participants at Harvard,
The EEE session of the 2013 NBER Summer Institute, UC Energy Institute, The Northeast Workshop
on Energy Policy and Environmental Economics, The University of Chicago, The American Enterprise
Institute, Resources for the Future, George Mason, IESE, UC-Irvine, and Arizona State. Jacob Bournazian
at the Energy Information Administration provided instrumental help with data access. This work
has been reviewed by EIA to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed. All errors remain my own.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Steve Cicala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Does Regulation Distort Costs? Lessons from Fuel Procurement in U.S. Electricity
Generation
Steve Cicala
NBER Working Paper No. 20109
May 2014
JEL No. D24,D72,D82,L11,L43,L51,L94,L98,Q4,Q48

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates changes in fuel procurement practices by coal- and gas-fired power plants in
the United States following state-level legislation that ended cost-of-service regulation of electricity
generation. I find that deregulated plants substantially reduce the price paid for coal (but not gas),
and tend to employ less capital-intensive sulfur abatement techniques relative to matched plants that
were not subject to any regulatory change. Deregulation also led to a shift toward more productive
coal mines. I show how these results lend support to theories of asymmetric information, capital bias,
and regulatory capture as important sources of regulatory distortion.


Steve Cicala
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
scicala@uchicago.edu
1   Introduction
Under what conditions does cost-of-service regulation lead to the distortion of production
costs and methods? In this paper I identify three leading potential mechanisms from the
theoretical literature seeking to answer this question, and measure their importance in con-
tributing to distortions in fuel procurement and pollution abatement arising from cost-of-
service regulation of U.S. electricity generation.
    Under cost-of-service, regulators periodically audit utilities to determine a price of output
that will allow “prudently incurred” variable costs to be recovered, and while delivering a rate
of return that will attract investor ownership (Joskow (1974)). The “Averch-Johnson Effect”
(Averch and Johnson (1962)) predicts that a rate of return that exceeds the cost of capital
leads firms to adopt economically inefficient production techniques that are capital-biased. It
also becomes impossible to induce efficient cost-reducing effort when the regulator is unable
to observe effort to reduce costs and the cost of this effort (Laffont and Tirole (1986, 1993)).
Finally, fuel prices are predicted to exceed those prevailing under competition when special
interest groups (such as coal producers) influence the regulator’s decision on which costs to
allow (Stigler (1971); Peltzman (1976); Grossman and Helpman (2002)). These distortions
must be weighed against those prevailing in a deregulated environment where the potential
to exert market power exists.
    I compare the importance of the mechanisms hypothesized by these theories at natural
gas- and coal-fired electricity generating facilities following the end of cost-of-service regu-
lation in states that passed electricity industry restructuring legislation. By virtue of the
need to transmit via public thoroughfares, the production and sale of electricity has histor-
ically been regulated by state or municipal governments in the United States (Stigler and
Friedland (1962); Jarrell (1978)). When not owned by the government, electricity providers
have typically taken the form of vertically-integrated Investor-Owned Utilities (“Utilities” or
IOUs). IOUs own the generating plants, the transmission network, and exclusive licenses to
sell electricity in their respective service areas. In the mid to late 1990’s, state-level initia-
tives sought to restructure the electricity industry by transforming the rate-regulated IOUs
in to participants in a competitive market guided by private investment, procurement, and
production decisions. This required breaking up utilities so that owners of the transmission
network could not favor their own plants in the face of lower-cost competition. This was
often accomplished through divestiture, in which IOUs sold off their generating assets or
transferred them to unregulated affiliates. Once divested, power plant operators’ costs are
no longer subject to oversight by the state Public Utility Commission. Although all states
had at least held hearings to consider restructuring reforms by 2000, the California energy
crisis put a halt to any legislation that had not already passed (Fabrizio, Rose, and Wolfram

                                                1
(2007)). As a result, the regulation of electricity generators varies dramatically across states,
with over half of states virtually untouched by any reform.
    To measure changes induced by this deregulation, I construct a panel on the operations,
fuel costs, and regulatory status of all gas- and coal-fired electricity generating facilities in the
lower 48 states, responsible for roughly two-thirds of U.S. electricity generation.1 Although
many plants initially ceased reporting costs following divestiture–as is standard when cost-of-
service rules end–the Department of Energy’s Energy Information Administration asserted
its jurisdiction to collect data on fuel prices at deregulated plants beginning in 2002. This is
the first study to evaluate the impact of deregulation on costs using detailed, restricted-access
data from the post-divestiture period in U.S. electricity generation.
    I employ a matched Differences-in-Differences (DID) estimator in the spirit of Heckman,
Ichimura, Smith, and Todd (1998) to compare fuel prices and sulfur regulation compliance
strategies at similar divested and non-divested plants in close geographical proximity. The
estimation strategy relies on the assumption that fuel purchasing opportunities are identical
between “treatment” and “control” facilities after controlling for time-invariant differences.
Close proximity is therefore a critical element of the estimation strategy because coal trans-
portation costs are substantial, and have changed over time. I find that divested plants
reduce the price paid for coal by 12% relative to a counterfactual scenario in which their
operations had continued under cost-of-service regulation.
    A small fraction of this gain may be attributed to the fact that divested generating
units have been far more likely to have switched from bituminous to cheaper, low-sulfur
sub-bituminous coal.2 The opposite is true of regulated generating units, which have dispro-
portionately installed “scrubbers” as a means of compliance with sulfur emission regulations.
Since scrubbers are enormously expensive pieces of equipment3 , the fact that rate-regulated
units would opt for more capital-intensive methods to achieve compliance with environmental
regulations is consistent with the hypothesis of Averch and Johnson (1962).
    The drop in the cost of coal following divestiture does not reflect the universal ineffi-
ciency of regulation. Instead, I find that divestiture had no impact on the price of fuel paid
by gas-fired generators. These plants were owned by the same monopolistic IOUs operating
coal-fired units, and were subject to the same change in regulatory oversight. Differences in
   1
    “Gas” and “Natural Gas” both refer to a gaseous mixture of hydrocarbons (mostly methane) extracted
from underground deposits, and are used interchangeably.
   2
     Coal is classified by ’rank’, which refers to the purity of energy concentrated over millions of years of
exposure to heat and pressure. In decreasing order of energy content, they are: Anthracite (mostly in PA),
Bituminous (Central Appalachia), Sub-bituminous (WY, CO, UT), and Lignite (TX). About 90% of coal
burned for electricity generation in the United States is Bituminous or Sub-bituminous.
   3
     Capital costs vary by type of scrubber, but tend to be in the neighborhood of $400/kW of capacity
(EIA-923), compared to $1000-$1500/kW for a coal-fired plant in its entirety.



                                                      2
the markets for natural gas and coal lend support to agency-based theories that emphasize
the role of asymmetric information between firms and regulators as a source of distortion
under regulation. While gas is a homogeneous commodity traded in regional markets with
transparent prices, the market for coal is dominated by confidential bilateral contracts. In
addition, shipping from mines is costly and plants must be specifically tuned to the hetero-
geneous characteristics of the coal being burned. Regulators therefore have less information
on a coal-fired plant’s purchasing opportunities, and operators may justify expenses based
on idiosyncrasies of their location and equipment. It is clear, however, that these justifica-
tions become less important when generators become the residual claimants of cost savings
through divestiture.
     To evaluate the importance of regulatory capture on distorting procurement decisions, I
confine my analysis to the set of plants that were burning coal sourced in-state during the pre-
divestiture period. Coal producers are hypothesized to have greater influence over regulators
in the states in which their mines (and jobs) are located. I find that divested facilities
in these areas increase their out-of-state purchases by about 25% relative to matched non-
divested facilities in coal-producing states, suggesting that regulation was an impediment to
efficient procurement. I also find evidence suggesting that local coal has had some success in
protecting their operations, as price reductions in these areas are mostly confined to plants
that switched to burning low-sulfur coal.
     I then connect my data on coal purchases to detailed data on mining cost determinants
in the counties of origin. This allows me to decompose the extent to which these changes are
driven by a reallocation of rents between mines and utilities, as opposed to real social welfare
gains. I find that divested plants buy coal from mines with substantially lower extraction
cost profiles: the mined coal seams are about 30% thicker and 50% closer to the surface than
coal purchased by matched facilities. In total, divested plants purchase coal that requires
∼ 25% less labor to extract from the ground at mines that pay 5% higher wages.
     Aside from any conclusions that may be drawn regarding the wider debates on the merits
of government intervention in the economy,4 the sheer scale of the coal-fired electricity sector
makes these results of independent interest. Over 40% of electricity in the United States is
derived from coal, and fuel accounts for about 80% of variable costs (Fabrizio, Rose, and
Wolfram (2007)). A 12% reduction in fuel prices at the coal-fired facilities that have already
   4
     A form of cost-of-service has recently been implemented in health care under the “80/20 rule” of the
Affordable Care Act. This rule requires that insurance companies reimburse their customers for any revenues
exceeding a set percentage above medical expenditures. As opposed to regulation in the electricity sector, in
which variable costs are simply passed through, this rule means that insurance companies can only raise their
profits by spending more on medical care. My results suggest the notorious opacity of costs and political
activity in this sector does not bode well for the anticipated cost-savings from recent health care reform
legislation.


                                                     3
been divested amounts to about one billion dollars per year. These facilities account for
roughly one quarter of U.S. coal-fired generating capacity; the remaining facilities have not
undergone any major changes in regulatory structure.
    The structure of the paper is as follows: in the next section I describe the process of
divestiture in the United States, and the institutional details that will facilitate estimation.
The third section describes the theoretical bases for how cost of service regulation might
distort costs, yielding a set of predictions to bring to the data. The fourth section details the
estimation strategy, and the fifth section describes the data that I will bring to bear on the
question. The sixth and seventh sections discuss the results and the associated welfare gains.
The final section concludes. There are two appendices. The Theory Appendix provides
a more detailed treatment of the model outlined in the text, capturing the hypothesized
mechanisms in a unified framework. Details on the various data sources used in this study
are contained in the Data Appendix.
2   Background on the U.S. Electricity Industry
Operations under Cost of Service Regulation
The market for electricity was chaotic and competitive in its early years due to duplicative,
non-exclusive franchises granted by municipalities (Jarrell (1978)). At the turn of the 20th
century, improvements in economies of scale of generation and transmission led to widespread
consolidation in the industry. State governments responded to this consolidation by asserting
themselves over municipalities to regulate the operations of electricity companies in their
respective states. Under the subsequent form of regulation, utilities have been granted
exclusive licenses to sell electricity in their service territories in exchange for being subject to
oversight of their operations and the rates they are permitted to charge customers. IOUs are
guaranteed recovery of ‘prudent’ costs incurred, as well as a pre-determined rate of return
on the value of the utility’s capital base. All major investments can only be undertaken with
the approval of the state’s Public Utility Commission. The prices an IOU is permitted to
charge are determined during ‘rate hearings’. These costly, politically charged affairs entail
an intensive audit of the utility’s costs, operations, and demand projections in order to justify
a change in the pricing formula for electricity.
    Kahn (1971) argues that the regulatory lag between rate hearings leads many utilities to
reduce costs between adjustments so as to reap profits during periods of fixed output price.
After oil price spikes in the 1970’s, many state commissions allowed IOUs to implement
automatic pass-through clauses for fuel costs since intermittent rate cases could not keep up
with the rise in the IOU outlays. Once the adjustment formula is set, IOUs are guaranteed
recovery of their fuel costs without further oversight.


                                                 4
    There are two additional types of facilities that deserve mention. An early effort to reduce
the cost of electricity during the Carter Administration led to the Public Utility Regulatory
Policy Act of 1978 (PURPA). PURPA made it (marginally) easier for non-utility generating
facilities to sell power to regulated entities in an attempt to remove barriers to entry in the
industry. This was followed by the Energy Policy Act of 1992, which sought to remove some
of the obstacles non-utilities faced when seeking transmission service from the IOUs who
owned the wires. These reforms stimulated limited entry from non-utility generators, mostly
co-generating facilities that also provided steam for industrial purposes (Joskow (2005)).5
    The final class of operators are federal, municipal, and cooperative organizations. These
organizations produce about 20% of the nation’s electricity (mostly in rural areas), and
have made up about 20% of U.S. coal-fired capacity since at least 1990. Public Utility
Commissions do not have jurisdiction to regulate these entities since they are owned either
by the government or their members. Facilities owned by either non-utilities or not-for-profits
were not subject to divestiture, and therefore do not experience operational or regulatory
changes during the period of study.
Restructuring and Divestiture
In spite of the successful deregulation of U.S. telecommunications (Olley and Pakes (1996)),
airlines (Kahn (1987); Ng and Seabright (2001)), railroads (McFarland (1989); Ellig (2002)),
and trucking (Rose (1987)), electricity was thought to be different. The fact that vertically
integrated utilities owned both the generation assets and the wires meant that a deregulated
firm would be able to shut out competition from other producers. Markets in electricity
could also be vulnerable to the exercise of market power since electricity production must
match demand in every moment in time–the impossibility of storage and high costs of plant
construction means raises the risk that a firm can unilaterally withhold capacity to drive up
prices with impunity.
    Joskow and Schmalensee (1988) was groundbreaking in that their evaluation of the elec-
tricity industry confronted these challenges directly, and suggested a set of policy options
that would facilitate the transition to a restructured market. Among these policies was that
vertically-integrated IOUs divest their generation assets to prevent owners of transmission
networks from favoring their own plants. Instead, generators would be required to bid their
capacity in day-ahead and real-time auctions, and would only be dispatched if their bid was
below that of the marginal unit required to meet demand. This change transferred control
of transmission networks to independent system operators in order to become participants
in regional markets. Once divested, plant operators bear the full cost of their procurement
  5
    Less than 2% of coal-fired capacity belong to this class of power plants. The mid-2000’s saw more
substantial entry in the form of gas-fired non-utility generators.


                                                 5
          Figure 1: Coal-Fired Plants in The United States, 1990-2009




                                                                         (     (
                                                                              ((                    ( (
                    !!
                     (                                                         ((                           (       (
                                                                 !                            (
                           !
                           (                                !
                                                                                             (      ((
                                                                     !
                                                                     (
                                                                                                     ((
                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                       ((
                                                                                                               !( (
                                                                                                                    !(
                                                                                                  (        ( !
                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                           !    (   !!
                                                                                                                     (          ( !(
                                                                                                                     (                       !! !(             !!
                                                                                                             ( !         !
                                                                                                                ( ! (     ( (      !                           ((
                                                                     (                                  ( ! (    !
                                                                                                                 (!  ! ( !         (               !!
                                                                                                     ( (!!(!
                                                                                             (                       (                      !                 ! !
                                                    (   (             (
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                              (      !!
                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                       !     !
                                                                                                                             ( ! !
                                                                                                                                 ( !(! !
                                                                                                                                 (    !     (
                                                                                                                                            !         !
                                                                                             ((
                                                                                                        !  !!
                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                            (!(  !  ! ((
                                                                                                                       (         !  ! !                     !! !
                                                                                                                                                            !
                                  (                             ((    (        (        (
                                                                                        (   ( (
                                                                                               (        ( (
                                                                                                           ! !!! !(( !               !(!
                                                                                                                                     ( !!!!!
                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                        (! !!
                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                               ! !  ! ! !
                                                        (            (( (                                    !! (    !   !(( !
                                                                                                                             ((( !(! ! (!
                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                        ( !
                                                                                                                                          !         ! !!!(!
                                                                                                   ( !
                                                 (                                               (              ! !   (!                 !(
                                                                                                                                          !          ! !!
                                               ( (
                                                 (          (                                 ((((
                                                                                                 ((     (
                                                                                                        !     ! ! !! !   (            (
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                     (!
                                                                                                                                      (  !
                                                                                                                                         (( ( !!!!
                                                                                                                                           (!             !
                                                                                                                                ( !
                                                                                                   (     (( (!        (      (( ( (
                                                            (
                                                                      (
                                                                      (                           ((        !!(
                                                                                                              (! !
                                                                                                              (      (!
                                                                                                                      !( !
                                                                                                                       (     ((
                                                                                                                            ((
                                                                                                                           ( (((   ( ((          !(!! !
                                                                       (       (                                 !(  !
                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                     !!!
                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                      (!!
                                                                                                                        (  !
                                                                                                                           (  (               !(
                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                (                                                (( ( (         ( !
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                  (    !
                                                                                                                       ((     (     (   (
                                                                                                                                             !(
                                                                                                                                                 (  !
                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                    !(
                                         (                  (                               ( (( (              !
                                                                                                                ( !
                                                                                                                    (( ( (( ( (((         ! !
                                                                                                                                           (!
                                                                                                                                            ((
                                         (          ( (
                                                             (                 !
                                                                               (
                                                                                                (         !(
                                                                                                              (            (
                                                                                                                                   ( (( ( (
                                                                                                (                  (          (      (
                                                      (                      !
                                                                             (      !     (                             ((
                                                                                                                     ((( (       ( ( ( (
                                                                                          !(
                                                                                                                     (   ( (( ( ((((
                                                                                                                                   ((
                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                            (
                                                 ((                                     !
                                                                                            !
                                                                                            ((
                                                                                            ! !(
                                                                                                                   (             (
                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                       !!                       ( ((       (
                                                                                      !!(
                                                                                              !
                                                                                              (                  (( ( ( (       (
                                                                                    !
                                                                                    (
                                                                                      !( !                                    ((
                                                                                    !
                                                                                    ( !                                       (
                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                              ((

                  Legend
                    !      Divested Plants
                    (      IOU/Gov/Muni/Coop

                    !      Matched Plants




decisions. Units that purchase relatively expensive fuel would be forced to raise their bids
in wholesale markets, and therefore become less likely to be called upon to operate.
    Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of these reforms with respect to coal-fired
electricity stations in the United States that report fuel deliveries between 1990 and 2009.6
Although divestiture policies precluded the possibility of IOUs cream-skimming from their
best plants, it is clear that neither coal-fired plants nor restructuring reforms were randomly
spread across the country. Almost all coal production and consumption occurs to the east
of the Rocky Mountains. At the time many coal-fired plants were built, most coal consumed
by electric facilities in the United States was the high-sulfur, bituminous variety from the
central Appalachian mountains and Illinois basin. In spite of the high cost of shipping coal
relative to transmitting the derived power by wire, the establishment of exclusive service
areas by IOUs ensured local utilities would not be competed out of the market by producers
in the Ohio River Valley. This is one source of the price differential in electricity across areas
that motivated restructuring legislation. Another major driver of restructuring legislation
was the gap between retail and industrial electricity prices (White (1996)). States with larger
   6
     States that restructured, but do not have coal-fired generating assets reporting cost data include Califor-
nia, Washington, DC, Maine, and Rhode Island. New Hampshire introduced retail choice, but did not require
divestiture of generating assets. A more detailed discussion of the state-by-state history of divestitures can
be found in the Data Appendix.



                                                                                            6
gaps were more likely to restructure due to the perception that retail consumers were getting
a raw deal relative to industrial buyers.
    Restructuring legislation was first passed in the Northeastern states and California in
the mid-1990s. The movement had gained sufficient momentum by 1998 that every state in
the union had at least held hearings on the prospective gains from deregulation (Fabrizio,
Rose, and Wolfram (2007)). This momentum dissipated quickly in the wake of the California
electricity crisis of 2000-2001, leading several states who had made significant progress in the
direction of restructuring to delay or cancel planned reforms (Joskow (2005)). No state has
passed restructuring legislation since this time: fairly or not, restructuring is popularly asso-
ciated with the spectacular failure in California, and a lack of significant offsetting benefits
to consumers (Kwoka (2008)).7 As noted by Joskow (2006), “Even the Cato Institute has
lost patience with competitive reforms in electricity and appears to see merit in returning to
the good old days of regulated vertically integrated utilities (Van Doren and Taylor (2004)).”
    That said, the states that had already restructured before the California crisis have
not returned to the model of vertically-integrated IOUs. The perils of liberalized electric-
ity markets have received significant scrutiny in the wake of the California electricity crisis
(Borenstein, Bushnell, and Wolak (2002); Borenstein (2002); Bushnell, Mansur, and Savaria
(2007); Mansur (2001, 2008)), and adjustments have been made to promote wholesale elec-
tricity markets that function reasonably well (Mansur and White (2009)). Recent work has
also shown that restructuring is associated with more productive nuclear generating facilities
(Davis and Wolfram (2012)), and declines in labor and non-fuel costs (Fabrizio, Rose, and
Wolfram (2007)).8 The market for electricity in the United States is therefore characterized
by a patchwork of regulatory structures that are separated by state borders and/or historical
service area boundaries.
3       Sources of Regulatory Imperfection
To explore the possible mechanisms that can explain changes in firm behavior following
deregulation, it is helpful to consider the main hypotheses posed in the theoretical literature
on regulation-induced distortions. To do so, I consider a setting in which a firm can reduce
the price paid for inputs by exerting cost-reducing effort. The fixed cost of this effort is
    7
     Borenstein, Bushnell, and Wolak (2002) find that the price of electricity would have tripled between
1998 and 2000 based on rising input costs alone. Although there were a number of factors that contributed
to the crisis (including the exercise of market power), it was most certainly exacerbated by the fact that
retail prices were fixed while wholesale prices were skyrocketing. This led generators to withhold capacity
due to doubts of receiving compensation, not the exercise of market power. See Joskow (2001) for a detailed
discussion of the history of the California electricity crisis.
   8
     Fabrizio, Rose, and Wolfram (2007) as well as concurrent work by Chan, Fell, Lange, and Li (2012)
define treatment as the time between law passage and divestiture because post-divestiture data on costs has
not been utilized prior to this study.


                                                    7
compensated with a rate of return on capital that exceeds the cost, and the regulator is able
to punish the firm for insufficient effort by refusing to reimburse costs deemed excessive.
In a key departure from the agency literature, I leave the regulator’s objective function
unspecified. Rather than derive the optimal policy for the regulator, I am instead interested
with how regulation affects the set of feasible policies. The reason for this approach is two-
fold: it is sufficiently flexible to allow for consideration of different theories of regulatory
inefficiency in a common framework, and it results in a set of hypotheses that can be taken
to the data on firm behavior without having already assumed the nature of the regulator’s
objective. The interested reader is referred to the online Theory Appendix for a more detailed
exposition.
    Suppose generating facilities produce electricity by combining fuel (F ) and capital (K)
according to the quasi-concave production function G(F, K)–labor is a small share of gen-
eration costs and is ignored. Let p denote the per-unit compensation received by plant
operators, whose determination will depend upon the regulatory environment. Plants must
exert managerial effort to solicit bids, negotiate contracts, etc. and that this effort reduces
the price paid for coal according to c = β − e where e ∈ [0, β]. Effort is itself costly, and
reduces profits according to a strictly increasing, convex function ψ(e), ψ 0 (e) > 0, ψ 00 (e) > 0.
    Letting R(F, K) = p[G(F, K)]G(F, K) and r denote revenues of a firm that may be
exerting market power and the rental rate of capital, respectively, in the absence of regulation
the firm maximizes

                             max R(F, K) − (β − e)F − rK − ψ(e)                                 (1)
                             e,F,K

    In this standard setting, the firm will equate the value-marginal product of inputs to
their respective costs, and the marginal cost of effort to its marginal benefit–the volume of
fuel consumed. This means that fuel prices will be higher when the firm exerts market power
relative to a perfectly competitive output market.
    Under “cost-plus” regulation, variable costs are reimbursed only if the regulator deems
them “prudent” and the plant receives a rate of return s > r on its capital stock, or “rate
base” that exceeds the cost of capital. The regulator is unable to directly observe cost-
reducing effort, and instead decides whether or not to allow fuel expenditures based only on
the reported price, c. Let θ(β − e) denote the probability that the regulator allows recovery
of costs c. The firm therefore maximizes (1) subject to the constraint that revenues are no




                                                 8
greater than allowed costs:9

                                 R(F, K) ≤ θ(β − e)[β − e]F + sK

    The revenue constraint combined with the wedge between the cost and return on capital
is the source of the seminal hypothesis of Averch and Johnson (1962): instead of equating
the relative marginal product of capital to the relative price, cost-plus recovery implies
                                                     
                           GK      r           λ s−r         r
                              =          1−             <
                           GF   (β − e)     (1 − λ) r     (β − e)

    where λ ∈ (0, 1) is the Lagrange multiplier on the revenue constraint, and we have
assumed certain cost recovery for the moment (see the online Theory Appendix). Production
is therefore expected to be inefficiently capital-biased in order to exploit the gap between
capital cost and return under cost-of-service regulation. Guaranteed cost recovery also leads
to inefficiently high fuel prices because allowed revenues are directly tied to costs through
the revenue constraint. While the plant bears the full cost of search effort, it only reaps
benefits at rate (1 − λ).
    In the agency-theoretic approach, the regulator removes the unconditional guarantee of
recovered costs in order to induce the plant to undertake the desired level of cost reduction
effort and production. This is a relatively straightforward task when there is no uncertainty
on intrinsic costs, β (i.e. the cost of fuel when no effort is exerted): the regulator approves
the costs that maximize her objective function, and denies compensation otherwise. The
plant’s best response is to comply with the regulator’s wishes so long as the resulting profits
are non-negative.
    Of course, potential costs are often unobserved by the regulator, who makes decisions
in the context of political pressure. Thus the interaction between regulators and firms has
become a key area of interest in principal-agent theory (Baron and Myerson (1982); Laffont
and Tirole (1986) and meticulously detailed in Laffont and Tirole (1993)). The workhorse
model of modern political economy (Grossman and Helpman (2002)) adopts the principal-
agent framework, and considers the influence of special interest groups as an argument in
the regulator’s objective function. From the plant’s perspective, the common theme of these
   9
     Joskow (1974) argues that while regulators may use this constraint for setting nominal prices at formal
rate hearings, firms are actually able to earn any rate of return so long as prices are not rising during
intermediate periods. Jha (2012) extends this intuition in a model in which excess profits are confiscated,
but imprudent expenditures are punished, inducing a form of risk aversion among regulated utilities. The
widespread adoption of automatic fuel adjustment clauses in the late 1970’s effectively re-coupled revenues
and costs in the manner implied by the rate of return constraint. Imprudent costs may be rejected in the
spirit of Jha (2012) through θ(β − e).



                                                     9
models is that the probability of recovering expenses depends in some way on reported costs.
In choosing a profit-maximizing level of effort, the firm trades off the direct reduction of
allowed revenue due to lower costs, and the increased probability of having costs allowed.
     In the case of asymmetric information, the regulator must adopt a strategy of approving
costs without observing effort or intrinsic costs. Suppose β can take on any value on the
interval [β, β] with some positive probability. Let c = β − e∗ (β) denote the costs realized
when firms with intrinsic costs β exert the level of effort that would be optimal in an unreg-
ulated environment e∗ (β), and similarly for c. While it is possible for the regulator to induce
efficient outcomes over some range of β (see the Theory Appendix), this becomes infeasible
as the unobserved heterogeneity grows sufficiently large so that it is no longer possible to
punish higher costs while preserving solvency. It is important to note that this is due to the
variance of unobserved heterogeneity (not levels of costs), and holds for any regulator objec-
tive function. We therefore expect to see larger changes in fuel prices following deregulation
when it is difficult for the regulator to induce efficient cost-reducing effort due sufficiently
large cost heterogeneity in the presence of asymmetric information.
     In this framework it is possible to consider the influence of special interest groups (local
coal mines in this setting) by supposing that the regulator approves fuel costs according to
θ(c, b) where b represents the influence of the mines, perhaps via campaign contributions as
in Grossman and Helpman (2002). In this case we can express the effect of this influence on
                            ∂2θ
allowed costs as ∂θ∂b
                      > 0; ∂b∂c ≥ 0 – contributions raise the probability of allowing high fuel
costs, and reduce the punishment for marginally reducing effort. This yields the intuitive
result that optimal search effort is declining in outside influence.
     We have therefore derived a core set of predictions to test against the data. The price of
fuel is expected to remain constant after divestiture when determinants of cost are readily
observable by a regulator who is operating relatively freely of political constraints imposed by
fuel suppliers, and the firm is unable to exert market power. Conversely, both opacity in the
procurement process and political influence tend to raise input prices above levels observed by
plants operating in a competitive market. Working against these forces is the potential that
prices might rise if market power considerations lead firms to substantially reduce output.
Finally, divested plants are anticipated to favor less capital-intensive production methods
than when they are compensated based on the value of their capital stock.
4   Estimation Strategy
To estimate the impact of plant divestiture on coal procurement practices, one would ide-
ally like to randomly assign treatment (divestiture) to observationally equivalent plants in
close proximity. The control plants would continue operating under cost-of-service. With


                                               10
random assignment, these plants would serve as a clean counterfactual for the operations of
the divested plants, allowing causal inference to be made. Forced divestitures triggered by
state-level restructuring legislation has ensured that probability of treatment within state is
uncorrelated with potential confounders. Complete divestiture of all IOU generating assets
guaranteed regulated utilities were not left operating the least desirable plants in their port-
folio, for example. However, it is clear from Figure 1 that restructuring legislation was not
randomly assigned across states.
    With a panel of data on costs and plant characteristics, one could potentially account
for the differences between treatment and control groups with a Differences-In-Differences
estimator (DID, Ashenfelter (1978) and Ashenfelter and Card (1985)). This is the approach
taken by Bushnell and Wolfram (2005), Davis and Wolfram (2012), and Chan, Fell, Lange,
and Li (2012) when studying the effect of divestiture on plant efficiency. A DID framework
with plant-level fixed effects assumes that once permanent, plant-specific determinants of
cost have been removed, coal prices at control facilities track the counterfactual prices at
treatment facilities. This assumption is problematic in settings where unobserved or endoge-
nous time-varying determinants of the outcome variable differ between treatment and control
groups. In the case of coal procurement, the combination of substantial shipping costs and
wide geographic dispersion of plants between treatment and control groups suggests that a
straightforward DID estimation would be inappropriate.
    Other possible approaches include use of a propensity score (Rosenbaum and Rubin
(1983)) based on control variables, or the synthetic control group approach of Abadie and
Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010), who match on pre-
treatment outcome variables. Again, the potential confounders in this setting render such
approaches problematic. For the propensity score, one would clearly want to include geo-
graphic coordinates as key covariates that determine both the outcome and the probability
of treatment. Unfortunately, a spatial mapping of propensity scores–even based on coordi-
nates alone–produces an essentially nonsensical function for even high-order polynomials. It
is simply not possible to produce a meaningful propensity score function that fits the map
of divested facilities observed in the data. The synthetic control approach is problematic
because a facility in Chicago may be matched with a facility in Atlanta that receives its coal
from West Virginia based on pre-treatment data because they are roughly equidistant to the
mines. The plant in Atlanta, however, is a poor counterfactual for the relative prices of coal
ranks in Chicago, which is much closer to the Powder River Basin in Wyoming. They may
have identical prices at baseline, but face different choice sets unrelated to treatment status.
    Instead, I compare facilities in close proximity that burned the same rank of coal in 1997,



                                              11
before divestitures began.10 More formally, suppose we have N plants indexed i ∈ {1, ..., N }
so that plants i ∈ {1, ..., N0 }, N0 < N are never divested, but those with i ∈ {N0 + 1, ..., N }
eventually are. There are T time periods indexed t ∈ {1, ..., T }, and T0 pre-treatment time
periods with 1 < T0 < T . Using the ‘Potential Outcomes’ framework popularized by Rubin
(1974), let Yit (0) denote the price of coal per MMBTU paid by a non-divested facility i in
period t. Similarly, let Yit (1) denote a facility that has been divested. Suppose fuel costs at
non-divested facilities are
                                  Yit (0) = γi + δt + ct (Xi , 0) + νit

    where ct (Xi , 0) represents a time-varying procurement cost function that depends on
facility i’s location Xi (a richer set of pre-treatment covariates is possible), and regulatory
status. Suppose that divestiture induces procurement cost ct (X i , 1), but that time invariant
costs γi are unaffected by regulatory status (an example would be “last mile” costs that are
idiosyncratic to the plant). Then coal prices at divested facilities can be written as

                              Yit (1) = Yit (0) + [ct (Xi , 1) − ct (Xi , 0)]
                                       = Yit (0) + τt (Xi )

where τt (Xi ) represents the relative procurement cost between being divested and regulated
at location Xi in period t. The observed fuel price at plant i in period t is therefore

                                        Yit = Yit (0) + τt (Xi )Dit

where                                    
                                         1 if i > N and t > T
                                                    0          0
                                   Dit =
                                         0 otherwise.

    The difficulty in estimation is that only control facilities in close proximity to Xi are suit-
able to serve as counterfactuals for the price Yit (0), and only after permanent facility-specific
differences and common transitory shocks have been taken into account. The estimation
strategy employed is similar to the conditional DID estimator of Heckman, Ichimura, Smith,
and Todd (1998), but matches on geographic proximity and binary baseline characteristics
(rank of coal burned), rather than the propensity score.
    As in the matching literature (Dehejia and Wahba (1999); Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd
  10
     The variance in heat, sulfur, and ash content across rank is much greater than within rank, so switching
across ranks requires more costly adjustments than the tuning needed to switch suppliers within rank. The
procurement options available to two plants in close proximity are likely to overlap when they burn the same
rank of coal.



                                                     12
(1997)), let 1 {} denote an indicator function that evaluates to one if the statement in braces
is true, and let Di ≡ max{Dit } denote treatment group, and lm (i) be the index of facilities
with Dl 6= Di and
                             X
                                   1 {kXj − Xi k 6 kXl − Xi k} = m                          (2)
                              j|Dj 6=Di

    Equation (2) identifies the m closest facilities of the opposite treatment group according
to the norm metric k  k. I match exactly on the most common rank of coal (bituminous, sub-
bituminous, or other) burned at baseline, then based on geographic proximity. An alternative
approach is to match all facilities j with a caliper on distance, kXj − Xi k < d, rather than
based on a fixed number of matches. Results will be shown to be robust to the choice of
matching metric. With a (possibly unbalanced) panel, it is possible to estimate τt (Xi ) with
a DID estimator applied to facilities i and the m facilities whose distance from Xi satisfies
(2):
                                Yit = γi + δt + τt (Xi )Dit + εit

    The average treatment effect on the treated, τ = E[τt (Xi )|D = 1] can be estimated by
taking the average over the divested facilities of the derived τ̂t (Xi ), or more efficiently,11 by
pooling the data of the divested facilities and their nearest neighbors in a single fixed-effects
DID estimation, that weighs each matched control facility by the inverse of the number of
matches to facility i in period t, then clusters standard errors at the facility level.
    Figure 2 shows the distribution of distance between divested and matched facilities under
three potential thresholds. All facilities but one have at least a single match within 200 miles.
All results based on matching the m closest non-divested facilities constrain the search radius
to 200 miles–beyond this point diminishes the quality of the counterfactual without much
gain in terms of broadening the sample. Estimates based on various search radii show that
the results are not particularly sensitive to this choice of cut-off. Constraining the sample
to these matches yields the set of non-divested facilities shown with grey-filled markers in
Figure 1. It is clear that this estimation strategy is not well suited to estimating an average
treatment effect for all U.S. plants, as the facilities in South-East, Upper Mid-West, and
South-West are all hundreds of miles from the nearest divested facility. It is therefore not
possible to estimate a credible counterfactual of how these non-divested plants would have
operated if they had been subject to divestiture with this econometric framework.
    This estimation strategy compares plants just across state lines, or within the same state,
  11
     Technically one would want to include separate time effects for each Xi . This increases the number
of parameters by T (N −N0 ) to reduce a component of the error term that is orthogonal to the treatment
parameter due to the balance between treatment and matched control units. Severe collinearity of proximate
time effects also introduces nonsingularity to the variance matrix when jointly estimated. For these reasons
all estimates are based on a common set of time dummies.


                                                    13
         Figure 2: Distance Between Divested and Matched Facilities

                                                   m=1                                                     m=5




                                                                                   150
                       25
                10 15 20
               Frequency




                                                                                Frequency
                                                                               50     100
                       5
                       0




                                                                                   0
                                    0   200      400    600       800   1000                0   200      400    600       800   1000
                                          Miles to Matched Facility                               Miles to Matched Facility


                                                  m=10
               50 100 150 200 250
                  Frequency
                       0




                                    0   200      400    600       800   1000
                                          Miles to Matched Facility




but exempted from restructuring due to public/cooperative ownership. This introduces the
potential for confounding if restructuring were adopted as part of a broader deregulatory
movement in these states that might affect fuel prices. To account for this possibility, Table
C.5 in the Online Appendix reproduces the core results while including quadratic, state-
specific trends without a statistically significant impact on the coefficients.
    A second concern regards the inclusion of Government/Municipal/Co-op-owned plants as
potential controls. Although Gov/Muni/Coop plants do not face any changes in regulatory
oversight during this period of time, it is not obvious that the incentives facing operators
of these plants would parallel those of IOUs, a necessary condition to use these facilities to
form a counterfactual for divested plants. This is a testable assumption, and Figure C.1 of
the Online Appendix does so using the matching methodology developed in this section with
m = 10. The difference between the two groups is statistically significant for one month over
twenty years, and they follow nearly identical paths aside from a brief convergence in 2002.
This suggests that Gov/Muni/Coop plants nearby divested facilities perform equally well as
IOU facilities to estimate the counterfactual prices that would have prevailed in the absence
of divestiture. The Appendix provides an additional check by running the main specifications
without these plants. As with state-specific trends, the coefficients are a percent or two lower,
but not statistically different than those presented below.
    A final caveat that must be mentioned in the discussion of this methodology is the
potential for bias due to violation of the stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA).

                                                                           14
The plants that serve to form counterfactual estimates are participants in common markets
(for coal and emissions, for example) with treated plants. It is therefore critical to interpret
the estimated coefficients with an eye toward how the behavior of divested plants may have
affected the decisions made by the control units.
5   Data
This study utilizes a detailed and comprehensive panel dataset I have constructed from a
combination of publicly-available and restricted-access data on the operations of the U.S.
electricity sector from 1990-2009. Data on fuel expenditures, generating unit configurations,
plant operations and regulatory status are from the Department of Energy’s Energy Informa-
tion Administration (EIA), and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). Data
on the mines from which coal is sourced is from the Mine Safety and Health Administration
(MSHA), the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
The Data Appendix describes each of the constituent elements in greater detail. Instead,
this section focuses on describing the data in the context of potential threats to the validity
of the proposed estimation strategy.
Plant-Level Characteristics
Table 1 presents summary statistics of plant characteristics by treatment group. Panel A
includes all facilities that report coal receipts in 1997. While divested plants are a few
years older, the only substantial difference between the two groups is the likelihood of being
subject to an Incentive Regulation program, a common precursor to restructuring. Panel B
weights the data from non-divested plants in proportion to the number of divested plants
matched for m = 10, subject to the constraint that plants be within 200 miles. Matching
removes two-thirds of the non-divested plants from the sample, but only one divested facility
is without any matches meeting this criteria. The high degree of balance between the two
groups is consistent with the history of power plant construction. Generating capacity is
closely related to economic activity, which is spatially correlated. It therefore makes sense
that areas that grew together in the middle of the 20th century made similar decisions to
expand their generation capacity. Again, the exception is exposure to Incentive Regulation,
which is consistent with the relationship with eventual restructuring. The fact that divested
plants were disproportionately already attempting to reduce costs suggest findings may be
somewhat biased against subsequent cost reductions.
    It is important to note that entry and attrition of coal-fired plants was rare during the
sample period, and are unlikely to be sources of bias. Stringent environmental regulations
on new boilers combined with high capital costs have made new coal plant construction
largely uneconomical. In total, 96% of coal heat in 2009 was delivered to plants reporting in

                                              15
   Table 1: Characteristics of Divested and Non-Divested Plants in 1997

          A. All Facilities
                                     Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
          Capacity (MW)                 799.79       797.48                 2.32
                                      [671.86]     [730.74]             (82.63)
          Annual Capacity                  0.59         0.57                0.02
          Factor                         [0.19]       [0.18]              (0.02)
          Plant Vintage               1961.99      1964.72               –2.73*
                                       [10.92]      [13.53]               (1.39)
          % Scrubbers                      0.25         0.32               –0.07
          Installed                      [0.44]       [0.47]              (0.05)
          Incentive                        0.44         0.15            0.29***
          Regulation Util.               [0.50]       [0.36]              (0.06)
          Facilities                         88          309                 397

          B. Matched Facilities
                                     Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
          Capacity (MW)                 803.95       648.72              155.23
                                      [674.61]     [657.66]            (119.86)
          Annual Capacity                  0.59         0.55                0.04
          Factor                         [0.19]       [0.22]              (0.05)
          Plant Vintage               1962.14      1962.91                 –0.78
                                       [10.90]      [14.04]               (2.20)
          % Scrubbers                      0.25         0.26               –0.01
          Installed                      [0.44]       [0.44]              (0.08)
          Incentive                        0.45         0.07            0.38***
          Regulation Util.               [0.50]       [0.25]              (0.06)
          Facilities                         87          101                 188
          Note: Non-Divested facilities in Panel B receive weight 1/mj for each matched
          divested facility j. Matching criterion: m = 10 burning the same rank of coal in
          1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Standard
          errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


1990 (slightly more after accounting for the non-reporting of permanent non-utilities prior
to 2002). As a fraction of plants, 92% of plants reporting in 2009 also reported in 1990.
For attrition, the combination of high entry costs with the high value from operating during
periods of peak demand justifies maintenance costs at most aging facilities. 94% of plants
operating in 1990 continued to report fuel deliveries in 2009. The plants that closed tended
to be small and rarely used–as a group they accounted for less than 2% of the heat delivered
in 1990.



                                                 16
Data on The Cost and Quality of Coal
This study uses detailed data on coal deliveries to power plants from the Energy Information
Administration (details can be found in the online Data Appendix). This is shipment-level
data, reported monthly for nearly all of the coal burned for the production of electricity in
the United States (all facilities with a combined capacity greater than 50MW are required to
report). Although data on prices is redacted from public release for non-utilities, restricted-
access data on prices was made available for this study under a non-disclosure agreement
with EIA.
    One critical caveat is that plants were no longer required to report to FERC upon di-
vestiture, and EIA did not assert their authority under the Federal Energy Administration
Act of 1974 to resume collection from non-utility plants until 2002. Plants that were sold
before 2002 therefore have a gap in reporting following divestiture. With most divestitures
occurring between 1999 and 2001, this results in a two year gap on average.
    Figure 3 shows how the delivered and mine-mouth nominal prices bituminous and sub-
bituminous coal have evolved over time. This figure again emphasizes the importance of
shipping costs, as the price of bituminous coal is nearly 50% higher upon delivery than at
the mine, and sub-bituminous prices more than double. This figure also shows a reason for
the increasing popularity of sub-bituminous coal, as the average delivered price has fallen
below the mine-mouth price for bituminous. While the delivered price depends on the spatial
distribution of selected plants, the crossing in the early 2000’s means that for plants that
switched, sub-bituminous was cheaper on average than bituminous coal, even for plants
located at a bituminous mine-mouth. After flat or declining prices through much of the
nineties, the delivered price of coal has roughly doubled for bituminous and increased by
about 50% for sub-bituminous coal over the last decade. Increases in mine-mouth prices
only account for about half of the rise in sub-bituminous prices, the rest is due to increased
shipping costs (both in terms of shipping rates and expanded delivery areas). Increases in
bituminous prices since 2003 are largely due to increased mining costs and international
demand.12 All told, expenditures on coal for generating electricity averaged about $23B
through most of the nineties, and has increased rapidly since 2002 to about $40B in 2009
(see Figure B.1b). Expenditures among divested facilities since reporting commenced in 2002
is about $8B per year on average.
    Table 2 presents summary statistics on the characteristics of coal deliveries reported to
FERC/EIA in 1997 (the final pre-divestiture year for all plants). As detailed in Joskow (1985,
1987, 1988), the market for coal is largely conducted through long-term bilateral contracts,
  12
    Crippling weather events in Chinese and Australian coal fields in 2007 led to a spike in demand for U.S.
bituminous coal, causing the price to rise nearly 50% (intra-year spikes were even higher).


                                                    17
              Figure 3: Coal Prices per MMBTU y Rank, 1990-2009




                       3
                       2.5
                Dollars per MMBTU
                 1     .5
                       0 1.5   2




                                    1990        1995               2000         2005            2010
                                                                   year

                                           Delivered Bituminous           Delivered Sub−Bituminous
                                           Mine−Mouth Bituminous          Mine−Mouth Sub−Bituminous


  Note: Mine-mouth prices from EIA Annual Energy Review (2011), Table 7.9 and converted to
  heat units using average heat content by year and rank as reported in Forms EIA-423,923 and
                                           FERC 423.

with supplemental demand procured on the “spot market,” which are themselves short-term
bilateral contracts in practice.13
    At baseline there are substantial differences in the characteristics of coal delivered to
divested and non-divested plants, though the volume of heat procured is similar. Many of
the differences in the characteristics of coal purchases between divested and non-divested
facilities are due to geographical dispersion, and are eliminated through matching. In fact,
there are no statistically significant differences between coal delivered to divested plants and
their matched counterparts.
    Since the estimation strategy relies on comparing changes over time, it is also important
to ensure that pre-existing trends are not responsible for the subsequent differences between
treatment and control units. Figure 4 examines the common pre-treatment period between
divested plants and their matched counterparts with m = 10. It provides encouraging
evidence that both treatment and control groups were following parallel paths throughout
the ’90s.14 It appears that the 12 cent premium paid in 1997 by IOU facilities that would
  13
     These contracts typically take the form of “base plus escalation”: initial prices are set to reflect cur-
rent market conditions, and the price subsequently rises or falls based on a producer price index for coal
production.
  14
     If one squints, there might be a slight narrowing of the gap around 1993, perhaps due to the introduction


                                                              18
Figure 4: Pre-Trend Test: Matching Estimates of Delivered Coal Price,
1990-1997



                     2
                     1.5
                   Cost
                    1.5
                     0




                      1990m1         1992m1            1994m1           1996m1               1998m1
                                                      Year−Month

                                     95% CI                        95% CI
                                     Divested Facilities           Not Divested Facilities


 Note: Non-Divested facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. Matching criteria:
 m = 10, burning the same rank of coal in 1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200
               miles. Confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility.


later be divested was a relatively constant feature of coal deliveries. It would be difficult
to attribute the decline in prices paid by divested facilities in subsequent periods to mean-
reversion, as there is no evidence that prices were moving in different directions before
divestiture.
Unit-Level Characteristics
Although coal deliveries are reported at the facility level, the decision to switch the rank of
coal burned or install a scrubber is unit-specific (a coal-fired “unit” typically consists of a
boiler connected to a generator, cooling and pollution abatement equipment). On average,
there are two to three coal-fired units operating per facility.
    Table 3 presents summary statistics on coal-fired unit characteristics, both nation-wide
and in the matched sample. The number of facilities here and those in the plant-level
analysis are slightly different due to reporting requirements at the unit-level. In addition, the
matching criteria at the unit-level also includes the presence of a scrubber. This is important
when estimating the differential probability of adding a scrubber after divestiture. This
additional matching requirement eliminates a handful of divested facilities, and about 25%
of incentive regulation programs.



                                                       19
of non-divested facilities. As with the plant-level data, matching removes any statistically-
significant differences between divested and non-divested units.




                                             20
Table 2: Characteristics of Coal Deliveries to Divested and Non-Divested
Plants in 1997
        A. All Facilities
                                Divested     Not Divested            Difference of Means
        Millions MMBTU              44.76            44.18                            0.58
        Delivered                 [42.78]          [43.01]                          (5.16)
        Price($/MMBTU)                1.42             1.20                       0.21***
                                    [0.37]           [0.37]                         (0.04)
        % Spot Market                 0.24             0.27                          –0.03
                                    [0.29]           [0.32]                         (0.04)
        Yrs to Contract               5.37             7.95                     –2.58***
        Expiry                      [6.19]           [7.21]                         (0.88)
        % Sourced                     0.41             0.30                        0.12**
        In-State                    [0.46]           [0.44]                         (0.05)
        % Bituminous                  0.76             0.62                        0.13**
                                    [0.42]           [0.46]                         (0.05)
        Sulfur Content                1.19             1.02                          0.17*
        (lbs/mmbtu)                 [0.72]           [0.81]                         (0.09)
        Ash Content                   8.67             8.03                           0.64
        (lbs/mmbtu)                 [4.83]           [4.15]                         (0.56)
        Mine Distance              318.10           364.92                         –46.82
        (mi.)                    [330.64]         [312.52]                        (39.38)
        Facilities                      88              309                            397

        B. Matched Facilities
                                  Divested Not Divested               Difference of Means
        Millions MMBTU                44.93           37.36                           7.57
        Delivered                   [43.00]         [37.48]                         (7.19)
        Price($/MMBTU)                  1.42            1.30                          0.12
                                      [0.37]          [0.34]                        (0.08)
        % Spot Market                   0.23            0.27                         –0.04
                                      [0.28]          [0.36]                        (0.06)
        Yrs to Contract                 5.42            7.42                         –2.00
        Expiry                        [6.23]          [7.92]                        (1.28)
        % Sourced                       0.41            0.40                          0.01
        In-State                      [0.46]          [0.45]                        (0.08)
        % Bituminous                    0.76            0.76                         –0.00
                                      [0.42]          [0.42]                        (0.07)
        Sulfur Content                  1.19            1.34                         –0.16
        (lbs/mmbtu)                   [0.73]          [0.87]                        (0.14)
        Ash Content                     8.56            9.45                         –0.89
        (lbs/mmbtu)                   [4.75]          [7.74]                        (1.38)
        Mine Distance                321.01          264.58                          56.43
        (mi.)                      [331.42]        [299.16]                        (47.52)
        Facilities                        87             101                           188
        Note: Non-Divested facilities in Panel B receive weight 1/mj for each matched
        divested facility j. Matching criterion: m = 10 burning the same rank of coal in
        1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Standard
        errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                 21
Table 3: Characteristics of Divested and Non-Divested Generating Units in
1997

      A. All Units
                               Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
      Boiler Vintage            1962.97      1965.25            –2.28***
                                 [10.65]      [12.43]               (0.84)
      Connected                   328.53       290.81              37.73*
      Nameplate (MW)            [265.07]     [268.24]             (20.27)
      Capacity Factor                0.77         0.79               –0.02
                                   [0.22]       [0.19]              (0.02)
      Bituminous                     0.80         0.79                0.01
                                   [0.40]       [0.41]              (0.03)
      Potential Sulfur             11.43          8.61            2.82***
      Emissions (1000 tons/yr)   [14.26]      [13.55]               (1.08)
      % Scrubbers                    0.16         0.20               –0.04
                                   [0.37]       [0.40]              (0.03)
      Facilities                       88          310                 398
      Generating Units                215          849                1064

      A. Matched Units
                               Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
      Boiler Vintage            1962.41      1963.95                –1.54
                                 [10.24]      [11.88]              (1.35)
      Connected                   325.91       281.13               44.78
      Nameplate (MW)            [268.49]     [275.55]             (33.25)
      Capacity Factor                0.77         0.76               0.01
                                   [0.22]       [0.25]             (0.04)
      Bituminous                     0.84         0.84              –0.00
                                   [0.37]       [0.37]             (0.04)
      Potential Sulfur             11.35        11.54               –0.19
      Emissions (1000 tons/yr)   [14.69]      [18.30]              (1.98)
      % Scrubbers                    0.13         0.13               0.00
                                   [0.34]       [0.34]             (0.04)
      Facilities                       79           76                155
      Generating Units                197          197                394
      Note: Non-Divested facilities in Panel B are weighted based on the number of divested
      facilities matched for m = 10 burning the same rank of coal and common scrubber
      status in 1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Standard
      errors clustered by unit in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                 22
6   Results
This section evaluates the conditions under which divestiture led to a change in behavior by
power plant operators, and relates these results to the hypotheses of theories of regulatory
inefficiency. I begin with coal prices, and show the robustness of the estimation strategy
to various assumptions and specifications. I then contrast the results for coal with those of
natural gas as evidence of the importance of asymmetric information in distorting procure-
ment decisions under regulation. I then look at sulfur regulation compliance decisions in the
context of capital-bias hypotheses, and show that the disproportionate switch to low-sulfur
coal among divested plants does not explain much of the observed drop in relative price.
Finally, I constrain my analysis to plants that were initially burning in-state coal, and relate
their change in procurement behavior to theories of regulatory capture by politically-active
coal mines.
Deregulation and the Price of Coal
Table 4 shows the change in log-price associated with plant divestiture using the matched
DID estimator. To evaluate the robustness of the estimates to matching criteria, the first
three columns use a caliper on distance, while the last three vary the number of matches. One
shortcoming of the distance caliper approach is that the number of divested facilities with any
matches within the specified distance drops off as the criteria becomes more stringent, which
changes the composition of divested plants. This caveat aside, all matching specifications
show large and statistically significant drops in the relative price paid for coal following
divestiture. The results using a fixed number of matches rather than a distance threshold
are stable and significant regardless of the number of matches included. Taken together,
these estimates show a 12-13% drop in the price that divested facilities have paid for coal
relative to nearby generation stations that were similar both on the characteristics of the
facility, coal, and trends before divestiture occurred. When using levels rather than logs, this
is about 25 cents per MMBTU of coal heat delivered. Based on the post-divestiture period
average annual coal expenditure at divested facilities (about eight billion dollars per year),
the treatment on the treated estimate amounts to one billion fewer dollars per year being
spent on coal, holding quantities constant.
    One can see the effect that the weighting procedure employed by the matched DID
estimator has by comparing the results from Table 4 with those of Table 5, which uses a
standard difference-in-difference estimator. Panel A is based on the full sample of coal plants
in the United States. The first two specifications rely on the assumption that divested and
non-divested facilities would have followed parallel paths in the absence of restructuring–there
are no time-varying differences between the two groups. Under this assumption, divestiture


                                              23
  Table 4: Coal: Matched DID Estimates of Log(P rice) and Divestiture
                                       (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
 Post-Divest                    –0.124***    –0.188***     –0.152*    –0.124***    –0.128***      –0.136**
                                   (0.044)      (0.058)    (0.077)       (0.045)      (0.046)      (0.064)
 m Nearest Neighbors                                                          10            5            1
 Proximity Threshold (mi.)             200          100         50
 Year-Month FE                         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 Facility FE                           Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 R2                                  0.721        0.712      0.668        0.723         0.726        0.738
 Facilities                            230          146         69          198           166          121
 Divested Facilities                    87           74         39           87            87           87
 Obs.                                47024        28449      12682        37495         32958        23336
 Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Coal per MMBTU, including shipping costs. Non-Divested
 facilities receive weight m1 j for each matched divested facility j burning the same rank of coal in 1997,
 subject to the indicated matching criterion. Standard errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1,
 ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


is associated with a modest, but statistically insignificant drop in purchased coal price.
    The third specification of Panel A relaxes the common-trend assumption by allowing the
price of coal to vary by census division-year. As a result, the post-divestiture coefficient
measures the percent change in coal prices at divested facilities compared to non-divested
facilities within the same census division, which has a similar flavor to the approach proposed
in Section 4. The drop in prices paid by divested coal plants is quite close to those of Table
4 using this specification.
    Panel B of Table 5 is also based on a standard difference-in-difference estimator, but it
limits the sample based on proximity to divested plants. This is an unweighted analog to
columns (1)–(3) of Table 4, in which the baseline rank of coal is not considered. Panel B
shows that while estimates of the effect on coal prices remain negative, the magnitude is
sensitive to the threshold distance for inclusion in the sample. At 100 miles, the coefficient
is 7% and is only marginally statistically significant. However, the loss in precision from
limiting the sample to closer facilities is more than offset by the substantial increase in the
coefficient estimates for the other specifications. The weighting procedure used in Table 4
puts greater emphasis on non-divested plants in close proximity to multiple divested plants,
and therefore stabilizes estimates somewhat in comparison to the unweighted approach.
    To evaluate the time path of the effect of divestiture, I interact an indicator variable
for treatment facilities with a dummies indicating the time relative to year of divestiture in
Figure 5. The omitted coefficient is the year prior to divestiture. Figure 5a is analogous to
the average effect in column (2) of Table 4, and Figure 5b breaks out the results of column
(4). Both panels show a flat relative price profile prior to divestiture that is close to, and


                                                   24
        Table 5: Coal: DID Estimates of Log(P rice) and Divestiture

           A. All Facilities:
                                                  (1)        (2)                      (3)
           Post-Divest                         –0.051     –0.054               –0.131***
                                              (0.035)    (0.035)                  (0.041)
           Divest                           0.145***
           Facilities                         (0.030)
           Year-Month FE                          Yes         Yes                     Yes
           Facility FE                                        Yes                     Yes
           Division-Year FE                                                           Yes
           Divest States Only
           R2                                  0.252       0.772                    0.803
           Facilities                            397         397                      397
           Divested Facilities                    88          88                       88
           Obs.                                86225       86225                    86225

           B. By Distance:
                                                  (1)     (2)                        (3)
           Post-Divest                         –0.055 –0.069*                   –0.137**
                                              (0.036) (0.040)                    (0.055)
           Proximity Threshold (mi.)              200     100                         50
           Year-Month FE                          Yes     Yes                        Yes
           Facility FE                            Yes     Yes                        Yes
           R2                                   0.733   0.700                      0.712
           Facilities                             333     221                        123
           Divested Facilities                     88      78                         47
           Obs.                                 71569   47324                      26483
           Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Coal per MMBTU, including shipping
           costs. Panel B contains all divested facilities, and any non-divested facilities
           within the specified distance of a divested plant. Standard errors clustered by
           facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


statistically indistinguishable from zero. It appears that any changes that occurred after
divestiture are not part of a continuation of a pre-existing trend. The corresponding figures
at different thresholds share this characteristic (not shown). Because collection from divested
plants did not begin until 2002 and most plants were divested in 1999 - 2000, the vertical
line in the figure denotes the year that the EIA began collecting data from most non-utility
plants, as described in Section 5. If divestiture lead to an immediate change in operations,
there would be a jump in the first year after sale. Instead, it appears the gains achieved by
divested plants took a few years to settle in to a new, permanent level. This may be due to


                                                  25
staggered expiration of contracts written before divestiture, but again it is difficult to draw
conclusions based on the handful of plants for which data is available for the first two years
after sale. The pattern of reductions for the other specifications are nearly indistinguishable
from those in Figure5: a relatively stable period starting at year 3 at over 10% less than
their regulated counterparts.
    It is possible to derive the full distribution of treatment effect by estimating separate DID
regressions that each include a single divested plant and its respective matches, as the ATT
is simply the average of these plant-specific estimates. Doing so reveals substantial hetero-
geneity in how coal prices have been affected by divestiture, but a median effect (−0.09) that
cannot be rejected as statistically equal to the overall average. The 25th and 75th percentiles
are −0.21 and 0.02, respectively. Although too fine a description of the heterogeneity is
prohibited by nondisclosure considerations, it is possible to say that the largest price drops
occurred in Illinois (where 19 plants were divested) and that there is not a particularly strong
geographic pattern (West-to-East, for example) determining the magnitude of the treatment
effect.
    Before examining these results in the light of theories of regulatory inefficiency, it is
important to rule out a rather simple hypothesis: that the relative change in price is due
to changes in quantities demanded at coal-fired facilities. Repeating the analysis with net
generation as the dependent variable shows that this was not the case: there has been no
differential change in production between divested and non-divested plants (results available
from the author). This may be explained by the fact that coal-fired units tend to be used for
“baseload”generation–that is, they run at full capacity at all times except during maintenance
periods. While deregulation created the risk welfare losses from market power, it does not
appear that coal-fired output was substantially affected on net.
Importance of Asymmetric Information: Comparison with Natural Gas
We have shown that coal burned for electricity is heterogeneous, and often sold via bilateral
contracts. Furthermore, prices are location-specific due to high transportation costs. This
makes it difficult for a regulator to know what purchasing opportunities are available to an
operator, and whether the operator is exerting sufficient effort to keep costs low. By contrast,
natural gas is a homogenous product (methane, mostly), traded on a transparent market.15
Since IOUs typically own the complete portfolio of generating plants, gas- and coal-fired
facilities were subject to an identical change in regulatory structure. The importance of the
interaction of information asymmetry and local capture can therefore be demonstrated by
comparing the results for coal prices with those of natural gas.
  15
    A set of year-month dummies explains half of the variation in gas prices, but only one quarter of the
variation in the delivered price of coal.


                                                   26
   Table 6: Gas: Matched DID Estimates of Log(P rice) and Divestiture
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)             (6)
    Post-Divest                       0.012     0.027      0.010     0.012      0.005           0.038
                                    (0.026)   (0.029)    (0.036)   (0.027)    (0.027)         (0.038)
    m Nearest Neighbors                                                 10          5               1
    Proximity Threshold (mi.)          200        100        50
    Year-Month FE                      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes             Yes
    Facility FE                        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes             Yes
    R2                               0.853      0.852     0.861      0.855     0.857           0.854
    Facilities                         276        198       111        254       224             165
    Divested Facilities                109         99        59        109       109             109
    Obs.                             46828      33465     17631      41089     36727           26510
    Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Gas per MMBTU. Non-Divested facilities receive
    weight m1j for each matched divested facility j subject to the indicated matching criterion. Stan-
    dard errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


    Figure 6 shows the analogous map of divested gas-fired plants in the United States as of
1997. It is important to use this baseline because the recent drop in natural gas has lead
to a boom in gas-fired generating capacity, much of which was never owned by an IOU,
and therefore only began reporting costs in 2002. The key distinction between geographic
distributions of gas- and coal-fired plants is that we now include the divestitures of California,
which relies primarily on gas and hydro-powered generators.
    Figure 7 shows the pre-treatment trends of prices paid by matched divested and non-
divested plants. While gas prices are clearly more volatile than coal prices, divested and
non-divested prices co-move; there is no indication of a pre-existing differential trend between
the groups.
    Table 6 shows that divestiture has had essentially zero effect on the price generators pay
for gas. This is true regardless of the matching criteria, and is relatively precisely estimated.
In the case of gas, regulation was not distorting input price. It is important to point out
that regulated IOUs operating coal-fired plants also tend to own gas-fired plants in order
to meet changes in demand throughout the day. Thus the exact same operators whose coal
prices changed substantially following divestiture were unable to make similar improvements
for their gas purchases. This implies that differences in the markets for coal and gas play
a critical role in determining the potential for cost reductions following divestiture. The
defining characteristics that differentiate these markets is price transparency and the room
for discretion allowed by commodity heterogeneity, suggesting the importance of asymmetric
information in creating the conditions that yield distortions under regulation.




                                                    27
Sulfur Emissions Compliance Decisions
Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 capped the total emissions of sulfur
oxides (which contribute to acid rain) allowed from major sources (i.e. coal-fired power
plants), and created a market so that plants with high abatement costs could buy allowances
instead of install abatement equipment. The market began in 1996 for the largest plants,
with the remainder of coal-fired plants following soon after. Aside from buying allowances,
plant operators had two main options to comply with the new regulations: buy a flue-gas
desulfurization system (called a “scrubber”), or switch to burning low-sulfur coal, typically
from the Powder River Basin (PRB) in Wyoming. The Averch-Johnson hypothesis predicts
that regulated plants will prefer to install capital-intensive scrubbers, which will add to their
rate base.
    Since scrubber installation is a permanent, binary outcome, it does not make sense to
employ the matched DID approach described above. The behavior of managers that already
have a scrubber installed is also uninteresting. I therefore perform a straightforward matching
of divested and non-divested facilities that burned a common rank of coal, but did not have
scrubbers installed in 1997. In recent work, Fowlie (2010) finds evidence consistent with the
Averch-Johnson hypothesis in the context of compliance decisions for regional nitrogen oxide
markets using a random-coefficients logit model. By contrast, the approach taken here is
nonparametric. The benefit of this approach is that the results are free of the distributional
assumptions that may cost more complex estimators some credibility. The main cost is that
the structural approach identifies behavioral parameters that can be used to make out-of-
sample predictions.
    With this caveat in mind, Table 7 compares compliance decisions among generating units
that were burning high-sulfur coal in 1997 without a scrubber installed. While divested
units are clearly less likely to install scrubber, the seven percentage point difference masks
the magnitude of how big this effect really is. Instead consider Figure 8a, which shows the
differential rate of scrubber adoption. It is quite striking that only 3 of roughly 200 divested
units install a scrubber up to six years after divestiture. It is only at the end of the sample
that scrubber installation begins to pick up at divested units, so that they are about half as
likely to install a scrubber by the end of the sample period. This result is relatively consistent
across threshold specifications, with the difference being slightly larger when using a distance
caliper rather than number of matches.
    Instead, divested plants disproportionately chose to comply with sulfur emissions regu-
lations by switching to sub-bituminous coal, as shown in Figure 8b. Since sub-bituminous
coal has become relatively cheap in the past decade,16 it may be that Averch-Johnson-type
 16
      This may be surprising in light of the finding of Busse and Keohane (2007) that railroads exerted market

                                                      28
      Table 7: Matched DID Estimates of Sulfur Compliance Strategy

                                                (1)            (2)                    (3)
                                          Scrubber     Low Sulfur            Uncontrolled
               Post-Divest               –0.072***       0.100***                  –0.032
                                            (0.024)        (0.031)                (0.038)
               Divested Unit                  0.014          0.010                 –0.023
                                            (0.040)        (0.034)                (0.047)
               m Nearest Neighbors               10             10                     10
               R2                             0.017          0.049                  0.056
               Units                            384            384                    384
               Divested Units                   197            197                    197
               Obs.                            7145           7145                   7145
               Note: Sample includes all units without a scrubber and burning bituminous
               coal in 1990. Non-Divested units receive weight m1j for each matched di-
               vested facility j within 200 miles. Matching criterion: m = 10. Standard
               errors clustered by unit in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


motives are the source of the observed drop in the price of coal among divested plants. One
method of accounting for the role of fuel switching in cost savings estimates is to allow the
treatment effect to differ between facilities that have switched the rank of coal they burn, and
those who are still burning the same rank of coal as at baseline. Panel A of Table 8 repro-
duces the baseline estimates of Table 4, allowing for this heterogeneous treatment effect. The
overall average price difference among plants that eventually switch is absorbed in the plant
fixed-effects. It shows that facilities do in fact realize larger gains after having switched fuels–
the total effect among switchers is obtained by adding the coefficients–though the difference
is not statistically significant. This is not due to compositional differences between switchers
and non-switchers: all but three facilities report at least one month of post-divestiture fuel
purchases using the same rank of coal that was burned in the baseline year 1997. These
post-divestiture purchases contribute to the non-switching estimate until the actual switch
is made. Perhaps most important is the fact that around 90% of the gains seen overall are
from facilities that have not switched to low-sulfur coal. While switching yields a larger
drop, it accounts for a relatively small fraction of the overall treatment effect. This means
that divested facilities were able to find and negotiate for cheaper coal, regardless of any
motives to use low-capital methods to comply with sulfur emission regulations. The cost
reductions found here are largely not an ancillary benefit of more fundamental motives to
distort abatement techniques to more capital-intensive options among regulated utilities.
power in the face of greater demand for low-sulfur coal. However, increases in productivity over this period
have more than offset demand shocks and markups. See the Data Appendix for a discussion of these trends.



                                                      29
Table 8: Matched DID Estimates of Log(P rice) and Divestiture, by Coal
Rank Switching and Import Status

 A. By Low-Sulfur Switching:
                                          (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
 Post-Divest                         –0.109**     –0.176***      –0.166*    –0.109**     –0.114**       –0.121*
                                      (0.050)        (0.067)     (0.091)     (0.051)      (0.052)       (0.068)
 Post-Divest x                         –0.053         –0.038       0.046      –0.052       –0.052        –0.053
 Switching Plant                      (0.048)        (0.057)     (0.092)     (0.048)      (0.049)       (0.049)
 m Nearest Neighbors                                                              10            5             1
 Proximity Threshold (mi.)                200           100           50
 Year-Month FE                            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
 Facility FE                              Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
 R2                                     0.721         0.712        0.668        0.724       0.727         0.738
 Facilities                               230           146           69          198         166           121
 Divested Facilities                       87            74           39           87          87            87
 Obs.                                   47024         28449        12682        37495       32958         23336

 B. By Import Status in 1997:
                                          (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
 Post-Divest                         –0.157**     –0.244***     –0.250**    –0.157**     –0.161**      –0.169**
                                      (0.067)        (0.083)     (0.107)     (0.068)      (0.069)       (0.082)
 Post-Divest x                          0.066          0.115      0.210*       0.066        0.066         0.066
 Initially In-State                   (0.068)        (0.081)     (0.113)     (0.068)      (0.068)       (0.069)
 m Nearest Neighbors                                                              10            5             1
 Proximity Threshold (mi.)                200           100           50
 Year-Month FE                            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
 Facility FE                              Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
 R2                                     0.722         0.715        0.679        0.724       0.727         0.739
 Facilities                               230           146           69          198         166           121
 Divested Facilities                       87            74           39           87          87            87
 Obs.                                   47024         28449        12682        37495       32958         23336
 Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Coal per MMBTU, including shipping costs. The treatment
 indicator in Panel A is interacted with dummies indicating whether the facility changes the predominant
 rank of coal burned after 1997. The treatment indicator in Panel B is interacted with dummies indicating
 whether the facility sourced its coal from within its home state in 1997. Main effects are absorbed in plant-
 level fixed effects. Non-Divested facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j burning the
 same rank of coal in 1997, subject to the indicated matching criterion. Standard errors clustered by facility
 in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


    These results also suggest that violations of SUTVA may lead to an underestimate of
the effect of divestiture on coal prices, if anything. An overestimate would occur if some
activity undertaken by the divested plants led to an artificial inflation of the prices available
to the control plants. Instead, the fact that divested plants disproportionately switched to


                                                      30
low-sulfur coal means that there was a reduction in the domestic demand for high-sulfur
coal, potentially reducing the price of the coal that control plants continued to burn. For
compliance decisions themselves, a potential SUTVA violation comes from changes in the
equilibrium price of sulfur emissions.17 An increased propensity to burn low-sulfur coal
raises the price of emissions because burning it emits more sulfur than scrubbing. A higher
sulfur price raises the attractiveness of adopting the cleaner technology–a scrubber. Note,
however, that such price effects occur for all market participants. The net effect of this
SUTVA violation will depend on how capital bias changes (if at all) with the price of sulfur
because scrubbing becomes more attractive to both divested and non-divested plants as the
price of sulfur increases. In addition, such concerns are only salient if the Averch-Johnson
effect is, in fact, affecting behavior. If it were not influencing decisions, there would be no
divergence in compliance strategies to raise the price of sulfur in the first place.
Regulatory Capture by Local Coal Producers
A distortion in the spirit of Stigler (1971) and Peltzman (1976) would exist if coal suppliers
lobby the state regulator to force generators to buy from local coal mines. However, it is
ambiguous a priori whether such a distortion would lead to larger or smaller reductions in
fuel prices in coal-producing states following divestiture. While there may be larger potential
savings in these states (as predicted by the model), there is also likely to be greater resistance
to keep them from being realized. Lile and Burtraw (1998), for example, document efforts
undertaken by state legislatures to promote the purchase of local coal, ranging from subsidies
to blatant mandates on the percent of coal that must come from within the state. While
efforts to legislate such policies were voided by the courts under the Commerce Clause, it
was still possible to make life for generators difficult via state oversight of environmental
regulations. Panel B of Table 8 provides evidence suggesting that local coal may have been
an impediment to fully realizing the potential savings from divestiture. It allows the effect
of divestiture on log(price) to vary between facilities that bought the majority of their coal
from within their home state in 1997, and those who mostly imported. Although facilities
that initially imported their coal consistently realized gains across specifications that are
about 50% greater than plants that bought from within-state, the difference between the
coefficients is not statistically significant. Furthermore, this can only be interpreted as sug-
gestive evidence since geographic distance between these groups could also cause differences
in realized cost reductions.
    More definitive evidence of inefficient procurement practices under cost-of-service regula-
tion in coal-producing states can be seen by examining changes in sourcing after divestiture.
 17
      I am grateful to Meredith Fowlie for pointing this out.



                                                      31
Table 9: Matched DID Estimates of Percent of In-State Coal Among Plants
Burning In-State Coal in 1997
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
 Post-Divest                         –0.093        –0.114        –0.111        –0.102       –0.107    –0.160***
                                    (0.058)       (0.073)       (0.072)       (0.065)      (0.065)       (0.055)
 Post-Divest x                   –0.374***     –0.351***     –0.342***     –0.374***    –0.373***     –0.377***
 Switching Plant                    (0.059)       (0.057)       (0.092)       (0.059)      (0.059)       (0.059)
 m Nearest Neighbors                                                               10            5             1
 Proximity Threshold (mi.)              200           100            50
 Year-Month FE                          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Facility FE                            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 R2                                   0.687         0.667         0.689        0.682         0.679         0.718
 Facilities                              82            68            30           81            74            57
 Divested Facilities                     40            33            15           40            40            40
 Obs.                                 17433         13745          5858        16802         14707         10820
 Note: Dependent variable is % of Coal sourced from in-state. All plants in the sample sourced from in-state
 in 1997. Non-Divested facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j burning the same
 rank of coal in 1997, subject to the indicated matching criterion. Standard errors clustered by facility in
 parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


Recall that at baseline divested and non-divested plants are relatively balanced on the per-
cent of coal sourced in-state. Table 9 limits the sample to divested and control plants that
burned in-state coal in 1997. It measures the change in the fraction of coal sourced from
in-state associated with divestiture. Since any plants that switch to sub-bituminous coal will
mechanically increase their out-of-state purchases, it allows for heterogeneous effects between
plants that switch, and those who do not. The goal here is to separate off switching motives
from efforts to find lower cost producers that are not protected by state governments. If
sourcing practices under regulation were efficient, one might see price drops as generators
negotiated for larger fractions of the surplus, but there would be no reallocation of business
to different mines. Table 9 shows this was not the case. Instead, divested facilities that ini-
tially sourced their coal in-state increased their out-of-state purchases, unconditional upon
switching status.18 While the biggest changes are among those who switch, there is also
some evidence that plants in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois were able to find lower cost
bituminous coal after divestiture (likely from Kentucky and West Virginia), although this
effect is only statistically significant in one of the matching specifications.
    When breaking the results down by year from divestiture, there is no evidence that the
post-treatment coefficient is spuriously due to pre-existing trends (see Figure C.2 of the
Online Appendix). Instead, a flat pre-trend around zero is followed by a precipitous fall
  18
     The coefficients are not minus one for switchers because this estimate is relative to the matched control
facilities, who also switched ranks of coal, albeit at a lower rate.

                                                     32
shortly after divestiture. In total, the relative fraction of coal sourced locally falls by about
25% during the post-divestiture period. While local coal lobbies may have prevented divested
facilities from fully realizing the price reductions achieved in areas without coal deposits, they
were not completely successful at mitigating the impact of divestiture on demand for their
product.
    Among the plants that switch to burning low-sulfur coal, it is not possible to distinguish
between the importance of Averch-Johnson and regulatory capture with the current evidence:
both theories predict that deregulated plants will be more likely to switch sub-bituminous
coal, which is both lower in cost and capital-intensity. In fact, it is likely that the two forces
are mutually-enforcing: eastern coal producers and regulated IOUs both stand to benefit
from the installation of a scrubber. It is also not possible to identify the separate effects
of asymmetric information and regulatory capture in coal-producing regions. However, the
fact that there is no relative price drop for gas suggests that opacity in the market for coal
creates the room needed for special interests to exert influence.19




 19
      For a theoretical treatment along these lines, see Coate and Morris (1995).


                                                      33
          Figure 5: Matching by Year from Divestiture: Log(P rice)
                                            (a) Distance < 100 Miles




                      .1
               Log(Price/MMBTU)
                    −.1
                      −.2
                      −.3    0




                                  −10     −5               0                5                10
                                                 Years since Divestiture

                                        95% CI           Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                        95% CI           Ave. Treatment on the Treated



                                            (b) 10 Nearest Neighbors
                      .1
               Log(Price/MMBTU)
                −.1   −.2   0




                                  −10     −5               0                5                10
                                                 Years since Divestiture

                                        95% CI           Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                        95% CI           Ave. Treatment on the Treated




 Note: Non-Divested facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. mj denotes
the number of divested facilities burning the same rank of coal in 1997, and is located within 100
 miles of the divested plant. Confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility.
    The vertical line denotes the third year post-divestiture, the point at which most divested
                              facilities resumed reporting fuel costs.

                                                       34
        Figure 6: Divested and Control Gas-Fired Plants, 1990-1997




                                                                     (
                       (                                                    (                       (
                   (             (                        !
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                ((
                                                                                                (        ( (
                                                                                      (     (     (                   (
                                                                                                          ( ((           ((           !              (
                                                                                       (          ( ( ( (
                                                                                                 ( ( (       ! (        (                     ! ( ! (
                                                                                                                                                 ! !(
                                                      (                                                      !!              (
                                                                           ( ( (       (((   (       (((  ! !
                                                                                                            ! ((
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                               (                             !
                                                                                                                                             !  !!! !
                                                                                                                                               (!
                                                                                                                                                (
               (                                   (        ((                       (               ( !!                        ! !      !!
                                                                                                                                          ! !!
                                                                                                                                             ((
                                                                                                                                             !(
                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                    (                                        !(                  !       ! !
                                 ((                              (
                                                                 (                          (             !        ((       (( (         !!!
                                                          (       (                       ((((
                                                                                             ( (        !                            !! (
                         (                                                      ((                     ((                             !
                                                                  (
                       (!
                       !!                                                  ( (     ((                        ((( (
                                                                                                                                     ((
                        !                                                   (             (( (  (                                      (
                                                          (                    (
                                            (                            (              ((((
                           !
                                          !  (         (
                                                           ( (           (       ((((
                                                                                 (                                                 (
                                      (
                                     !!
                                      (
                                      ( !!                             (
                                                                       (         (               (     (                     (
                                      (                                                                          ( (         (
                                      !
                                      (!
                                       (
                                       !
                                         ! (      (((                    (
                                                                         (    ! ! (!(!
                                                                                     !(
                                                                                       !
                                                                                       (( !(   (     ((        (
                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                           ( (
                                                                     (              !
                                                                                    !(
                                                                                     !!!     (
                                                                                             ((( (( ( (                          (
                                         !           ((                    !! ! (!          (
                                                        (      (
                                                               (      !     !        !  ! ! (( ( (
                                                                                        !
                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                             (
                                                                       !              !(          (       (  ((
                                                                                 (((( ! (            (
                                                                                          ( (( ( ((( (              (( ( (  (
                                                                                 (       !!!
                                                                                           !!       ((((                  ((
                                                                               ((( !!                                        ((
                                                                                   !!
                                                                                    !                                    ( (    (
                                                                              !
                                                                                                                               (((
                                                                                 !!                                             (
               Legend                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                (

                   !            Divested Plants
                   (            Gov/Muni/Coop Plants




Figure 7: Pre-Trend Test: Matching Estimates of Delivered Gas Price,
1990-1997
                           6
                           5
                   Price ($/MMBTU)
                    2      3
                           1
                           0    4




                              1990m1                      1992m1                    1994m1                       1996m1                      1998m1
                                                                                   Year−Month

                                                           95% CI                                        95% CI
                                                           Divested Facilities                           Not Divested Facilities


 Note: Non-Divested facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. Matching
  criteria: m = 10, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Confidence
                     intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility.


                                                                                    35
Figure 8: Matching by Year from Divestiture: Sulfur Compliance Strategies,
10 nearest neighbors
                                                  (a) P r(Add Scrubber)


                       .3
              Fraction Implemented
                 .1    0      .2




                                      1995          2000                   2005                      2010
                                                              Year−Month

                                             95% CI                        95% CI
                                             Divested Facilities           Not Divested Facilities



                                                  (b) P r(Switch Rank)
                       .4        .3
              Fraction Implemented
              .1       0.2




                                      1995          2000                   2005                      2010
                                                              Year−Month

                                             95% CI                        95% CI
                                             Divested Facilities           Not Divested Facilities



  Note: Sample is based on units that did not have a scrubber installed in 1997. Non-Divested
  facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. Matching criteria: m = 10,
 burning the same rank of coal in 1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200
            miles. Confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility.

                                                              36
7        Transfers versus Efficiency Gains
The large drop in price observed at divested coal-fired plants says little about the social
welfare gains derived from restructuring. Even the substantial reallocation to out-of-state
mines is consistent with minimal mining cost reductions. Suppose, for example, that out-
of-state mines are only marginally more productive than in-state mines, the latter of which
have been receiving regulatory rents. Prices fall and output shifts following divestiture, but
to little effect in terms of the resources required to produce electricity.20
    Fortunately the EIA data on coal deliveries includes information on the supplier and
county of origin. I have linked these deliveries to characteristics of the mines from which the
coal is derived. This includes quarterly data on the labor hours per ton (converted to hours
per MMBTU to preserve consistency) from the Mine Safety and Health Administration,
the associated wage bill from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and data on the depth and
thickness of coal seams from the U.S. Geological Survey. Seam depth measures how many
feet underground must be dug before reaching the coal (to serve as a proxy for fixed costs),
and seam thickness measures how much coal per foot of horizontal digging can be recovered
once the seam has been reached. Because expanded production in one quarter is foregone
production in the subsequent quarter (coal is a non-renewable resource), labor hours can be
interpreted as the average marginal cost of labor.
    Figure 9 shows the effect of divestiture on the mining labor embodied in coal purchases.
The difference between divested and matched plants prior to divestiture is relatively flat
and insignificantly different from zero in both panels. The hours of labor required to mine
coal then drops by about 25% for coal that is subsequently sold to divested plants, and
this persists throughout the post-divestiture period. While hours drop, wages rise by about
5%–suggesting relative labor productivity gains at mines that sell to divested plants. Results
are similar when considering the characteristics of the mines from which the coal is being
sourced. Figure 10 shows that coal delivered to divested plants comes from seams that are
about 30% thicker, and nearly 50% closer to the surface following divestiture. These results
indicate that the shift in procurement following divestiture lead to substantial reductions in
the cost of mining coal for electricity generation.
8        Conclusion
This paper uses two decades of detailed procurement data at gas- and coal-fired power
plants to characterize the major determinants of regulatory inefficiency in U.S. electricity
generation. I find evidence that asymmetric information, regulatory capture, and capital-
    20
    The success of special interest groups that advocate for transfers with minimal welfare costs is predicted
by Becker (1983, 1985).



                                                     37
bias all lead to substantial distortions in procurement decisions. I find the price of coal drops
by 12% at deregulated plants relative to similar, nearby coal-fired facilities that were not
subject to any regulatory change. Deregulated plants disproportionately switch to burning
low-sulfur coal rather than install a capital-intensive abatement equipment to comply with
environmental regulations, and expand imports from out of state by 25% if they were initially
burning in-state coal. In addition, I find that the reallocation of procurement following
divestiture is toward mines that are substantially more productive than those who supply
regulated facilities. In total, operators of divested coal-fired plants spend about $1B less
per year on coal due to deregulation. These plants make up only 25% of coal-fired capacity,
while the rest have continued operating without any change in regulation.
    My results do not imply the universal failure of regulators to induce efficient behavior in
the regulated community: I find that generators pay the same price for natural gas regardless
of their regulatory status. Instead, this indicates that regulation may work well when the
regulated community is unable to shroud its inefficient behavior from oversight.
    After thirty years of deregulation, the pendulum is swinging back toward greater govern-
ment oversight in order to correct market failures in critical sectors of the American economy
such as finance, banking, and health care. In addition, the deregulatory momentum of the
1990’s has stalled in the electricity sector following the 2000-2001 crisis in California. Al-
though regulation may appear at first to be the solution to imperfect markets, as eloquently
described by Bastiat (1850), this is not the end of the story.




                                               38
          Figure 9: Matching by Year from Divestiture: Mine Labor
                                               (a) Log(Hours per M M BT U )




                        .2
               Log(Labor Hours/MMBTU)
                −.4      −.2
                        −.6       0




                                        −10     −5               0                5                10
                                                       Years since Divestiture

                                              95% CI           Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                              95% CI           Ave. Treatment on the Treated



                                                  (b) Log(Hourly W age)
                        .15
                        .1
                  Log(Hourly Wage)
               −.05    0−.1   .05




                                        −10     −5               0                5                10
                                                       Years since Divestiture

                                              95% CI           Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                              95% CI           Ave. Treatment on the Treated



Note: Hours per M M BT U is the number of hours of labor required to extract 1M M BT U worth
  of coal at the mines from which matched plants purchase coal. Non-Divested facilities receive
weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. Matching criteria: m = 10, burning the same rank
    of coal in 1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Confidence
  intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility. The vertical line denotes the point at
                    which most divested facilities resumed reporting fuel costs.
                                                             39
Figure 10: Matching by Year from Divestiture: Source Mine Characteristics
                                              (a) Log(Seam T hickness)




                       .6       .4
              Log(Seam Thickness)
               0       .2
                       −.2




                                     −10     −5                 0                 5                10
                                                      Years since Divestiture

                                           95% CI             Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                           95% CI             Ave. Treatment on the Treated



                                                   (b) Log(Seam Depth)
                        .5
               Log(Seam Depth)
               −.5      −1 0




                                     −10      −5                0                 5                10
                                                      Years since Divestiture

                                           95% CI              Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                           95% CI              Ave. Treatment on the Treated



  Note: Seam T hickness is the thickness and Seam Depth is the estimated depth below the
  surface of coal seams at the mines from which matched plants purchase coal. Non-Divested
  facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. Matching criteria: m = 10,
 burning the same rank of coal in 1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200
   miles. Confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility. The vertical line
        denotes the point at which most divested facilities resumed reporting fuel costs.
                                                            40
References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010): “Synthetic Control Methods
 for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Pro-
 gram,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490), 493–505. 11

Abadie, A., and J. Gardeazabal (2003): “The economic costs of conflict: A case study
 of the Basque Country,” The American Economic Review, 93(1), 113–132. 11

Ashenfelter, O. (1978): “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings,” The
 Review of Economics and Statistics. 11

Ashenfelter, O., and D. Card (1985): “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings
 to Estimate the Effect of Training Programs,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 67(4), 648–660. 11

Averch, H., and L. L. Johnson (1962): “Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory Con-
 straint,” The American Economic Review, 52(5), 1052–1069. 1, 2, 9

Baron, D. P., and R. Myerson (1982): “Regulating a monopolist with unknown costs,”
 Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 50(4), 911–930. 9

Bastiat, F. (1850): “What is Seen and What is Not Seen,” in Selected Essays on Political
 Economy, 1996, ed. by S. Cain, and G. B. de Huszar. Foundation for Economic Education,
 Irvington-on-Hudson, NY, 6th edn. 38

Baumol, W. J., and A. K. Klevorick (1970): “Input Choices and Rate-of-Return Regu-
 lation : An Overview of the Discussion,” The Bell Journal of Economics and Management
 Science, 1(2), 162–190. 47

Becker, G. S. (1983): “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political
 Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98(3), 371–400. 37

       (1985): “Public policies, pressure groups, and dead weight costs,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 28(3), 329–347. 37

Berg, S. V., and J. T. Tschirhart (1988): Natural Monopoly Regulation. Cambridge
 University Press, New York, NY. 47

Borenstein, S. (2002): “The Trouble with Electricity Markets: Understanding California’s
 Restructuring Disaster,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(1), 191–211. 7

Borenstein, S., J. B. Bushnell, and F. A. Wolak (2002): “Measuring Market Inef-
 ficiencies in Californias Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market,” The American Eco-
 nomic Review, 92(5), 1376–1405. 7

Bushnell, J. B., E. T. Mansur, and C. Savaria (2007): “Vertical Arrangements,
 Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured US Electricity Markets,”
 The American Economic Review. 7


                                            41
Bushnell, J. B., and C. Wolfram (2005): “Ownership Change, Incentives and Plant
 Efficiency: The Divestiture of U.S. Electric Generation Plants,” . 11

Busse, M., and N. O. Keohane (2007): “Market Effects of Environmental Regulation:
 Coal, Railroads, and the 1990 Clean Air Act,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 38(4),
 1159–1179. 28

Chan, H. S., H. Fell, I. Lange, and S. Li (2012): “Efficiency and Environmental
 Impacts of Electricity Restructuring on Coal-fired Power Plants,” . 7, 11

Coate, S., and S. Morris (1995): “On the Form of Transfers to Special Interests,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 103(6). 33

Davis, L. W., and C. Wolfram (2012): “Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency:
 Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 4(Oct). 7, 11

Dehejia, R. H., and S. Wahba (1999): “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies:
 Reevaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical
 Association, 94(448), 1053. 12

Ellig, J. (2002): “Railroad Deregulation and Consumer Welfare,” Journal of Regulatory
 Economics, 21(2), 143–167. 5

Fabrizio, K., N. Rose, and C. Wolfram (2007): “Do Markets Reduce Costs? Assess-
  ing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric Generation Efficiency,” The
  American Economic Review, 97(4), 1250–1277. 1, 3, 7

Fowlie, M. (2010): “Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment in Pol-
 lution Abatement,” The American Economic Review, 100(3), 837–869. 28

Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman (2002): Special Interest Politics. The MIT Press. 1,
 9, 10, 49

Guerriero, C. (2010): “The Political Economy of Incentive Regulation: Theory and Evi-
 dence from US States,” . 52

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd (1998): “Characterizing Selection
 Bias Using Experimental Data,” Econometrica, pp. 1017–1098. 2, 12

Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. E. Todd (1997): “Matching as an Econometric
 Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme,” The Review
 of Economic Studies, 64(4), 605–654. 12

Hicks, J. (1935): “Annual Survey of Economic Theory: The Theory of Monopoly,” Econo-
  metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 3(1), 1–20. 46

Jarrell, G. A. (1978): “The Demand for State Regulation of the Electric Utility Industry,”
  Journal of Law and Economics, 21(2), 269–295. 1, 4

                                           42
Jha, A. (2012): “Regulatory Induced Risk Aversion in Contracting Behavior : An Empirical
  Analysis of US Electric Utilities from 1983-1998,” . 9

Joskow, P. L. (1974): “Inflation and Environmental Concern: Structural Change in the
  Process of Public Utility Price Regulation,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 17(2),
  291–327. 1, 9

         (1985): “Vertical Integration and Long-Term Contracts: The Case of Coal-Burning
  Electric Generating Plants,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1(1), 33–80.
  17

         (1987): “Contract Duration and Relationship-Specific Investments: Empirical Evi-
  dence from Coal Markets,” The American Economic Review, 77(1), 168–185. 17

         (1988): “Price Adjustments in Long-Term Contracts: The Case of Coal,” Journal
  of Law and Economics, 31(1), 47–84. 17

        (2001): “California’s Electricity Crisis,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 17(3),
  365–388. 7

         (2005): “The Difficult Transition to Competitive Electricity Markets in the United
  States,” Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges, pp. 31–97. 5, 7

         (2006): “Markets for Power in the United States: An Interim Assessment,” The
  Energy Journal, 27(1). 7

Joskow, P. L., and R. Schmalensee (1988): “Markets for power: An Analysis of Elec-
  trical Utility Deregulation,” MIT Press Books, 1. 5

Kahn, A. (1971): The Economics of Regulation: Principles and Institutions. John Wiley,
 New York. 4

         (1987): “Airline Deregulation-A Mixed Bag, But a Clear Success Nevertheless,”
  Transp. LJ, 16, 229. 5

Kwoka, J. (2008): “Restructuring the U.S. Electric Power Sector: A Review of Recent
 Studies,” Review of Industrial Organization, 32(3), 165–196. 7

Laffont, J., and J. Tirole (1986): “Using Cost Observation to Regulate Firms,” The
 Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), 614–641. 1, 9

Laffont, J. J., and J. Tirole (1993): A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
 Regulation. MIT Press. 1, 9

Lile, R., and D. Burtraw (1998): “State-Level Policies and Regulatory Guidance for
  Compliance in the Early Years of the SO 2 Emission Allowance Trading Program,” . 31

Mansur, E. T. (2001): “Pricing Behavior in the Initial Summer of the Restructured PJM
 Wholesale Electricity Market,” . 7


                                            43
        (2008): “Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets,” The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 369–386. 7

Mansur, E. T., and M. W. White (2009): “Market Organization and Efficiency in
 Electricity Markets,” Yale School of Management Working . . . . 7

McFarland, H. (1989): “The Effects of United States Railroad Deregulation on Shippers,
 Labor, and Capital,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, 1(3), 259–270. 5

Ng, C., and P. Seabright (2001): “Competition, Privatisation and Productive Efficiency:
 Evidence from the Airline Industry,” The Economic Journal, 111(473), 591–619. 5

Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommu-
 nications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 64(6),
 1263–1297. 5

Peltzman, S. (1976): “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” The Journal of Law
 and Economics, 19(2), 211. 1, 31

Rose, N. (1987): “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking Indus-
 try,” The Journal of Political Economy, 95(6), 1146–1178. 5

Rosenbaum, P., and D. B. Rubin (1983): “The central role of the propensity score in
 observational studies for causal effects,” Biometrika. 11

Rubin, D. B. (1974): “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Non-
 randomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5), 688–701. 12

Sappington, D., and J. Pfeifenberger (2001): “The State of Performance-Based Reg-
  ulation in the U.S. Electric Utility Industry,” The Electricity Journal, 14(8), 71–79. 52

Shleifer, A. (1985): “A Theory of Yardstick Competition,” RAND Journal of Economics,
  16(3), 319–327. 47

Stigler, G. J. (1971): “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomics and Management Science, 2(1), 3–21. 1, 31

Stigler, G. J., and C. Friedland (1962): “What can Regulators Regulate? The Case
  of Electricity,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 5(Oct), 1–16. 1

Van Doren, P., and J. Taylor (2004): “Rethinking Electricity Restructuring,” Policy
 Analysis, 530. 7

White, M. W. (1996): “Power Struggles: Explaining Deregulatory Reforms in Electricity
 Markets,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1996, 201–267. 6




                                            44
A      Theory Appendix (For Online Publication)
This appendix presents a more detailed discussion of the model outlined in Section 3. After
deriving the optimal behavior for firms in the absence of regulation, I introduce standard
rate-of-return (or “cost-plus”) regulation, in which the regulator has discretion to approve
capital investments and “prudent” variable costs. As discussed in the main text, I leave the
regulator’s objective function unspecified. Rather than derive the optimal policy for the
regulator, I am instead interested with how regulation affects the set of feasible policies. The
reason for this approach is two-fold: it is sufficiently flexible to allow for consideration of
different theories of regulatory inefficiency in a common framework, and it results in a set of
hypotheses that can be taken to the data on firm behavior without having already assumed
the nature of the regulator’s objective.
    As in the text, suppose generating facilities produce electricity by combining fuel (F )
and capital (K) according to the quasi-concave production function G(F, K)–labor is a small
share of generation costs and is ignored. Let p denote the per-unit compensation received by
plant operators, whose determination will depend upon the regulatory environment. Given
this price, plants face the inverse demand function p = p[G(F, K)]. For simplicity, assume
a constant elasticity of demand, and denote the inverse price elasticity of demand η =
    G(F,K) dp
− p[G(F,K)] dG
               , with 0 ≤ η < 1.21 Suppose plants must exert managerial effort to solicit bids,
negotiate contracts, etc. and that this effort reduces the price paid for coal according to
c = β − e where e ∈ [0, β]. Effort is itself costly, and reduces profits according to a convex
function ψ(e), ψ 0 (e) > 0, ψ 00 (e) > 0.
    First, consider the behavior of the plant in the absence of regulation. Let R(F, K) =
p[G(F, K)]G(F, K) denote total revenues when the manager considers the effect of output
on price (and may therefore be exerting market power). The plant manager takes the rental
rate of capital, r as given, and chooses effort and inputs to maximize

                              max R(F, K) − (β − e)F − rK − ψ(e)                                   (3)
                              e,F,K


   Assuming that price is sufficiently high to cover the fixed costs of effort, we have the
standard first order conditions

                                      [e] :    ψ 0 (e)    =F
                                      [F ] : (1 − η)pGF   = (β − e)
                                  [K] : (1 − η)pGK = r
  21
    Sufficient conditions for a maximum will hold so long as the demand function is not so convex as to
reverse the quasi-concavity of revenues with respect to inputs.


                                                    45
    The optimal effort equates the marginal cost of effort to the marginal benefit: a reduction
in the cost of every unit of coal purchased. When the plant takes price as given, marginal
revenue is equal to price (i.e. η = 0 from the firm’s perspective), and standard optimality
conditions for inputs equate marginal cost to value marginal product. It is worth noting the
effect that market power has on input costs in this scenario. Since a monopolist will restrict
output to raise price, the reduced demand for inputs implies less effort will be exerted to
reduce input costs than in a competitive market.22 Input costs in a deregulated market
therefore depend on the ability of firms to exert market power. Let the triple (e∗ , F ∗ , K ∗ )
denote the effort and input demand in a competitive, deregulated market.
    Next, suppose the firm is regulated on a cost-of-service basis known as “cost-plus.” This
does not imply that firms are (directly) rewarded for higher coal prices. Instead, variable
costs are reimbursed only if the regulator deems them “prudent” and the plant receives a
rate of return s > r on its capital stock, or “rate base” that exceeds the cost of capital.
The regulator is unable to directly observe cost-reducing effort, and instead decides whether
or not to allow fuel expenditures based only on the reported price, c. Let θ(β − e) denote
the probability that the regulator allows recovery of costs c. The firm therefore maximizes
profits subject to the constraint that revenues are no greater than allowed costs:

                                   R(F, K) ≤ θ(β − e)[β − e]F + sK

    Thus the term “cost-plus”: the revenues the firm can raise are equal to its prudently
incurred variable costs, plus a guaranteed “fair rate of return” paid to capital. To focus
attention on cost reduction, it is assumed that the regulator is perfectly able to observe
and dictate quantities conditional upon costs.23 This yields the Lagrangian and first order
conditions



           L = max R − (β − e)F − rK − ψ(e) + λ{θ(β − e)[β − e]F + sK − R}                                  (4)
                    e,F,K

  22
     Following Hicks (1935), the tendency for monopolists to have costs that exceed those prevailing under
competition has been referred to as “the quiet life of the monopolist.”
  23
     This is equivalent to defining the analogous probabilities of approval for fuel and capital as unity at the
quantities desired by the regulator, and zero otherwise.




                                                      46
                    [e] :      ψ 0 (e)      = F {1 − λ[θ(β − e) + [β − e]θ0 (β − e)}
                                              [1 − λθ(β − e)]
                    [F ] : (1 − η)pGF       =                 (β − e)
                                                  (1 − λ)
                                                     λ
                   [K] : (1 − η)pGK         =r−           [s − r]
                                                  (1 − λ)

The binding revenue constraint and sufficient second order condition for a maximum imply
0 < λ < 1.24 Capital-bias is expressed clearly by assuming for a moment that the regulator
approves all variables costs (θ(c) = 1 ∀ c). Instead of equating the relative marginal product
of capital to the relative price, cost-plus recovery implies
                                                      
                            GK      r           λ s−r         r
                               =          1−             <
                            GF   (β − e)     (1 − λ) r     (β − e)

That the relative cost of inputs exceeds the technical rate of substitution under cost of service
regulation is the basis of famed “Averch-Johnson Effect.”25 When cost recovery is guaranteed
regardless of c, it is also clear that fuel prices are inefficiently high. This is because allowed
revenues are directly tied to costs through the revenue constraint. While the plant bears
the full cost of search effort, it only reaps benefits at rate (1 − λ).26 One strategy is to
decouple revenues from costs via “yardstick competition” (Shleifer (1985)). Under yardstick
competition, the allowed output price is tied to the realized costs of other producers–thereby
effectively setting λ and η to zero.
    In the agency-theoretic approach, the regulator removes the unconditional guarantee of
recovered costs in order to induce the plant to undertake the desired level of cost reduction
effort and production. This is a relatively straightforward task when there is no uncertainty
on intrinsic costs, β (i.e. the cost of fuel when no effort is exerted): the regulator approves
the costs that maximize her objective function, and denies compensation otherwise. If we
consider only differentiable strategies, the first best outcomes of (3) are achieved when the
regulator approves effort e∗ with certainty, and the probability of cost allowance at the
                                                         ∗)
optimum changes according to θ0 (β − e∗ ) = − θ(β−e     ∗
                                                    (β−e )
                                                            . This neutralizes the effect of the rate
of return constraint by increasing the probability of allowed costs one-for-one with cost-
reducing effort–a zero net revenue effect. The plant’s best response is to undertake efficient
search effort so long as the resulting profits are non-negative.
  24
      The determinant of the bordered Hessian of (4) is positive when λ < 1 and revenues are not too concave.
  25
      See Baumol and Klevorick (1970) for a more complete treatment, and Berg and Tschirhart (1988)
(chapter 9) for a discussion of the subsequent literature on the “Averch-Johnson effect.”
   26
      If we instead assumed that the regulator could fully compensate the firm for effort, effort would be
efficient conditional upon quantities, but quantity would still inefficiently low because the plant anticipates
the effect of output on price.



                                                      47
    In the presence of asymmetric information, the regulator must adopt a strategy of ap-
proving costs without observing effort or intrinsic costs. Suppose β can take on any value
on the interval [β, β] with some positive probability. Let c = β − e∗ (β) denote the costs
realized when firms with intrinsic costs β exert the level of effort that would be optimal in
an unregulated environment, e∗ (β), and similarly for c. While it is possible for the regulator
to induce efficient outcomes over some range of β, this becomes infeasible as the unobserved
heterogeneity grows sufficiently large so that it is no longer possible to punish higher costs
while preserving solvency.
    To see this, first note that the efficient level of effort in the first-best world is decreasing
                               ∗
in intrinsic costs, that is de
                            dβ
                                 < 0. This is shown by differentiating the first order conditions of
(3) with respect to β while noting input demand is a function of fuel price. The input demand
conditions yields the standard ∂F    ∂c
                                        = RKK RRFKK   2
                                                  F −RF K
                                                          < 0, by the assumed quasi-concavity of
revenue. Differentiating the optimal effort condition yields
                                                      ∂F
                                       de∗            ∂c
                                           =   ∂F
                                       dβ      ∂c
                                                    + ψ 00 (e∗ )

    This implies optimal effort is decreasing in intrinsic costs so long as the convexity of the
effort function is greater than the drop in fuel demand arising from higher fuel prices. This
follows from the assumption that the revenue function is not too concave in order for the
solution to (3) to be a maximum. As a result, optimal costs are increasing with intrinsic
          ∗
costs, dc
        dβ
            > 0. This makes sense, for otherwise we would have the perverse scenario in which
firms with higher costs are producing more than those with lower costs. Similarly, applying
the envelope theorem to (4) when differentiating profits with respect to β implies that profits
of an operating plant are strictly declining as intrinsic costs rise.
    Suppose the regulator approves θ(c) = 1 for c ≤ c, with θ0 (c) = − θ(c)c
                                                                              for c ≥ c. This is
a feasible strategy to induce efficient search so long as profits remain non-negative, and β
is known by the regulator. However, for fixed β, as β grows large, there will eventually be
a region of β in which the optimal policy does not allow the plant to cover its costs, and is
forced to shut down. It is important to note that this is due to the variance of unobserved
heterogeneity, not the levels of costs. When intrinsic costs are high, but observed, it is
perfectly possible for the regulator to approve costs at the efficient level of effort. This
is a classic result in principal-agent theory, typically proven in circumstances in which the
regulator aims to maximize the sum of consumer surplus and profits. The point here is
that efficient effort is impossible to induce under any regulator objective function when
unobserved heterogeneity is sufficiently large.
    The inefficiency associated with regulatory capture is also straightforward to demonstrate.


                                                48
Suppose the local coal mines exert some influence over the regulator’s decision-making. In
this case, the regulator approves fuel costs according to θ(c, b) where b represents the influence
of the mines, perhaps via campaign contributions as in Grossman and Helpman (2002). In
                                                                                        ∂2θ
this case we can express the effect of this influence on allowed costs as ∂θ   ∂b
                                                                                  > 0; ∂b∂c  ≥0–
contributions raise the probability of allowing high fuel costs, and reduce the punishment
for marginally reducing effort.27 To show how increased mining influence affects the cost-
minimizing effort exerted by plants, suppose the regulator is initially inducing optimal effort
                    ∗ ,b)
with ∂θ
      ∂c
         = − θ(β−e
                (β−e∗ )
                          and consider the effect of a marginal rise in influence on search effort.
Accounting for political influence via θ(c, b) in (4), differentiation of the analogous first order
condition for effort with respect to b and substituting in for the initial policy yields
                                                                            2
                                       de∗    F λ[ ∂θ
                                                   ∂b
                                                       + (β − e∗ ) ∂c∂b
                                                                    ∂ θ
                                                                        ]
                                           =−
                                       db           ψ 00 (e∗ ) + ∂F
                                                                 ∂c
                                                                                        ∗
    The denominator is positive by the same condition that implies de dβ
                                                                         < 0. Thus an increase
in political influence leads to a decrease in cost-reducing effort, and higher fuel prices.
B       Data Appendix (For Online Publication)
Data on Divestitures
Data on divestitures is compiled from the “Electric Utility Plants Sold/Transferred and
Reclassified as Non-utility Plants” Tables across various years of the March Issue of EIA’s
“Electric Power Monthly” report. It is also possible to identify month of divestiture prior to
2002 because plants cease reporting fuel costs at that time. A third source of divestiture date
is a change in regulatory status reported on Form EIA-906, “Power Plant Report.” In the
relatively uncommon case that these dates disagree, I rely first on the cost data (a signal of
operational changes at the plant), then the sale data, and finally the “Power Plant Report”
data.
     Table B.1 breaks down this history of coal-fired plant divestitures by state. Divestiture of
utility-owned plants in a state was usually complete following passage of passing restructuring
laws. Not all states that restructured have coal-fired plants to use in this study. Although
California restructured its electricity markets, its IOUs did not own any coal-fired capacity.
Washington, DC was also restructured but its two coal-fired plants are used sufficiently
little to avoid fuel delivery reporting requirements. All New England states except Vermont
restructured their electricity markets, but Maine and Rhode Island do not have coal-fired
generating assets. New Hampshire did not require divestiture of the two coal-fired plants
owned by Public Service of New Hampshire, and these plants continue to report costs after
  27                                               ∂2θ                                                            ∂θ
       In fact, the necessary assumption is that   ∂b∂c   not be so negative as to reverse the direct effect of   ∂b .



                                                           49
the introduction of retail competition.
    There have also been a number of divestitures in states that remain otherwise rate-
regulated. The plants divested in Indiana, and Virginia were owned by IOUs based in
restructured states, and were forced to sell for this reason. Montana has suspended restruc-
turing, but Montana Power Company assets were divested in 2000 after its failed telecom
investments during the dot-com bust led the company in to bankruptcy. The Centralia
station in Washington state was sold amidst conflict among the plant’s eight co-owners.
    Divestiture status in Ohio and Texas varies by utility service area. The only IOU plants
in Texas that remain to be divested belong to Southwestern Electric Power Company, which
is connected to a separate grid from the rest of the state. The lack of markets available
in this service area has delayed divestiture. In Ohio, two Duquesne Light Co. coal-fired
plants were divested in 2000 as part of Pennsylvania’s restructuring program. Although
Ohio implemented retail choice in 2000, FirstEnergy’s plants in Ohio would not be divested
until 2005. Plans to divest of the remaining IOU plants in Ohio have been tied up between the
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO) and the courts since that time. The owners of
these plants remain rate-regulated and require approval PUCO approval to change electricity
prices.
Coal Prices
This study uses detailed data on coal deliveries to power plants from the Energy Information
Administration (Forms EIA-423, “Monthly Report of Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric
Plants,” and EIA-923, “Power Plant Operations Report”) and Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (Form FERC-423, “Monthly Report of Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric
Plants”). This is shipment-level data, reported monthly for nearly all of the coal burned
for the production of electricity in the United States (all facilities with a combined capacity
greater than 50MW are required to report).28 The data records the county or mine of origin,
whether purchased on the spot market or long-term contract, characteristics of the coal (heat,
sulfur and ash content), rank (bituminous, etc.), and the price per million British thermal
units (MMBTU). Although data on prices is redacted from public release for non-utilities,
restricted-access data on prices was made available for this study under a non-disclosure
agreement with EIA.
    As described in the text, deregulated plants were not required to report fuel prices to the
EIA until 2002. This means that IOU plants that were divested ceased reporting from the
  28
    When switching to Form 923 in 2008, the EIA began collecting monthly data from a sample of plants,
and a census annually. Monthly data is estimated by EIA from plants that only submitted the annual form.
This change applied more significantly to gas-based generators, as more than 97% of coal deliveries continued
monthly reporting.



                                                     50
time of divestiture until 2002. There is no gap in reporting for the limited set of plants that
have been divested since 2002. An exception to this rule is for the six FirstEnergy plants
in Ohio that stopped reporting once retail competition began in June of 2000, but did not
resume reporting until actual divestiture at the end of 2005. All results are robust to the
exclusion of these plants.
    Coal delivered to combined heat and power plants (4% of reported coal deliveries after
2002) is not included in any of the analysis. These are plants that also sell steam, either
for heating or industrial processes. One reason is practical: 36 of 49 coal-fired co-generation
plants were not required to report until 2002, so they lack data in the pre-divestiture baseline
period. The second is that it is unclear how to categorize the regulatory structure these
plants face: a plant owned by an IOU may be free to privately contract for steam to nearby
industrial plants. In addition, four small (typically produced <50MWh/month) facilities that
were divested, but never report post-divestiture are also dropped. They are the Hickling and
Jennison plants in NY, Grand Tower in IL, and Edgewater in OH.
    Figure B.1a shows the total heat content of coal deliveries reported to FERC/EIA from
1990-2009. The vertical lines represent the points at which divestitures begin in 1998, and
when reporting for divested plants resumes in January 2002. There is clearly a substantial
amount of non-reporting induced by divestiture. Aside from this dip, there is a 15-25%
increase in coal delivered over this 20 year period.29 It is important to note that nearly all
of this came from an increase in production at existing facilities, not entry of new plants.
    Another feature of Figure B.1a worthy of note is the expansion of sub-bituminous coal,
both in levels and as a share of coal consumed for electric power. The Clean Air Act of 1990
created a cap-and-trade program to reduce sulfur emissions from electricity generating and
large industrial units. Putting a price on sulfur increased the relative value of low-sulfur
sub-bituminous coal (95% of sub-bituminous coal mined in the United States in 2009 was
from the Powder River Basin (PRB) in Wyoming). Switching to PRB coal provided an
alternative to building capital-intensive scrubbers to reduce sulfur emissions. Technological
improvements as demand for PRB coal expanded further reduced the price of extraction,
making PRB coal a potentially economical choice regardless of environmental compliance
considerations. Shipments of PRB coal more than doubled over the twenty year period of
study, accounting for about 40% of the coal heat delivered in 2009.
Plant-Level Data
Data on generator nameplate capacity and vintage comes from Form EIA-860, “Annual Elec-
tric Generator Report,” while data on installed abatement equipment is from Form EIA-767,
  29
    The drop-off in 2009 is the combined effect of the economic downturn and displaced generation due to
the fall in natural gas prices.


                                                  51
“Annual Steam-Electric Plant Operation and Design Data” and EIA-923, “Power Plant Op-
erations Report.” Annual capacity factor is the annual net generation reported on FormEIA-
906/759, “Power Plant Report” divided by maximum potential output as determined by
facility nameplate rating. This form is also the source for analysis on changes in output at
the facility-level. Utility-specific implementations of Incentive Regulation programs is from
Sappington and Pfeifenberger (2001) with updates from Guerriero (2010). This is linked to
the plant-level data by the utility identifiers in the “Power Plant Report” data.
    Data on geographic coordinates of power plants is from the Environmental Protection
Agency’s eGrid database.
Unit-Level Data
Unit-specific characteristics are assembled using the crosswalks between unit components
provided in Form EIA-767, “Annual Steam-Electric Plant Operation and Design Data” avail-
able from 1990-2005. The data on this form was later compiled on Form EIA-923, “Power
Plant Operations Report” after a gap in reporting for 2006.30 The effects of this gap can
be mitigated by the fact that scrubber installation date is collected, so status in the missing
year can be inferred from prior and subsequent years. Power generating stations have been
required to file these forms with EIA regardless of regulatory status,31 so this series does not
suffer from the intermittent non-reporting present in the fuel price data. Unit-level genera-
tor nameplate capacity and vintage comes from Form EIA-860, “Annual Electric Generator
Report.”
    As with the generating facilities themselves, there has also been limited entry and attrition
at the unit level. As a fraction of nameplate capacity, 92% of units reporting in 2009 also
reported when the series began in 1990 (85% of units). These numbers increase to 95%
and 93% respectively when accounting for the expanded coverage among combined heat and
power units in 2002. Attrition was similarly rare, with 96% of capacity and 87% of units
reporting in 1990 continuing to report in 2009.
    It is worth noting that is that it is not uncommon for facilities to have both scrubbed and
un-scrubbed units operating at the same plant. This can be seen by comparing the number
for any scrubber present at the facility in Table 1, and the unit-level statistics in Table 3.32
The differences between divested and non-divested units are otherwise similar to those found
  30
     Plants with a combined nameplate capacity less than 50 MW are not required to report fuel prices (Form
EIA-423/923), while all facilities with a capacity greater than 10 MW are required to report generating unit
configurations and operations (Form EIA-767/923). The discrepancy amounts to an infinitesimal share of
production and capacity.
  31
     Form EIA-767 expanded coverage to a handful of combined heat and power plants in 2002.
  32
     While scrubbers had only been installed on a small fraction of generating units in 1997, these units were
disproportionately large. In 1997 28% of U.S. coal-fired capacity was scrubbed for sulfur emissions. This has
grown to nearly half by 2009.


                                                     52
at the plant level, and largely eliminated in the matched sample.
Mine-Level Data
Data on mine labor productivity is from the Mine Safety and Health Administration’s “Quar-
terly Mine Employment and Coal Production Report” (MSHA-7000-2). Figure B.2 shows
the trends in production and labor hours over the sample period. The main development
over the last twenty years has been the explosion of production from the Powder River Basin
(PRB) in Wyoming. This has more than offset the decline of output elsewhere, so that
there has been a modest increase in coal production overall. The shift in output has been
accompanied with a sharp decline in mining employment, which has only rebounded slightly
since 2005. The 1990’s saw sharp increases in labor productivity all around–from expanding
output faster than employment in the PRB, and by reducing employment faster than output
in the East. It requires about seven times less labor to extract a ton of coal in the PRB.
    Wages are calculated by adding up the quarterly hours reported in the MSHA data by
FIPS county, and merging this data with the quarterly wage bill in the coal mining sector
as reported in the “Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages” from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.33 Wage rates are calculated at the county level by dividing the total county wage
bill by total hours.
    The thickness of coal seams is from MSHA’s “Mine Dataset,” which contains descrip-
tive data on all mines under MSHA’s jurisdiction since 1970. To calculate the depth of
mine seams, I used a Perl script to collect the universe of stratigraphic data from the U.S.
Geological Survey’s “National Coal Resources Data System.” The combined USTRAT and
COALQUAL databases consist of over 200,000 geo-coded core samples taken by federal and
state geologists in order to map U.S. coal deposits. Among the many parameters collected
from these core samples is the depth of coal deposits. I use these points to create a surface of
estimated seam depth using a spline to interpolate between points using the geoprocessing
toolkit of ArcGIS 10.0. I then intersect the coordinates of mines with this surface to estimate
the depth of coal deposits at each mining site.
    The EIA only began collecting source mine identifiers (MSHA ID) on the fuel delivery
data in 2008. From 1990-2001, I link deliveries to the name of the supplier listed in EIA’s
Coal Transportation Rate Database (CTRD) based on facility, county of coal origin, and
the characteristics of the coal reported in both the CTRD and EIA-423 data. The name of
the supplier is explicitly listed in the EIA-423 data beginning in 2002. Deliveries and mine
characteristics are therefore connected at the county-supplier level.



 33
      Coal mining employment is reported under the four-digit NAICS code, “2121.”


                                                   53
Figure B.1: Total Heat Content and Cost of Coal Deliveries by Rank, 1990-
2009
                                          (a) Total Heat Content of Coal Deliveries


                      20      15
              Quads (10e15 btu)
                     10
                      5
                      0




                                   1990        1995                2000           2005      2010
                                                                   year

                                                      Bituminous           Sub−Bituminous
                                                      Other



                                              (b) Total Cost of Coal Deliveries
                       40
                       30
               Billions of $
                    20 10
                       0




                                   1990        1995                 2000          2005      2010
                                                                    year

                                                      Bituminous           Sub−Bituminous
                                                      Other




 Note: Vertical lines denote the year in which divestitures begin (1998), and when reporting for
         non-utilities commences (2002). Source: Forms EIA-423,923 and FERC 423.


                                                               54
Figure B.2: U.S. Coal Production and Labor Demand, 1990-2009
                                           (a) Production

               300   200
       Millions of Tons
      100      0




                      1990q1    1995q1             2000q1           2005q1           2010q1
                                                 Year−Quarter

                                         U.S. Total             Wyoming Only



                                          (b) Labor Input
               80




                                                                                   8
                        60




                                                                                   6
      Millions of Hours




                                                                                   Millions of Hours
              40




                                                                                           4
               20




                                                                                   2
               0




                                                                                   0




                      1990q1   1995q1          2000q1           2005q1         2010q1
                                             Year−Quarter

                                    U.S. Total              Wyoming Only



                                Source: Form MSHA-7000-2.




                                                  55
                    Table B.1: Summary of Coal Plant Divestitures by State
                                            Fraction of    Fraction of
     State               Plants (Divested) IOU Divested Capacity Divested Mean Sale Date [s.d.]
     Texas                    17 ( 9 )         0.69           0.60          8/2002 [13.69]
     Connecticut               1(1)            1.00           1.00             5/1999 [ .]
     Delaware                 2(2)             1.00           1.00           7/2001 [ 0.00]
     Maryland                  7(7)            1.00           1.00          10/2000 [ 3.09]
     Illinois                22 ( 19 )         1.00           0.95          10/2000 [18.57]
     Indiana                  24 ( 1 )         0.05           0.02           9/2001 [23.14]
     Massachusetts             4(4)            1.00           1.00          12/2000 [47.45]
56




     Montana                   3(2)            0.67           0.98           1/2000 [ 0.00]
     New Jersey               5(4)             1.00           0.99          9/2002 [38.19]
     New York                 10 ( 8 )         0.89           0.92           8/1999 [ 6.46]
     Ohio                     25 ( 8 )         0.38           0.26           2/2002 [29.28]
     Pennsylvania            21 ( 21 )         1.00           1.00          7/2000 [14.09]
     Virginia                  9(1)            0.11           0.10           2/2002 [29.41]
     Washington               2(1)             1.00           0.97           5/2000 [ 0.00]
     Divest States Total    152 ( 88 )         0.65           0.33          7/2001 [23.71]
     Notes: Coal-fired cogeneration plants in CA were not affected by restructuring legislation (4 plants).
     Other restructured states without reporting coal plants include ME, VT, RI, and DC. NH did not
     require divestiture (2 plants) Sources: ”Electric Power Monthly” (March, various years), EIA-423/923
     and EIA-906.
C      Additional Results and Robustness Checks
This Appendix presents additional results and robustness checks to supplement those pre-
sented in the main text of the paper. The first three tables replicate the summary statistics
and core results from the main text using only Investor-Owned Utility plants as the potential
matches for divested plants. Dropping Government/Municipal/Co-op-owned plants reduces
the set of matched controls from 101 plants (in the main text) to 77. This exercise is useful,
first, to explain the drop in generating capacity and delivered heat between divested and
non-divested plants shown in the B panels of Tables 1 and 2, respectively. Although these
differences were not statistically significant in the main text, the results here show that the
differences that did exist were due to matches with non-IOU plants, which tend to be smaller.
    Although Gov/Muni/Coop plants do not face any changes in regulatory oversight during
this period of time, it is not obvious that the incentives facing operators of these plants would
parallel those of IOUs, a necessary condition to use these facilities to form a counterfactual
for divested plants. This is a testable assumption, and Figure C.1 does so using the matching
methodology developed in Section 4 with m = 10. IOU plants not subject to divestiture
are matched to Gov/Muni/Coop facilities that burned a common rank of coal in 1997 and
are within 200 miles of the matched facility. The difference between the two groups is
statistically significant for one month over twenty years, and they follow nearly identical
paths aside from a brief convergence in 2002. This suggests that Gov/Muni/Coop plants
nearby divested facilities perform equally well as IOU facilities to estimate the counterfactual
prices that would have prevailed in the absence of divestiture.
    What impact does the exclusion of these non-IOU plants have on the estimated relation-
ship between divestiture and coal prices? Table C.3 replicates the main results on (log) coal
prices from the paper with this sample restriction. Although Figure C.1 shows IOU and non-
IOU prices track together fairly well, one might be concerned that divestiture raises pressures
on nearby non-IOU plants to reduce their costs, thereby contaminating the control group.34
With nearly 25% of the control sample removed, the estimated effect of divestiture drops
from around 12% to roughly 10%, and it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that the
coefficients are equal at conventional levels. It would therefore appear that such a spillover
was not occurring–perhaps because divested plant fuel prices remain confidential, and it was
therefore difficult for the nearby municipal plants to know they were being out-performed.
    Table C.4 presents an additional robustness check by re-running the core specifications
of Table 4 with a constant set of divested plants. This means restricting the data to those
divested plants with at least one control facility within 50 miles–the set of matched control
plants will vary across specifications, since that is the point of presenting different matching
 34
      I am grateful to an anonymous referee for raising this possibility.

                                                       57
criteria. Thus the third columns of the two tables are identical. This yields slightly larger
coefficients, but again, they are not statistically different than those in the main text. An-
other point of interest is that this table gives further evidence in favor of the explanation
of greater heterogeneity across columns (1) - (3) of Table 4 in the main text: the analogous
coefficients vary less once a constant set of plants is used.
    Although Figure 5 shows a relatively flat pre-trend leading up to divestiture, Table C.5
tackles the potential for pre-existing trends directly by including state-specific quadratic
trends in the Matched DID specifications. This helps to account for any time-varying dif-
ferential trends between treatment and control states that would bias the estimate of an
effect of divestiture (the coefficients do not budge with simple linear trends and/or treat-
ment group-specific trends). The results are not statistically different from those in the main
text (if a percent or two less).
    Finally, one might worry that differences in behavior between groups might be due to
the differential impact of environmental regulations or access to transportation networks.
Table C.7 expands upon the plant-level summary statistics of Table 1 to gauge the potential
for such a scenario. The share of deliveries that arrived by barge in 1997 according to the
Coal Transportation Rate Database is relatively balanced between the two groups. Divested
plants are more likely to be subject to stricter ozone and particulate matter (PM) regulations,
though this differential is moderated somewhat through matching. While there is not much
time-variation in the PM regulations, the NOx Budget program was rolled out starting in
2003. These differences in regulation are unlikely to have affected coal procurement decisions:
reported PM emissions factors for pulverized coal are not reported separately for bituminous
versus sub-bituminous coals in the EPA’s official engineering studies (AP-42, 5th Edition,
Vol 1, Ch 1.), nor are NOx compliance options limited based on sulfur content (though flue
gas treatment configurations may vary).
    Looking beyond the results regarding the price paid for coal, Figure C.2 shows the year-
from-divestiture effects of the share of coal procured from in-state, analogous to the overall
average effects presented in Table 9. This figure shows that the subsequent Matched-DID
results are not an artifact of a pre-existing trend away from purchasing in-state coal in
subsequently restructured states.
    Because the analysis of sulfur compliance decisions excludes all plants who had already
installed a scrubber before 1997, one might worry about potential sample selection problems.
In particular, it might be the case that subsequently divested plants were more likely to have
already installed scrubbers in the plants best-suited for their use prior to 1997. The relative
lack of scrubber adoption in later years might simply be due to sample exclusion.35 To gauge
 35
      I am grateful to an anonymous referee for raising this concern.


                                                      58
the potential for this concern, Table C.6 includes all of the units in the original analysis, plus
those in both divested and non-divested groups that switch to low-sulfur coal or installed
a scrubber between 1991 and 1996, and were therefore excluded from the main analysis.
It appears the inclusion of additional units that would soon go on choose an abatement
strategy has a negligible effect on the estimates. The results with this larger set of units
barely differs from those in the main text, suggesting that subsequently divested plants were
not disproportionately installing scrubbers in the half-decade before restructuring.




                                               59
Figure C.1: Matching Estimates of Delivered Coal Price at IOU and
Gov/Muni/Coop Plants, 1990-2009
                    3
                    2.5
                    2
                  Cost
                  1.5
                    1
                    .5
                    0




                      1990m1         1995m1         2000m1            2005m1      2010m1
                                                   Year−Month

                                              95% CI            95% CI
                                              IOU               Gov/Muni/Coop


Note: Gov/Muni/Coop facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. Matching criteria:
 m = 10, burning the same rank of coal in 1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200
               miles. Confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility.




                                                       60
Table C.1: Characteristics of Coal Deliveries to Divested and Non-Divested
IOU Plants in 1997

        A. All Facilities
                                Divested     Not Divested             Difference of Means
        Millions MMBTU              44.76            48.17                            –3.41
        Delivered                 [42.78]          [44.48]                           (5.49)
        Price($/MMBTU)                1.42             1.22                        0.20***
                                    [0.37]           [0.36]                          (0.05)
        % Spot Market                 0.24             0.29                           –0.06
                                    [0.29]           [0.33]                          (0.04)
        Yrs to Contract               5.37             5.43                           –0.07
        Expiry                      [6.19]           [6.03]                          (0.88)
        % Sourced                     0.41             0.28                         0.13**
        In-State                    [0.46]           [0.43]                          (0.06)
        % Bituminous                  0.76             0.62                         0.13**
                                    [0.42]           [0.46]                          (0.06)
        Sulfur Content                1.19             0.93                        0.26***
        (lbs/mmbtu)                 [0.72]           [0.71]                          (0.09)
        Ash Content                   8.67             7.82                            0.84
        (lbs/mmbtu)                 [4.83]           [3.31]                          (0.56)
        Mine Distance              318.10           383.93                          –65.83
        (mi.)                    [330.64]         [319.82]                         (41.53)
        Facilities                      88              210                             298

        B. Matched Facilities
                                  Divested Not Divested               Difference of Means
        Millions MMBTU                44.93           44.84                            0.09
        Delivered                   [43.00]         [38.95]                          (7.45)
        Price($/MMBTU)                  1.42            1.26                       0.16***
                                      [0.37]          [0.29]                         (0.06)
        % Spot Market                   0.23            0.30                          –0.07
                                      [0.28]          [0.35]                         (0.06)
        Yrs to Contract                 5.42            5.71                          –0.29
        Expiry                        [6.23]          [7.89]                         (1.34)
        % Sourced                       0.41            0.40                           0.01
        In-State                      [0.46]          [0.44]                         (0.08)
        % Bituminous                    0.76            0.77                          –0.01
                                      [0.42]          [0.41]                         (0.07)
        Sulfur Content                  1.19            1.27                          –0.08
        (lbs/mmbtu)                   [0.73]          [0.74]                         (0.13)
        Ash Content                     8.56            8.54                           0.02
        (lbs/mmbtu)                   [4.75]          [3.49]                         (0.78)
        Mine Distance                321.01          279.19                           41.82
        (mi.)                      [331.42]        [309.77]                        (51.48)
        Facilities                        87              77                            164
        Note: Non-Divested facilities in Panel B receive weight 1/mj for each matched
        divested facility j. Matching criterion: m = 10 burning the same rank of coal in
        1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Standard
        errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01



                                                 61
Table C.2: Characteristics of Divested and Non-Divested IOU Generating
Units in 1997

        A. All Facilities
                                   Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
        Capacity (MW)                 799.79       891.30              –91.51
                                    [671.86]     [763.46]             (88.81)
        Annual Capacity                  0.59         0.57                0.02
        Factor                         [0.19]       [0.18]              (0.02)
        Plant Vintage               1961.99      1963.00                 –1.01
                                     [10.92]      [13.44]               (1.49)
        % Scrubbers                      0.25         0.25               –0.00
        Installed                      [0.44]       [0.44]              (0.06)
        Incentive                        0.44         0.22            0.22***
        Regulation Util.               [0.50]       [0.42]              (0.06)
        Facilities                         88          210                 298

        B. Matched Facilities
                                   Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
        Capacity (MW)                 803.95       797.35                 6.60
                                    [674.61]     [692.20]            (127.59)
        Annual Capacity                  0.59         0.59               –0.00
        Factor                         [0.19]       [0.18]              (0.03)
        Plant Vintage               1962.14      1961.88                  0.26
                                     [10.90]      [13.76]               (2.28)
        % Scrubbers                      0.25         0.26               –0.01
        Installed                      [0.44]       [0.44]              (0.08)
        Incentive                        0.45         0.10            0.35***
        Regulation Util.               [0.50]       [0.30]              (0.08)
        Facilities                         87           77                 164
        Note: Non-Divested facilities in Panel B receive weight 1/mj for each matched
        divested facility j. Matching criterion: m = 10 burning the same rank of coal in
        1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Standard
        errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                               62
Table C.3: IOU Only: Matched DID Estimates of Coal Log(P rice) and
Divestiture
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)                (6)
Post-Divest                    –0.096**    –0.120**      –0.107    –0.096**    –0.091**             –0.076
                                (0.040)     (0.050)     (0.077)     (0.042)     (0.044)            (0.051)
m Nearest Neighbors                                                      10           5                  1
Proximity Threshold (mi.)           200         100         50
Year-Month FE                       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes                Yes
Facility FE                         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes                Yes
R2                                0.690       0.611      0.601       0.691       0.687              0.663
Facilities                          192         124         61         168         146                110
Divested Facilities                  87          74         39          87          87                 87
Obs.                              39367       24025      11164       32865       29072              21324
Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Coal per MMBTU, including shipping costs. Non-Divested
facilities receive weight m1 j for each matched divested facility j burning the same rank of coal in 1997,
subject to the indicated matching criterion. Standard errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




Table C.4: Constant Set of Divested Plants: Matched DID Estimates of
Coal Log(P rice) and Divestiture
                                    (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)              (6)
Post-Divest                    –0.152**    –0.188***     –0.152*    –0.144**    –0.148**          –0.151*
                                (0.064)       (0.070)    (0.077)     (0.066)     (0.067)          (0.079)
m Nearest Neighbors                                                       10           5                1
Proximity Threshold (mi.)           200           100         50
Year-Month FE                       Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes
Facility FE                         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes
R2                                0.655         0.690      0.668       0.658       0.658            0.664
Facilities                          159           100         69         132          99               57
Divested Facilities                  39            39         39          39          39               39
Obs.                              30507         18592      12682       20649       16593            10045
Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Coal per MMBTU, including shipping costs. Non-Divested
facilities receive weight m1 j for each matched divested facility j burning the same rank of coal in 1997,
subject to the indicated matching criterion. Standard errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                  63
Table C.5: State-Specific, Quadratic Time Trends: Matched DID Estimates
of Coal Log(P rice) and Divestiture
                                      (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
Post-Divest                    –0.103***    –0.177***      –0.102   –0.108***     –0.111***     –0.145***
                                  (0.033)      (0.049)    (0.080)      (0.034)       (0.038)       (0.049)
m Nearest Neighbors                                                         10             5             1
Proximity Threshold (mi.)             200          100        50
Year-Month FE                         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Facility FE                           Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
State-Quadratic Trend                 Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
R2                                  0.798        0.799     0.747         0.802        0.804         0.814
Facilities                            230          146        69           198          166           121
Divested Facilities                    87           74        39            87           87            87
Obs.                                47024        28449     12682         37495        32958         23336
Note: Dependent variable is Log(P rice) of Coal per MMBTU, including shipping costs. Non-Divested
facilities receive weight m1 j for each matched divested facility j burning the same rank of coal in 1997,
subject to the indicated matching criterion. Standard errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




Table C.6: Units Burning Bituminous Coal in 1990 Without Scrubbers:
Matched DID Estimates of Sulfur Compliance Strategy

                                           (1)           (2)                          (3)
                                     Scrubber    Low Sulfur                  Uncontrolled
           Post-Divest               –0.061**      0.088***                        –0.036
                                       (0.025)       (0.030)                      (0.037)
           Divested Unit                 0.015        –0.007                       –0.013
                                       (0.034)       (0.030)                      (0.042)
           m Nearest Neighbors              10            10                           10
           R2                            0.021         0.056                        0.067
           Units                           457           457                          457
           Divested Units                  219           219                          219
           Obs.                           7929          7929                         7929
           Note: Sample includes all units without a scrubber and burning bituminous coal
           in 1997. Non-Divested units receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility
           j within 200 miles. Matching criterion: m = 10. Standard errors clustered by
           unit in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                  64
Figure C.2: Matching by Year from Divestiture: Percent Sourced In-State
                  .2
            % Sourced In−State
         −.4      −.2
                  −.6       0




                                 −10     −5               0                5                10
                                                Years since Divestiture

                                       95% CI           Ave. Pre−Treatment on the Treated
                                       95% CI           Ave. Treatment on the Treated



 Note: Non-Divested facilities receive weight m1j for each matched divested facility j. mj denotes
the number of divested facilities burning the same rank of coal in 1997, and is located within 100
 miles of the divested plant. Confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by facility.
    The vertical line denotes the third year post-divestiture, the point at which most divested
                               facilities resumed reporting fuel costs.




                                                      65
Table C.7: Modes of Transportation and Environmental Regulations at
Divested and Non-Divested Plants in 1997

       A. All Facilities
                                  Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
       Barge Delivery                  0.13         0.15                –0.02
                                     [0.33]       [0.32]               (0.05)
       Ozone                           0.67         0.31             0.36***
       Non-Attainment                [0.47]       [0.46]               (0.06)
       PM                              0.50         0.25             0.25***
       Non-Attainment                [0.50]       [0.44]               (0.06)
       Nox Budget                      0.86         0.47             0.39***
       Program                       [0.35]       [0.50]               (0.05)
       Facilities                        88          309                  397

       B. Matched Facilities
                                  Divested Not Divested Difference of Means
       Barge Delivery                  0.14         0.19                –0.06
                                     [0.33]       [0.33]               (0.08)
       Ozone                           0.67         0.52                 0.15
       Non-Attainment                [0.47]       [0.50]               (0.09)
       PM                              0.51         0.26             0.24***
       Non-Attainment                [0.50]       [0.44]               (0.08)
       Nox Budget                      0.86         0.70              0.16**
       Program                       [0.35]       [0.46]               (0.08)
       Facilities                        87          101                  188
       Note: Non-Divested facilities in Panel B receive weight 1/mj for each matched
       divested facility j. Matching criterion: m = 10 burning the same rank of coal in
       1997, subject to the constraint that distance be less than 200 miles. Standard
       errors clustered by facility in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                              66
