                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LABOR MOBILITY WITHIN CURRENCY UNIONS

                                            Emmanuel Farhi
                                             Iván Werning

                                         Working Paper 20105
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20105


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014




For useful comments and discussions we thank Arnaud Costinot, Thomas Philippon and Robert Shimer,
as well as seminar participants at MIT and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Emmanuel Farhi and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Labor Mobility Within Currency Unions
Emmanuel Farhi and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 20105
May 2014
JEL No. E0,F0

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the effects of labor mobility within a currency union suffering from nominal rigidities. When
the demand shortfall in depressed region is mostly internal, migration may not help regional macroeconomic
adjustment. When external demand is also at the root of the problem, migration out of depressed regions
may produce a positive spillover for stayers. We consider a planning problem and compare its solution
to the equilibrium. We find that the equilibrium is generally constrained inefficient, although the welfare
losses may be small if the economy suffers mainly from internal demand imbalances.


Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu

Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E17-234
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu
            Labor Mobility within Currency Unions∗
                           Emmanuel Farhi                       Iván Werning
                        Harvard University                            MIT

                                              April 2014


                                                 Abstract
        We study the effects of labor mobility within a currency union suffering from nominal
        rigidities. When the demand shortfall in depressed region is mostly internal, migra-
        tion may not help regional macroeconomic adjustment. When external demand is also
        at the root of the problem, migration out of depressed regions may produce a posi-
        tive spillover for stayers. We consider a planning problem and compare its solution
        to the equilibrium. We find that the equilibrium is generally constrained inefficient,
        although the welfare losses may be small if the economy suffers mainly from internal
        demand imbalances.



1      Introduction
Mundell (1961) is famously cited for his exaltation of labor mobility as a precondition for
optimal currency areas. This idea, which quickly settled as a cornerstone of the growing
Optimal Currency Area (OCA) literature, seems broadly consistent with the preciously
few experiences we have to date.1 The United States enjoys relatively high mobility and
has proven to be a successful currency union. Mobility is arguably much lower within
the Eurozone, which sunk into trouble scarcely ten years after its inauguration.23
    ∗ Foruseful comments and discussions we thank Arnaud Costinot, Thomas Philippon and Robert
Shimer, as well as seminar participants at MIT and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
   1 See Dellas and Tavlas (2009) for a review of the OCA literature. Important precedents to Mundell (1961)

are Friedman (1953), Meade (1957), and Scitovsky (1958). Mundell emphasized that labor mobility may be
imperfect across regions within national borders, so that this OCA condition may not hold even for a single
country, thereby weakening Friedman’s argument for flexible exchange rates at the national level.
   2 For example, according to Bonin et al. (2008) annual interstate mobility in the US was 2-2.5% in 2005

and 2006, while cross-border moves within Europe are around 0.1%.
   3 The OCA literature has isolated other factors for a union’s success, including fiscal and product market

integration, which also differ between the US and the Eurozone.

                                                     1
    Intuitive as Mundell’s notion may be, we know of no formal study connecting mobil-
ity with macroeconomic adjustment within a currency union. To remedy this, we set up a
currency union model featuring nominal rigidities and incorporate labor mobility across
the different regions (or countries) that compose the currency union. We use this simple
model to tackle two related questions. First, does mobility help stabilize macroeconomic
conditions across regions in a union? Second, is equilibrium mobility socially optimal?
    Our findings do not fully validate the Mundellian view, but they are consistent with
a potential important role for mobility. Workers migrating away from depressed regions
naturally benefit from the option to pick up and go somewhere better. The interesting
and less obvious question is whether their exodus also helps those that stay behind. That
is, whether it aids in the macroeconomic adjustment of regions. A major insight of our
analysis is that the answer to this question is subtle because workers leaving a region
depart not only with their labor, but also with their purchasing power.
    Indeed, we provide a benchmark case where migration has no effect on the per-capita
allocations across regions. For this benchmark, the entire demand shortfall in depressed
regions is internal, located within the non-tradable sector. When workers migrate out of
a depressed region local labor supply is reduced, but so is the demand non-traded goods,
which, in turn, lowers the demand for labor. The two effects cancel, leaving the situation
for stayers unchanged.
    Away from this neutral benchmark, depressed regions might also suffer from external
demand shortfalls. When this is the case, migration out of depressed regions may help
improve the region’s macroeconomic outcome. For example, at the opposite end of the
spectrum, suppose regions only produce traded goods and that there is no home bias in
the demand for these goods. The demand for each region’s product is then determined
entirely by external demand at the union level, and internal demand plays no special
role. In this case, migration out of a depressed region improves the outcome of stayers by
increasing their employment, income and consumption.
    Overall, these results highlight that the macroeconomic spillover benefits from mobil-
ity are not straightforward. In particular, the degree of economic openness (how much
regions trade with one another) turns out to be a key parameter. Openness was proposed
by McKinnon (1963) as another precondition for an optimal currency area. Our findings
thus reveal an interesting interaction between these two separate notions discussed in the
OCA literature.
    Turning to the second, normative, question we find that the equilibrium with free
mobility is not generally constrained efficient. Typically, there is too little mobility from



                                             2
a social welfare perspective.4 This is the case because the macroeconomic outcome of a
depressed region weakly improves when some workers migrate away from it. One may
think of this effect as a macroeconomic externality not internalized by private agents.
A social planner, in contrast, internalizes these benefits, leading her to promote greater
mobility.
    What parameters affect the size of the inefficiency? Is the equilibrium inefficiency
likely to be quantitatively significant? To answer these questions it is useful to note that
the equilibrium turns out to be efficient in the benchmark case with internal demand
imbalances where migration does not affect per capita regional outcomes. This case fea-
tures no macroeconomic spillovers or externalities, aligning private and social benefits
and costs. This suggests that the welfare losses incurred by the equilibrium, vis a vis the
planner’s solution, depend on just how far actual economies are from this benchmark.
The inefficiencies may be small if economies are relatively closed and intraregional trade
is a small fraction of production.
    In reality, nominal rigidities may be present in prices, in wages or in both. In the policy
arena, concerns over wage rigidity seem to dominate those over price rigidity, while the
academic literature is more balanced. Indeed, in standard models the source of rigidity
makes little difference to the conclusions. Mainly for expositional reasons, we begin our
analysis with price rigidity. This allows us to sidestep some thorny issues that arise with
wage rigidity, such as the rationing assumption for employment. We also explicitly con-
sider rigid wages for a benchmark rationing rule that delivers the same results as rigid
prices. All of our results go through for this case. In ongoing work we explore other
rationing rules for employment that may introduce additional effects.


2     Internal Demand Imbalances
Our first model builds on the traded and non-traded goods setup introduced by Obstfeld
and Rogoff (1995) and developed by Farhi and Werning (2012) for the study of fiscal trans-
fers within currency unions. Here we extend these settings by incorporating mobility of
workers.
    A finite number of regions indexed by i ∈ I form a currency union. Our focus is on
trade and mobility within the union. Consequently, we abstract from non-members and
assume that either the union comprises the entire world or that it is is closed to the rest
of the world. There is a traded good, a non-traded good and labor. The traded good is
    4 With agent heterogeneity we believe it may be possible to construct examples where mobility is socially

pernicious. We abstract from these cases. We don’t know how realistic such cases may be.


                                                      3
supplied inelastically and traded competitively, with its price adjusting to clear the world
market. In each region, non-traded goods are produced from labor by monopolistic firms.
    The fundamental source of inefficiency that we introduce is nominal rigidities in the
form of price or wage stickiness. Shocks induce variations in productivities and prefer-
ences across regions, but because of these rigidities, and because the currency union rules
out adjustments in exchange rates, the equilibrium allocation may be distorted away from
the flexible price outcome. Some regions may end up with prices for their non-traded
good that are “too high” hurting the demand for their product and leading to a depressed
labor market. Other regions may end up with prices that are “too low”, enjoying high de-
mand and leading to a hot labor market.
    For simplicity take the prices of non-traded goods (or wages) as given and consider
one-time unanticipated shocks. However, our results generalize to considering the ex-
ante decision of firms (or workers) that set prices of non-traded goods (or wages) before
the realization of some state of the world s with probability π (s), but cannot change them
in the ex-post stage when the state of the world s is realized. At this ex-post stage, prices
(or wages) are fixed and the analysis is similar to the one we undertake here.


2.1   Preferences, Technology and Markets
Agents. There is a continuum of agents with a finite number of types j ∈ J each with
mass µ j . Let µi,j ∈ [0, µ j ] denote the mass of agents of type j who end up living in region
i, satisfying the adding up constraint

                                                   µj =   ∑ µi,j .                           (1)
                                                          i∈ I

An agent of type j living in region i maximizes utility from consumption of traded goods
 i,j                     i,j
CT , non-traded goods CNT and labor N i,j

                                                                  i,j       i,j
                               U i,j =          max       U i,j (CT , CNT , N i,j ),         (2)
                                          i,j    i,j
                                         CT ,CNT ,N i,j


subject to the budget constraint

                     PT CT + PNT,i CNT ≤ Wi N i,j + ET + Ti + ∑ π j,k Πk ,
                         i,j              i,j                           j
                                                                                             (3)
                                                                                  k∈ I

where PT is the price of the traded good, PNT,i is the price of the non-traded good in
region i, Wi is the wage in region i, π j,k is the share of profits Πk from region k that accrue


                                                          4
to agents of type j (satisfying ∑ j∈ J µ j π j,k = 1), and Ti is a type-independent lump sum
                                   j
rebate to agents in region i, and ET is the endowment of traded goods of agents of type j.
    Note that we assume that both the agent type j ∈ J and region i ∈ I affects utility. This
allows us to capture differences in tastes for regional location and heterogenous relocation
costs. For example, suppose there are two regions

                                   I = {Spain, Germany}.

A simple model may then be to assume two agent types corresponding to their previous
residence
                              J = {Spaniard,German}.

Additionally, we may imagine that within each region agents differ in their degree of
mobility, say, because they have a different costs of moving, tastes for living abroad, or
family attachments to their original region. We can capture this by expanding the set of
agent types

    J = {Mobile Spaniard, Immobile Spaniard, Mobile German, Immobile German}.

Thus, our framework could flexibly accommodate these and other considerations.
    Turning to the budget constraints, agents can only work and consume in their region
                                                       j
of residence. Their endowments of the traded good ET is inalienable and does not depend
on the region in which they locate. Agents are also allowed to own shares of firms from all
regions. For our basic equilibrium analysis we shall assume that both taxes and transfers
are region specific but do not depend on the agent type. We have in mind a union where
regions do not discriminate agents based on past residence.
    The agents first order conditions are

                                          i,j           i,j
                                        UCT         UCNT
                                                =             ,                            (4)
                                         PT         PNT,i
                                          i,j           i,j
                                         UN     UCNT (s)
                                       −      =          .                                 (5)
                                         Wi      PNT,i

If agents are free to choose in which region i to live, then we have the additional condition
that
                                                             0
                                µi,j = 0 if U i,j < max U i ,j .                           (6)
                                                              i0 ∈ I

Mobility preferences and costs are implicitly incorporated in the utility functions U i,j , as


                                                    5
discussed above.
   The traded good is traded competitively across regions. Define the average endow-
ment of traded goods by
                                                     j
                                        ∑ j ∈ J µ j ET
                                 ET =                  .
                                         ∑ j∈ J µ j

Firms. Non-traded goods are produced in each region i by competitive firms that com-
bine a continuum of non-traded varieties indexed by l ∈ [0, 1] using the constant returns
to scale CES technology

                                                ˆ    1
                                                                                !    1
                                                                                    1− 1ε
                                                                   1− 1ε
                                   YNT,i =               YNT,i,l           dl               ,
                                                 0

with elasticity ε > 1.
   Each variety is produced by a monopolist using a linear technology:

                                             YNT,i,l = Ai Ni,l .

Each monopolist hires labor in a competitive market with wage Wi , but pays Wi (1 + τL,i )
net of a region specific tax on labor τL,i .
   We assume that the prices of intermediate goods are given and fixed.5 All intermediate
goods are symmetric, with prices PNT,i,l = PNT,i . This guarantees a symmetric equilibria
with YNT,i,l = YNT,i and Ni,l = Ni , satisfying

                                              YNT,i = Ai Ni .                                             (7)

Aggregate profits from intermediate goods in region i are
                                                                 
                                                       1 + τL,i
                              Πi = (1 − τπ,i ) PNT,i −          Wi YNT,i ,                                (8)
                                                         Ai
where τπ,i is the profit tax. We assume that intermediate firms hire labor to meet demand
at the fixed price PNT,i . They will have an incentive to do so as long as their profit margin
                    1+ τ
is positive PNT,i − A L,i Wi > 0. We assume throughout that this is the case.
                          i

   5 Asmentioned at the beginning of this section, we could also think that monopolists set prices PNT,i,l in
advance, at an ex ante stage, before the realization of the state of the world s is known. We are studying the
ex-post stage, after the shock.




                                                          6
Government.       The government budget constraint in each region is
                                                                                     
                                                                           1 + τL,i
                    ∑µ     i,j
                                 Ti = τL,i Wi Ni + τπ,i            PNT,i −
                                                                             Ai
                                                                                    Wi YNT,i .    (9)
                    j∈ J


In principle, we could have considered a a single union-wide budget constraint (equal
to the sum across regions of the regional budget constraints) that allowed for transfers
across regions, as in a fiscal union. Instead we choose to work with tax and transfer rules
that ensure budget balance at the regional level.

                                                                                  j
Equilibrium definition. Given prices PNT,i , endowments ET , profit shares π j,i , and taxes
τL,i and τπ,i , an equilibrium without free mobility is a set of masses µi,j satisfying the adding
up constraint (1), a price for traded goods PT , a set of wages Wi , consumptions and labor
            i,j   i,j
supplies CT , CNT and N i,j , outputs YNT,i and labor demands Ni , profits Πi , and taxes Ti ,
such that consumers maximize, firms meet demand, hire labor, pay taxes and distribute
profits, the government’s budget constraint holds and markets clear. Formally, we impose
the budget constraint (3) with equality, the first-order conditions (4)–(5), equations (7)–(9)
and the market clearing conditions

                                             ∑                       ∑ µ j ET ,
                                                             i,j
                                                        µi,j CT =                                (10)
                                           i ∈ I,j∈ J                j∈ J


                                               ∑ µi,j CNT = YNT,i ,
                                                            i,j
                                                                                                 (11)
                                               j∈ J

                                                  ∑ µi,j N i,j = Ni ,                            (12)
                                                  j∈ J

for all regions i ∈ I. An equilibrium with free mobility requires in addition that condition (6)
hold for all agent types j ∈ J and regions i ∈ I.


2.2   Additional Assumptions on Preferences, Taxes, and Endowments
To make the problem tractable, we make the following additional assumptions on prefer-
ences, taxes, and profit shares.
    First, we assume that profits are full taxed τπ,i = 1, so that Πi = 0, and transferred to
all residents equally
                                        PNT,i YNT,i − Wi Ni
                                  Ti =                      ,                            (13)
                                                µi



                                                              7
where µi denotes the mass of agents living in region i

                                              µi =   ∑ µi,j .                                (14)
                                                     j∈ J


We also assume that the endowment of traded goods is independent of the agent type j so
       j
that ET = ET . These assumptions ensure that all agents living in region i have the same
non-labor income PT ET + Ti . This is convenient, as we do not then have to keep track of
the wealth distribution.
    Second, we assume that in any region i, the utility functions U i,j represent the same
preference ordering for all agent types j. In other words, individual utility functions U i,j
are monotone transformations of some underlying regional utility function Ũ i (CT , CNT , N ).
This simplifying assumption helps with aggregation, since we do not need to keep track
of preference heterogeneity within regions. Note that we still allow preferences to depend
on location.
    Additionally, we assume that these preferences are separable between consumption
and labor, and homothetic in consumption goods. Specifically,

                               i,j   i,j                          i,j   i,j
                         Ũ i (CT , CNT , N i,j ) = Û i (ũi (CT , CNT ), N i,j ),

where the sub-utility function ũi is assumed to be homogeneous of degree one, increas-
ing, concave, strictly quasi-concave and twice continuously differentiable. Homotheticity
of preferences over consumption goods is convenient because it implies that, given the
relative price pi = PPT of traded goods in region i, agents of type j in region i choose to
                      NT,i
consume traded and non traded goods in fixed proportions

                                            i,j                 i,j
                                           CNT = αi ( pi )CT ,

for some function αi (·) that is increasing and differentiable. This conveniently encap-
sulates the restriction implied by the first order condition (4). This condition is crucial
because the stickiness of non-traded prices, together with the lack of monetary indepen-
dence, places restrictions on the possible variability across regions i in the relative price pi .
    These assumptions on preferences also imply that all agent types j within a region i
choose to work the same amount N i,j = Ni /µi . Total (non-labor and labor) income is then
PT ET + PNT,i YNT,i /µi , which is independent of agent type j. As a result, the allocation
over consumption and labor that any agent enjoys if living in region i is independent of
the agent’s type j. This greatly facilitates the analysis.



                                                     8
3     Equilibrium and Optimum with Domestic Demand Im-
      balances
We now study the previous model from a positive and normative perspective. We first
describe a positive property of the equilibrium. We then define and characterize the prob-
lem of a planner that can control mobility decisions.


3.1    Equilibrium
Implementability conditions. With the additional assumptions on preferences, taxes,
profit shares and endowments stated in Section 2.2, equilibria have a simple structure.
Consumption of traded goods, non-traded goods, and labor of agents of type j in region
i are given by
                                       i,j
                                     CT = ET ,                                     (15)
                                                i,j
                                              CNT = αi ( pi ) ET ,                                          (16)
                                                                  ET
                                              N i,j = αi ( pi )      .                                      (17)
                                                                  Ai
Total output and labor in region i are then simply determined by

                                            YNT,i = µi αi ( pi ) ET ,

                                                                  ET
                                             Ni = µi αi ( pi )       .
                                                                  Ai
We can then determine wages Wi and transfers Ti from equations (5) and (13).

Proposition 1 (Implementability). Given a price PT for traded goods, there exists a unique
equilibrium with free mobility (up to the indifference of agents in their location decisions). Given
in addition regional population sizes µi and masses of agents µi,j that satisfy (14), there exists a
unique equilibrium without free mobility.6
    6 Under the interpretation that the shock is one-time unanticipated, we can simply take prices as given
and we do not have to concern ourselves with the dependence of the ex-ante price setting stage on the ex-
post equilibrium. If instead we think that the shock and a nonzero ex-ante probability and that monopolists
set prices in advance, at an ex-ante stage, before the realization of the state of the world s, then no matter
                                 i,j i,j
what equilibrium allocation CT , CNT , N i,j , YNT,i , Ni and wages Wi arises in each state of the world s in the
ex-post stage (the dependence of these variables on s is suppressed in our notation), we can always adjust
the non state contingent tax τL,i and the taxes Ti , so that any desired price PNT,i,l = PNT,i independent of the
state of the world s is indeed chosen by firms at the ex-ante stage.




                                                        9
   A useful measure of demand imbalance at the regional level, is the labor wedge

                                                          i,j
                                                  1 UN
                                         τi = 1 +          ,
                                                  Ai U i,j
                                                        CNT

where the right hand side is independent of the agent type j. The labor wedge is zero at
a first-best allocation. A positive labor wedge τi > 0 indicates that region i is in a bust.
Conversely, a negative labor wedge τi < 0 indicates that region i is in a boom.


Impact of movers on stayers. We now state a crucial property of the equilibrium that
addresses the question that we raised in the Introduction regarding the impact of movers
on stayers.

Proposition 2 (Independence of per-capita allocations on location decisions). Given a price
PT for traded goods, the allocation of agents of type j in region i is identical and given by equations
(15)-(17) in all equilibria with or without free-mobility.

    Given a price for traded goods PT , the allocation of agents of type j in region i is totally
independent of the distribution of agents across regions. When some agents moves out of
a region i, reducing µi , the aggregate demand for non-traded goods in region i is reduced,
which reduces the demand for labor in region i. The move also reduces the supply of
labor in region i. The net impact of these two effects on stayers is null—their allocation
remains unchanged. Of course movers achieve a different allocations. But their move has
absolutely no impact on stayers. For example, the labor wedge τi remains unaffected.
    We will explore the normative consequences of Proposition 2 on the social efficiency
of mobility decisions in Section 3.2. For now, consider the equilibrium with free mobility.
Consider a depressed region i. Workers migrating away from this region naturally benefit
from the option to move to some region i0 with higher economic activity. Overall, the level
of economic activity in the union increases. In this sense, mobility helps macroeconomic
adjustment in a currency union, which can be seen as a vindication of the view associated
with Mundell (1961). However, Proposition 2 introduces an important qualification. In-
deed, migration out of region i and into region i0 does not improve the lot of stayers in
the region i of origin (nor does it hurt the lot of agents in the region i0 of destination).


3.2    Social Optimum
We consider a planning problem that allows us to characterize constrained Pareto efficient
allocations. The planning problem is indexed by a set of nonnegative Pareto weights λ j .

                                                  10
By varying these Pareto weights, we can trace out the entire constrained Pareto frontier.
The planning problem seeks to maximize a weighted average of the agents’ utilities over
the set of equilibria without free mobility. In other words, we are assuming extreme pow-
ers of relocation for the planner.7 Our main result is that constrained efficient allocations
are consistent with free mobility.
    In order to study the planning problem, it is useful to first define the indirect utility
function                                                             i        
                          i,j i,j          i,j    i,j i          i,j α ( p )
                        V ( CT , p i ) = U       CT , α ( p i ) CT ,         CT .
                                                                      Ai
    The price of traded goods PT can be controlled with union-wide monetary policy,
which consists in our model of setting the numeraire. Because our results on mobility
do not depend on whether monetary policy is chosen optimally, we consider two plan-
ning problem, a restricted planning problem and a full planning problem. The restricted
planning problem takes monetary policy (the price of traded goods PT ) as given and seeks
to optimally allocate agents over regions8
                                                                                           
                                                                                     PT
                            W ( PT ) = max        ∑
                                          µi,j i ∈ I,j∈ J
                                                             j i,j
                                                            λµ V     i,j
                                                                               ET ,
                                                                                    PNT,i
                                                                                                ,        (18)

s.t. for all j ∈ J,
                                                 ∑ µi,j = µ j .                                          (19)
                                                 i∈ I

    The full planning problem allows for flexible monetary policy and characterizes jointly
the optimal allocation of agents across regions and optimal monetary policy. The only
difference with the restricted planning problem (18) is that PT is a choice variable instead
of a parameter, so that the maximization takes place over PT and µi,j . This planning
problem can be solved recursively, solving first for the optimal allocation of agents across
regions for a given PT as characterized by the restricted planning problem (18), and then
maximizing over PT
                                       max W ( PT ).                                     (20)
                                                   PT

    We call the solutions of the restricted planning problem constrained efficient given
   7 Alternative implementations of the same allocations could be achieved by introducing additional agent

and location specific lump sum taxes
   8 Under the interpretation that the shock has a nonzero ex-ante probability and that monopolists set

prices in advance, at an ex-ante stage, before the realization of the state of the world s, then we could also
study an ex-ante problem that maximizes expected welfare across states s. The only difference is that the
non state contingent prices PNT,i would be choice variables, and there would be corresponding additional
optimality conditions. Because the prices PNT,i are not state contingent, it would typically not be possible
to achieve the first best in every state s. Given these prices PNT,i , the analysis would be unchanged.


                                                            11
monetary policy, and the solutions of the full planning problem constrained efficient.


3.3   Optimal Mobility Given Monetary Policy
In this section, we characterize constrained efficient allocations given monetary policy—
the solutions of the restricted planning problem (18). The first order condition for µi,j
yields
                                     λ j U i,j − ν j = ρi,j ,                          (21)

where ν j is the multiplier on the constraint (19), ρi,j = 0 if µi,j ∈ (0, 1), ρi,j ≥ 0 if µi,j = 1
and ρi,j ≤ 0 if µi,j = 0, and where with a slight abuse of notation, we replace V i,j by U i,j .
The first order conditions (21) can be rewritten as the condition that for all i ∈ I and j ∈ J,

                                                                              0
                                 µi,j = 0         if U i,j < max U i ,j ,
                                                                   i0 ∈ I

and coincides with the first order condition for free mobility (6). It is therefore not neces-
sary to intervene in mobility decisions.
Proposition 3 (Optimal Mobility). Constrained efficient allocation given monetary policy PT
are consistent with free mobility.
    The intuition for Proposition 3 is straightforward. Since there are no external effects
of agents’ location decisions on other agents, free mobility is optimal.


3.4   Optimal Monetary Policy
In this section, we characterize constrained efficient allocations—the solution of the full
planning problem (20). The derivative of the indirect utility function with respect to the
relative price of non-traded goods can be computed to be

                                   i,j i,j                 αip    i,j   i,j
                                  Vp (CT ,        pi ) =         CT UCT τi .
                                                           pi

Using this observation, the first order condition for PT can be written as

                                    ∑
                                                                 i,j
                                               λ j µi,j αip ET UCT τi = 0.                    (22)
                                  i ∈ I,j∈ J


Proposition 4 (Optimal Monetary Policy). Constrained efficient allocations are such that a
weighted average of the labor wedge τi across regions i is equal to zero, where the weight on τi is
                                 i,j
given by ∑ j∈ J λ j µi,j αip ET UCT as in condition (22).

                                                      12
    Proposition 4 establishes that optimal union-wide monetary policy targets a weighted
average across regions for the labor wedge τi . Because of our assumption of nominal
rigidities, all the labor wedges τi cannot in general be set to zero so that perfect stabiliza-
tion is generally impossible. However, at the union level the economy is stabilized in the
sense that the weighted average for the labor wedge across regions is set to zero. This im-
plies that optimal union-wide monetary policy ensures that some regions are in a boom
and some in a bust.
    The optimal allocation of agents across regions is still characterized by Proposition 3.
Of course PT influences the value of the endogenous variables U i,j , but not the conditions
for optimal mobility (21), which given these variables, coincide with the conditions for
free mobility (6).


3.5   Sticky Wages
Our arguments rely on nominal rigidities. We have chosen to expose the main result with
sticky prices and flexible wages, but this is inessential. Indeed, consider the same model
but assume now that prices are flexible, but that wages are sticky.
    We take the set of wages Wi as given. We consider a simple symmetric allocation rule
which specifies that labor Ni in region i is distributed equally among all the agents living
in region i. Optimal price setting dictates that

                                                  e             W
                             PNT,l,i = PNT,i =       (1 − τL,i ) i .                          (23)
                                                 e−1            Ai

Given this set of prices PNT,i , the analysis is then exactly the same as in the model with
sticky prices and flexible wages.

Proposition 5. Consider the model with sticky wages set at Wi and consider the associated equi-
librium and optimal allocations. These are identical to those of a model with sticky prices set by
(23). In particular, Propositions 2, 3, and 4 apply to the model just outlined with flexible prices
and sticky wages.


4     External Demand Imbalances
As in Section 2, there is a finite number of regions i ∈ I forming a currency union. Each
region produces a single differentiated final good. We index goods by their region of
origin i. Although production is specialized, consumption is not. All goods are consumed


                                                 13
throughout the union, with arbitrary differences in spending patterns across goods from
different regions depending on the region of residence.
    As in Section 2, the key friction is nominal rigidities. Shocks induce variations in
productivities and preferences. However, due to nominal rigidities, and because regions
are in a currency union, prices (or wages) cannot vary with the shocks, distorting the
allocation away from the flexible price outcome. Some regions then end up with a boom
and a hot labor market, others with a bust and a depressed labor market.
    For simplicity, we proceed as in Section 2. We take prices (or wages) as given, and
focus on a one-time unanticipated shock. However, our results generalize to a setting
where firms (or workers) set prices (or wages) in an ex-ante stage before the realization
of some state of the world s with probability π (s), but cannot change them in the ex-post
stage when the state of the world s is realized. At this ex-post stage, prices (or wages) are
fixed. We would then focus on a particular state s and suppress from our notation any
explicit dependence on the state.


4.1   Preferences, Technology and Markets
Agents. There is a continuum of agents of a finite number of different types j ∈ J. The
mass of agents of type j is µ j . We denote by µi,j ∈ [0, µ j ] the mass of agents of type j who
live in region i, satisfying
                                         µ j = ∑ µi,j .                                      (24)
                                                     i∈ I
                                                                                   i,j
An agent of type j living in region i maximizes utility from consumption {Ck }k∈ I of the
final goods and labor N i,j
                                                    i,j
                               U i,j = max U i,j ({Ck }, N i,j ),                    (25)
                                          i,j
                                         Ck ,N i,j

subject to a budget constraint

                            ∑ Pk Ck + ≤ Wi N i,j + Ti + ∑ π j,k Πk ,
                                   i,j
                                                                                            (26)
                            k∈ I                            k∈ I


where Pk is the price of final good k, Wi is the wage in region i, π j,k is the share of profits
Πk from region k of agents of type j, and Ti is a type-independent lump sum transfer to
agents in region i.




                                                     14
    The agents first order conditions are that for all k,

                                                  i,j
                                                UC             Pk
                                                      k
                                                  i,j
                                                          =−      .                                        (27)
                                                UN             Wi

If agents are free to choose the region they live in, then we have the additional condition

                                                                           0
                                     µi,j = 0    if U i,j < max U i ,j .                                   (28)
                                                                  i0 ∈ I


Mobility costs are implicitly incorporated in the utility functions U i,j .


Firms. Final goods are produced in each region i by competitive firms that combine a
continuum of non-traded varieties indexed by l ∈ [0, 1] using the constant returns to scale
CES technology
                                      ˆ 1              ! 1
                                                        1− 1ε
                                                  1
                              Yi =        Yi,l 1− ε dl        ,
                                                  0

with elasticity ε > 1.
   Each variety is produced by a monopolist with linear technology

                                                Yi,l = Ai Ni,l .

Each monopolist hires labor in a competitive market with wage Wi , but pays Wi (1 + τL,i )
net of a region specific tax on labor τL,i . The prices Pi,l = Pi set by monopolists are sticky,
and are taken as given. All intermediaries in a given region then hire the same amount of
labor Ni implying
                                            Yi = Ai Ni .                                    (29)

The common price of intermediate goods Pi is then also the price of the final good pro-
duced in region i.9
   Aggregate profits from intermediate good production in region i equals
                                                                 
                                                       1 + τL,i
                                 Πi = (1 − τπ,i ) Pi −          Wi Yi ,                                    (30)
                                                         Ai
   9 Ifthe shock is one-time unanticipated, this poses no difficulty. As mentioned at the beginning of this
section, we could also think that monopolists set prices in advance, at an ex ante stage, before the realization
of the state of the world s. Prices Pi,l of intermediate goods must be set before the realization of s is known.




                                                          15
where τπ,i is the profit tax. Profit shares must satisfy for every region i

                                                ∑ µ j π j,i = 1.                              (31)
                                                j∈ J


Government. The government budget constraint in each region imposes that each re-
gion balances its budget
                                                                                     
                                                                           1 + τL,i
                      ∑µ     i,j
                                   Ti = τL,i Wi Ni + τπ,i             Pi −
                                                                             Ai
                                                                                    Wi Yi .   (32)
                      j∈ J


Equilibrium definition. Given prices Pi , profit shares π j,i and taxes τL,i and τπ,i , an
equilibrium without free mobility is a set of masses µi,j , wages Wi , consumptions and labor
           i,j
supplies Ck and N i,j , outputs Yi and labor demands Ni , profits Πi , and taxes Ti , such that
the conditions (24)-(27) and (29)-(32) are verified, and markets clear so that for all k ∈ I,

                                              ∑
                                                                i,j
                                                         µi,j Ck = Yk ,                       (33)
                                            i ∈ I,j∈ J


                                             ∑ µk,j N k,j = Nk .                              (34)
                                             j∈ J

An equilibrium with free mobility requires in addition that condition (28) hold.


4.2   Additional Assumptions on Preferences and Taxes
Just as for the previous model, we me some additional assumptions here to make the
problem tractable.
   First, we assume that profits are fully taxed τπ,i = 1 and rebated to local agents

                                                       Pi Yi − Wi Ni
                                            Ti =                     ,                        (35)
                                                             µi

where µi the mass of agents living in region i,

                                                 µi =      ∑ µi,j .                           (36)
                                                           j∈ J


These assumptions ensure that all agents living in region i have the same income, given
by the value Pµi Yi of the final goods produced in region i. Moreover, they ensure that each
               i




                                                           16
region i runs a balanced budget since
                                                                        
                                                              1 + τL,i
                        µi Ti = τL,i Wi Ni + τπ,i        Pi −          Wi Yi .
                                                                Ai

    Second, we assume that in any region i, the utility functions U i,j represent the same
preference ordering for all agent types j. Moreover, we assume that these preferences are
separable between consumption and labor, and homothetic in consumption. We denote
by αik ∈ (0, 1) the spending share on good k, with ∑k∈ I αik = 1. This choice of preference is
flexible enough to allow for any arbitrary degree of home bias in consumption. We denote
by Pi the corresponding price index, and by Ci,j the consumption index. With some abuse
of notation, we can write the utility of an agent of type j in region i as

                                         U i,j (Ci,j , N i,j ).


5     Equilibrium and Optimum with External Demand Im-
      balances
We now turn to characterizing the equilibrium and contrast it to the problem of a planner
that can control mobility directly.


5.1   Equilibrium
Implementability conditions. With the additional assumption on preferences, taxes
and profit shares stated in Section 4.2, equilibria take a simple form. Aggregate income in
region i is given by Pi Yi . Total demand for good k from region i is then

                                                    Pi
                                              αik      Y
                                                    Pk i

Adding up across regions gives total demand and hence income for country k

                                       ∑ αik Pi Yi = Pk Yk .                              (37)
                                       i∈ I

Proposition 6 (Implementability). In any equilibrium with or without free mobility, regional
production Yi must satisfy the implementability condition (37). Conversely, given any regional
productions Yi satisfying the implementability condition (37), regional population sizes µi and


                                                    17
masses of agents µi,j satisfying (36), there exists a unique equilibrium without free mobility with
regional production Yi .10

    We have already proved the first part of the proposition. For the second part of the
proposition, consider Yi > 0 that satisfy the implementability condition (37). The unique
equilibrium such that the aggregate productions are given by Yi can be constructed as
follows. We have
                                       i,j   1 P
                                     Ck = αik i Yi ,                                  (38)
                                            µi Pk
                                                           1 Yi
                                                 N i,j =         .                                           (39)
                                                           µi Ai
We can also compute the consumption index

                                                         1 Pi
                                                Ci,j =        Y.
                                                         µi Pi i

We then compute Ni , wages Wi , profits Πi , and taxes Ti from equations (34), (27), (30),
and (35).
   We can also compute the labor wedge τi , which represents a useful measure of demand
imbalance at the regional level
                                              i,j
                                            U N Pi
                                  τi = 1 + i,j      i
                                                      ,
                                            U Pi A            C
where the right hand side is independent of the agent type j. The labor wedge is zero at
a first-best allocation. A positive labor wedge τi > 0 indicates that region i is in a bust.
Conversely, a negative labor wedge τi < 0 indicates that region i is in a boom.


Demand structure. We now establish that the linear system of equations given by (37)
admits a unique positive solution, up to constant of proportionality.

Proposition 7 (Demand Structure). There exists a set of strictly positive regional productions
Yi∗ such that for any set of regional productions Yi satisfying the implementability condition (37),
there exists λ > 0 such that Yi = λYi∗ for all i.
  10 Under  the interpretation that the shock is one-time unanticipated, we can simply take prices as given
and we do not have to concern ourselves with the dependence of the ex-ante price setting stage on the ex-
post equilibrium. If instead we think that the shock and a nonzero ex-ante probability and that monopolists
set prices in advance, at an ex-ante stage, before the realization of the state of the world s, then no matter
                                i,j
what equilibrium allocation Ck , N i,j , Yi , Ni , and wages Wi arises in each state of the world s in the ex-post
stage (the dependence of these variables on s is suppressed in our notation), we can always adjust the non
state contingent tax τL,i and the taxes Ti , so that any desired price Pi,l = Pi independent of the state of the
world s is indeed chosen by firms at the ex-ante stage.


                                                         18
Proof. Let A be the matrix [ aki ] where aki = αik PPi . We have aki > 0 for all i, k. We can
                                                           k
therefore apply the Perron-Froebenius theorem. It is easy to see that 1 is an eigenvalue
of A. Indeed, we can consider the matrix I − A, multiply each line by Pk , sum them, and
get 0. Hence ( P1 , P2 , ..., PI ) is a left eigenvector of A with eigenvalue 1. Because Pk ≥ 0
for all k, this proves that 1 is the Perron-Froebenius eigenvalue of the transpose A0 of A.
By implication 1 is also the Perron-Froebenius eigenvalue of A. This proves that there
exists a right eigenvector (Y1∗ , Y2∗ , ..., YI∗ )0 of A with eigenvalue 1 and Yk∗ > 0. Moreover,
the vector space associated with the eigenvalue 1 is one-dimensional.

    The proportionality constant λ is a union-wide aggregate demand shifter that we treat
as a dimension of policy. In a richer model λ would be determined by monetary policy at
the currency union.


Impact of movers on stayers. We now state a simple property of the model that crucially
differentiates it from the model of Section 2.

Proposition 8 (Dependence of per-capita allocations on location decisions). Given a value
for λ > 0, in all equilibria with or without free mobility, the consumption and labor allocation
of agents of type j in region i is given by equations (38)-(39). It depends on the equilibrium
only through the sufficient statistic of the population size µi of region i, to which it is inversely
proportional.

       Proposition 8 should be contrasted with Proposition 2. Given λ, the allocation of
agents of type j in region i is inversely proportional to the population size µi of region
i. When some agents moves out of a region i, reducing µi , the aggregate consumption
λ PPii Yi∗ and labor supply λ A1 Yi∗ of region i remain unchanged, and are shared among
                                i
fewer people due to the outward migration. Of course, as in the model of Sections 2-3.2,
movers achieve a different allocations, but the key difference is that their move now has
an impact on stayers, increasing their consumption and labor supply in proportion of the
ratio of the migration outflow to the population size µi .
       We will explore the normative consequences of Proposition 8 on the social efficiency
of mobility decisions in Section 3.2. For now, let us focus on the equilibrium with free
mobility. Consider a depressed region i. As in the model of Sections 2, workers migrating
away from this region naturally benefit from the option to move to some region i0 with
higher economic activity. This stimulates the economy of the region i of origin in per-
capita terms and cools off the economy of the destination region i0 in per-capita terms.
Mobility may therefore have extra benefits for macroeconomic adjustment in a currency


                                                 19
union when demand imbalances are external rather than internal, reinforcing the view
associated with Mundell (1961).


5.2    Social Optimum
Once again, we consider a planning problem indexed by a nonnegative Pareto weights λ j .
By varying these Pareto weights we can trace out the entire constrained Pareto frontier.
The planner maximizes over the set of equilibria without free mobility. As in Section
3.2, we are assuming extreme powers of relocation for the planner. 11 As we shall see,
in contrast to the model with internal imbalances of Sections 2-3.2, constrained efficient
allocations are not consistent with free mobility.
    Because our results on mobility do not depend on whether union-wide aggregate de-
mand management λ is set optimally, we consider two planning problem, a restricted
planning problem and a full planning problem. The restricted planning problem takes
union-wide aggregate demand management λ as given and seeks to optimally allocate
agents over regions. Using Propositions 6 and 7, we can write the planning problem as12

                                                                              Pi Yi∗ Yi∗
                                                                                          
                         W (λ) = max           ∑
                                    µi ,µi,j i ∈ I,j∈ J
                                                           j i,j
                                                          λµ U     i,j
                                                                             λ i ,λ
                                                                              P µi Ai µi
                                                                                               ,       (40)


subject to, for all j ∈ J
                                                    ∑ µi,j = µ j ,
                                                    i∈ I

and for all i ∈ I
                                                    ∑ µi,j = µi .
                                                    j∈ J

    The full planning problem allows for flexible monetary policy and characterizes jointly
the optimal allocation of agents across regions and optimal monetary policy. The only
difference with the first planning problem (40) is that λ is a choice variable instead of a
parameter, so that the maximization takes place over λ, µi and µi,j . This planning problem
can be solved recursively, solving first for the optimal allocation of agents across regions
  11 Alternative implementations of the same allocations could be achieved by introducing additional agent

and location specific lump sum taxes
  12 Under the interpretation that the shock has a nonzero ex-ante probability and that monopolists set

prices in advance, at an ex-ante stage, before the realization of the state of the world s, then we could
also study an ex-ante problem that maximizes expected welfare across states s. The only difference is that
the non state contingent prices Pi would be choice variables, and there would be corresponding additional
optimality conditions. Because the prices Pi are not state contingent, it would typically not be possible to
achieve the first best in every state s. Given these prices Pi , the analysis would be unchanged.



                                                             20
for a given λ as characterized by the restricted planning problem (40), and then maximiz-
ing over λ
                                         max W (λ).                                  (41)
                                                  λ

   We call the solutions of the restricted planning problem constrained efficient given
union-wide aggregate demand management, and the solutions of the full planning prob-
lem constrained efficient.


5.3    Optimal Mobility
In this section, we characterize the constrained efficient allocation given union-wide ag-
gregate demand management—the solutions of the restricted planning problem (40). We
break down the restricted planning problem into two steps. In the first step, we solve

                                                                                P Y∗     Y∗
                                                                                             
                     V ({µi }, λ) = max       ∑
                                      µi,j i ∈ I,j∈ J
                                                        λµ U j i,j   i,j
                                                                               λ ii i , λ i
                                                                                P µi Ai µi
                                                                                                  ,   (42)


subject to, for all j ∈ J
                                               ∑ µi,j = µ j ,                                         (43)
                                               i∈ I

and for all i ∈ I
                                               ∑ µi,j = µi .                                          (44)
                                               j∈ J

In the second step, we solve

                                    W (λ) = max V ({µi }, λ),                                         (45)
                                                        µi


subject to
                                                ∑ µi = 1.
                                                i∈ I

    For all i ∈ I and j ∈ J, we have the following first order condition for µi,j in the
first-step planning problem 42:

                                      λ j U i,j − ν j − γi = ρi,j ,                                   (46)

where γi is the multiplier on the constraint (44), ν j is the multiplier on the constraint (43),
ρi,j = 0 if µi,j ∈ (0, 1), ρi,j ≥ 0 if µi,j = 1 and ρi,j ≤ 0 if µi,j = 0. This condition characterizes
the optimal location of agents of different types across the different regions.


                                                         21
   The envelope theorem implies that for all i ∈ I,

                                                µi,j Pi Yi∗ i,j
                             Vµi = − ∑ λ j          λ      U τ + γi .
                                      j∈ J
                                                µi Pi µi C i

The right hand side is independent of the agent type j.
   The first order conditions for the second-step planning problem (45) are for all i ∈ I,

                                               Vµi = γ,

that is
                                                    µi,j Pi Yi∗ i,j
                               γi = γ + ∑ λ j           λ      U τ.                        (47)
                                             j∈ J
                                                    µi Pi µi C i

The sign of γi − γ coincides with the sign of the labor wedge τi . If region i is in a boom,
we have τi < 0 and γi < γ. Conversely, if region i is in a bust, we have τi > 0 and γi > γ.
    The first order conditions (46) can be rewritten as the condition that additional condi-
tion that for all i ∈ I and j ∈ J,

                                                    γi            i0 ,j   γi 0
                          µi,j = 0   if U i,j −        < max    U       −      ,           (48)
                                                    λj   i0 ∈ I           λj

and should be contrasted with the first order condition for free mobility (28). In general
the maximand over i of U i,j − λγij is different from the maximand of U i,j . It is therefore
necessary to intervene in mobility decisions. One way to characterize this intervention is
through an implicit additive utility wedge in the comparison between utility in region i
                                                         γ −γ
and utility in region i0 . This utility wedge is given by i0λ j i .

Proposition 9 (Optimal Mobility). Constrained efficient allocation given union-wide aggregate
demand management are in general inconsistent with free mobility. The utility wedge in the
comparison between utility in region i and utility in region i0 . This utility wedge is given by
γi 0 − γi
    λj
          , where γi is defined by equation (47).

    Proposition 9 shows that from a social perspective, in an equilibrium with free mobil-
ity, agents tend to locate too little in regions that are in a relative boom (regions with a
low value of γi ) and too much in regions that are in a relative bust (regions with a high
value of γi ). In other words, agents do not move out enough from regions in a relative
bust towards regions in a relative boom.
    A simple intuition for Proposition 9 is that agents do not internalize that by mov-
ing out of a region in a bust, they increase the consumptions and labor supplies of the


                                                    22
agents that remain in that region proportionately—the overall aggregate consumption
λ PPii Yi∗ and labor supply λ A1 Yi∗ in region i both remain unchanged, and are shared among
                                i
fewer people due to the outward migration. The impact of the staying agents’ utilities
is commensurate with the labor wedge τi in that region. Indeed, suppose that a mass
−dµi > 0 of agents leaves region i. Then then change in utility of staying agents of type j
is given by

                               −dµi Pi Yi∗ i,j −dµi 1 Yi∗ i,j
                       dU i,j =    λ i UC +          λ      U
                                µi  P µi          µi   Ai µi N
                                dµ P Y ∗ i,j
                             = − i λ ii i UC τi .
                                 µi P µi

These effects of an agent’s mobility decision on other agents’ utilities are not internal-
ized. Hence the need for corrective government intervention in mobility decisions. The
relevant sufficient statistic for these interventions is the multiplier

                                     j i,j dU
                                                i,j      Pi Yi∗ i,j
                                                           jµ
                                                                i,j
                      γi = − ∑ λ µ            = ∑λ     λ       U τ,
                              j∈ J
                                          dµi   j∈ J
                                                     µi Pi µi C i

which aggregates these external effects through a weighted average across agent types j
with weights λ j µi,j .
    The result in Proposition 9 can be contrasted with that in Proposition 3. In the model
with internal demand imbalances of Sections 2-3.2, constrained efficient allocations are
consistent with free mobility, and agents’ mobility decisions have no external effect on
other agents’ utilities. Indeed the allocation of an agent of type j in region i is indepen-
dent of the distribution of agents across regions. By contrast, in the model with external
imbalances of this section, constrained efficient allocations are in general not consistent
with free mobility, and agents’ mobility decisions have external effects on other agents’
utilities.
    The key difference can be traced back to the positive effects analyzed in Sections 3.1
and 5.1. In the model with internal demand imbalances, for a given stance of monetary
policy PT , migration out of a region reduces the total demand for the region’s non-traded
goods, and hence total demand for labor in the region by the same amount as it decreases
the total supply of labor in the region. As a result, the labor supply of stayers is un-
changed, and so is their consumption. By contrast, in the model with external imbal-
ances, for a given stance of union-wide aggregate demand management λ, migration out
of a region does not reduce the total demand for the region’s goods, which must then be
met by an increase in the labor supply of stayers, raising their income and in turn their

                                                      23
consumption.


5.4   Optimal Union-Wide Aggregate Demand Management
In this section, we characterize constrained efficient allocations—the solutions of the full
planning problem 41. The first order condition for λ is

                                             Pi Yi∗ i,j
                                     ∑ λ µ Pi µi UC τi = 0,
                                           j i,j
                                                                                              (49)
                                  i ∈ I,j∈ J


where the right hand side is independent of j ∈ J. This condition characterizes the opti-
mal level of union-wide aggregate demand in the currency union.
Proposition 10 (Optimal Union-Wide Aggregate Demand). Constrained efficient allocations
are such that a weighted average of the labor wedge τi across regions i is equal to zero, where the
                                              Y ∗ i,j
weight on τi is given by ∑ j∈ J λ j µi,j PPii µi UC as in condition (49).
                                       i

    Proposition 10 is similar to Proposition 4 and has a similar interpretation. The choice
of the price of the aggregate demand shifter λ, which can be thought of as union-wide
aggregate demand management, plays the same role as union-wide monetary policy PT .
    The optimal allocation of agents across regions is still characterized by Proposition
9. Of course λ influences the value of the endogenous variables U i,j and γi , but not the
conditions for optimal mobility (??), which given these variables, does not coincide with
the conditions for free mobility (6).


5.5   Sticky Wages
Our arguments go through if wages are sticky but prices are flexible. We take the set of
wages Wi as given. We consider the same simple symmetric allocation rule as in Section
3.5 which specifies that labor Ni in region i is distributed equally among the all the agents
living in region k. Optimal price setting dictates that

                                                e             W
                                 Pi,l = Pi =       (1 − τL,i ) i ,                            (50)
                                               e−1            Ai

where consistent with our previous analysis τL,i cannot be adjusted and is taken here to
be a parameter. Given this set of prices Pi , the analysis is then exactly the same as in the
model with sticky prices and flexible wages.
Proposition 11. Consider the model with sticky wages set at Wi and consider the associated
equilibrium and optimal allocations. These are identical to those of a model with sticky prices set

                                                   24
by (50). In particular, Propositions 10 and 9 apply to the model just outlined with flexible prices
and sticky wages.


6    Conclusion
We have examined the effectiveness of labor mobility in helping macroeconomic adjust-
ment in currency unions plagued with nominal rigidities. Our findings, summarized
below, develop and qualify one of the central tenets of the Optimal Currency Area litera-
ture put forth by Mundell (1961) that labor mobility is a precondition for optimal currency
areas.
    Agents move out of depressed regions and achieve higher welfare. Their impact on
the welfare of stayers is less straightforward. Our analysis has emphasized the origins,
internal or external, of demand imbalances. When demand imbalances are mostly in-
ternal, movers have little impact on the welfare of stayers. By contrast, when demand
imbalances are mostly external, movers improve the welfare of stayers.
    These considerations have normative implications. There is little scope for govern-
ment interventions in mobility decisions when demand imbalances are mostly internal.
By contrast, there is an important role for government interventions in mobility decisions
when demand imbalances are mostly external. Optimal government interventions en-
courage migrations out of depressed regions.


References
Bonin, Holger, Werner Eichhorst, Christer Florman, Mette Okkels Hansen, Lena Ski-
  old, Jan Stuhler, Konstantinos Tatsiramos, Henrik Thomasen, and Klaus F. Zimmer-
  mann, “Report No. 19: Geographic Mobility in the European Union: Optimising its
  Economic and Social Benefits,” IZA Research Reports 19, Institute for the Study of La-
  bor (IZA) July 2008.

Dellas, Harris and George S. Tavlas, “An optimum-currency-area odyssey,” Journal of
 International Money and Finance, November 2009, 28 (7), 1117–1137.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning, “Fiscal Unions,” NBER Working Papers 18280, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, Inc June 2012.

Friedman, Milton, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” in “Essays in Positive Eco-
  nomics,” University of Chicago Press, 1953, pp. 157–203.

                                                25
McKinnon, Ronald, “Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review, 1963, 53,
 717–724.

Meade, J.E., “The Balance of Payment Problems of a Free Trade Area,” Economic Journal,
 1957, 67, 379–396.

Mundell, Robert, “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review,
 September 1961, 51 (4), 657–665.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of
 Political Economy, June 1995, 103 (3), 624–60.

Scitovsky, Tibor, Economic Theory and Western Economic Integration, Stanford, 1958.




                                           26
