NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW EMPIRICAL ECONOMICS OF MANAGEMENT
Nicholas Bloom
Renata Lemos
Raffaella Sadun
Daniela Scur
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 20102
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20102
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

This paper is based on Van Reenen’s FBBVA lectures in the 2013 San Diego AEA and in Madrid.
Comments from seminar participants and an anonymous referee have helped improve the paper. WMS
has received financial support from the Economic and Social Research Council, the International Growth
Center, PEDL, the UK Department of Business and the National Science Foundation. Our partnership
with McKinsey and Company (from whom we received no funding) has been essential for the project,
in particular Pedro Castro, Stephen Dorgan, John Dowdy and Dennis Layton. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20102.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Nicholas Bloom, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, Daniela Scur, and John Van Reenen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The New Empirical Economics of Management
Nicholas Bloom, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, Daniela Scur, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 20102
May 2014
JEL No. E23,M1,M11
ABSTRACT
Over the last decade the World Management Survey (WMS) has collected firm-level management
practices data across multiple sectors and countries. We developed the survey to try to explain the
large and persistent TFP differences across firms and countries. This review paper discusses what
has been learned empirically and theoretically from the WMS and other recent work on management
practices. Our preliminary results suggest that about a quarter of cross-country and within-country TFP
gaps can be accounted for by management practices. Management seems to matter both qualitatively
and quantitatively. Competition, governance, human capital and informational frictions help account
for the variation in management.
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
Renata Lemos
Center for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
and University of Cambridge
r.lemos@lse.ac.uk
Raffaella Sadun
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rsadun@hbs.edu

Daniela Scur
University of Oxford
Department of Economics
Manor Road Building
Oxford OX1 3UQ
UK
and Centre for Economic Performance, LSE
daniela.scur@economics.ox.ac.uk
John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

1. Introduction
The enormous variation in firm and establishment performance has become a focus of
empirical and theoretical interest throughout the social sciences, including economics.
The opening up of business micro-data by national statistical agencies and vast
improvement in computer power to store and analyze very large and complex datasets
have facilitated the careful documentation of this first order economic fact.
A decade ago we began a project now called the World Management Survey1 (WMS)
which sought to address the issue of whether management practices were an important
factor in understanding the heterogeneity of firm productivity. Many theories put
entrepreneurial or managerial ability at the heart of this issue, but until recently there was
precious little large-scale quantitative data across firms, industries and countries to
empirically investigate these claims.

This review paper seeks to draw together what has been learned from the research
program in measuring and understanding management practices. It is an exciting research
area, and there is a huge amount remaining to be done.

In short, there do appear to be methodologically robust ways of measuring core
management practices. These do not cover every aspect of management – for example,
we explicitly leave out more “strategic” aspects of management relating to innovation,
marketing and finance. Nevertheless, the practices identified in our survey - monitoring,
targets and incentives - appear to be informative for organizational performance across
disparate sectors such as manufacturing, hospitals, schools and retail stores. Further, the
small Randomized Control Trial (RCT) evidence does suggest a causal impact of “high
dosage” management on productivity. In summary, management does indeed appear to
be important in accounting for the large differences in cross-country Total Factor
Productivity (TFP) as well as within-country differences.

1

The WMS website (http://worldmanagementsurvey.org) has details on datasets, methods (with training
materials on how to run your own survey), reports, papers and an online benchmarking tool for firms.

2

Our knowledge about why there are such large variations in management is still
rudimentary. Competitive intensity is one important and robust factor in raising
management quality, as is ownership and governance (e.g. family firms appear to have
weak management on average). But empirical work examining other potentially
fundamental factors such as information and co-ordination frictions is almost nonexistent.

The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 looks at productivity variation across
firms and countries both cross-sectionally and over time. Section 3 describes the WMS
methodology, gives some results, and responds to criticisms. Section 4 examines the
impact of management on performance and section 5 discusses some theoretical models
of management. Section 6 offers some brief remarks on the causes of the variation of
management and section 7 concludes.

2. Productivity variation
We begin by documenting the different types of productivity variation across countries,
firms and time.
2.1 Aggregate time series
Solow (1957) found that a large fraction (87.5%) of the growth of output per worker in
the US was due to growth in TFP rather than capital accumulation. The finding that TFP
is at least as important as observable factors of production in such growth accounting
exercises has been replicated for numerous countries. It is easy to forget that there was
initially much skepticism over this result with many attempts to statistically explain away
residual TFP as due to standard mis-measurement of capital or labor services.2 The
growth literature3 has generally understood TFP to be due to the generation and diffusion
2

Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) argued that when aggregation was done properly and inputs and outputs
were correctly measured US TFP growth was negligible between 1945 and 1965. Griliches (1996) was later
to revise his views.
3
For example, see the Aghion and Howitt (2009) textbook.

3

of “hard” technological innovations such as hybrid corn, beta-blockers and information
and communication technologies (ICT). Another important factor, however, could be
“soft” technologies such as the management practices of Taylor’s Scientific Management
or Toyota’s Lean Manufacturing.4 Indeed, in Solow’s original article he emphasized that
TFP meant “any kind of shift in the production function” (emphasis in original).

2.2 Industry level time series
With the advent of better micro-economic data on plant and firm5 productivity it became
possible to decompose the growth of TFP into a “within-firm” and “between-firm”
component. The traditional view is that the economy can be summarized by a
representative firm, implying that productivity growth is within-firm. This could be from
innovation expanding the technological frontier outward or from the adoption of existing
ideas by incumbent firms.

The Schumpeterian tradition, however, has long emphasized the between-firm
component. Much of aggregate productivity growth is from the reallocation of output
away from less productive firms towards more productive firms. This reallocation can
take place on the extensive margin as less productive firms exit and more productive
firms enter.6 This is the traditional notion of creative destruction, which is a Darwinian
force of natural selection. But reallocation can also take place on the intensive margin as
market shares get reallocated among incumbents away from the least efficient and
towards the more efficient firms. In either case these are between-firm effects that are
distinct from the traditional within-firm effects.

4

See Alexopoulos and Tombe (2012) for a systematic analysis of these at the macro-economic level.
We will tend to use plant and firm interchangeably for expositional ease, although obviously they differ in
interesting ways. A firm can increase productivity by shrinking/shutting down its less efficient plants and
growing/entering more efficient ones. This appears to be an important channel in the retail sector (e.g.
Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan, 2006). The WMS data is collected at the establishment level, but most of
the manufacturing firms have only one or two plants.
6
Analysis of entrants has found that their measured productivity is surprisingly low, usually no better than
incumbents. However, this appears to be due to an overestimation of their output price, because firm
specific prices are usually unobserved and researchers use industry-wide price deflator instead. Foster,
Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) show in industries where plant-specific prices are observed entrants
typically price below the average incumbent, so revenues deflated by industry prices will lead to an
underestimate of entrant output and therefore also their productivity.
5

4

Bailey, Hulten and Campbell (1992) analyzed data from US manufacturing plants and
argued that over a five year period about half of a typical industry’s TFP growth was due
to the reallocation of output between plants rather than ongoing incumbent within plant
productivity growth. There are multiple ways in which to perform such statistical
decompositions of industry productivity growth into within and between components see, for example, Olley and Pakes (1996), Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) and
more recently, Melitz and Polanec (2013). Whichever way this is performed there is
almost always a substantial between-firm component.

2.3 TFP differences between cross sections of countries
Figure 1 shows the correlation between GDP per capita and TFP for a large number of
countries (Jones and Romer, 2010). It is clear that those countries with high TFP are also
the countries with high GDP per capita, suggesting that TFP is important for
understanding cross-country success. Development accounting (e.g. Caselli, 2005)
focuses on how to account for these large cross-sectional differences across countries. It
is the cross sectional analog of the Solow growth accounting approach. As with the time
series, a puzzle remains that observables such as human and non-human capital seem
unable to account for the large GDP per capita differences observed across countries.7

Aggregate TFP differences across countries are also influenced by how different
economies allocate output to plants of heterogeneous productivity levels. For example,
Figure 2 shows the estimated productivity distribution of the manufacturing sectors in the
US and India (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). Compared to the US, India appears to have a
much longer left tail of low productivity plants. This suggests that there is something
about the structure of the Indian economy that allows less productive plants to survive
more easily than they do in the US. A large number of possible explanations present
themselves that we will later examine, such as competitive intensity in the product
market, labor market frictions, size-related regulations and other distortions due to
7

Gennaioli, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silvanes and Shleifer (2013) perform development accounting using cross
sectional data from the regions within a large number of countries. They argue that an expanded view of
human capital (which includes managerial/entrepreneurial skills) can account for most of the TFP
differences. We pursue the managerial idea in this paper.

5

corruption and tax. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) estimate that Indian manufacturing TFP
would be 40-60% higher if misallocation was reduced to US levels.

These lines of research show that productivity dispersion at the micro-economic level is
fundamental to understanding the macro-economic patterns. But this only pushes the
question one level deeper: what causes firm heterogeneity?

2.4 Firm heterogeneity within countries
Firm heterogeneity has a long history in social science (see Syverson, 2011, for an
economics perspective). Today we are lucky to live in a world of large-scale (frequently
near population) on firms. These are usually from national statistical agencies that collect
micro-data primarily to build aggregate information either at the industry or macro level.
Increasingly, researchers have been granted confidential access to such government data
(e.g. the Longitudinal Business Database of US establishments). A second source is from
the private sector. Companies such as Bureau Van Dijk have collated firm-level
accounting panel data from almost every country in the world, for both publicly listed
and private companies. These sources have enabled researchers to look at a wide range of
variables including employment, output and productivity. Liberalization of administrative
data and rapid increases in computer power have enormously enhanced our capacity to
store and interrogate micro-data. Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013) detail
many examples of the cross-country micro-datasets now being used for productivity
analysis.

The first systematic empirical analysis focused on the firm size distribution measured by
employment, sales or assets. Gibrat (1931) characterized the size distribution as
approximately log normal and sought to explain this with reference to simple statistical
models of growth. In fact, the firm size distribution is closer to a Pareto distribution, and
this power law is now well documented in every country in the world were data is
available and is a central topic of the field of “econo-physics” (e.g. Hernández-Pérez,
Angulo-Browna and Tun, 2006 or Axtell, 2011).

6

For example, using data on the population of manufacturing firms for France (following
Gibrat) and the US we plot the firm size distribution in Figure 3. The power law implies
that in log-log space there is a negative linear relationship between firm size and density,
which is what we observe for the US data, except for the far right tail. France looks
similar except for a break at 50 employees, which is an important regulatory threshold for
labor laws. Garicano, Lelarge and Van Reenen (2013) discuss how the presence of many
regulatory “taxes” that begin when the firm reaches 50 employees implies a broken
power law exactly as described by the data.8

As noted in the introduction, one of the robust facts emerging from the analysis of largescale firm-level databases is the very high degree of heterogeneity between business units
(see Bartelsman and Doms, 2000). For example, Syverson (2004a) analyses labor
productivity (value-added per worker) in US manufacturing establishments in the 1997
Economic Census and shows that on average, a plant at the 90th percentile of the labor
productivity distribution has four times higher labor productivity than a plant at the 10th
percentile in the same four digit sector. Similarly, Criscuolo, Haskel and Martin (2003)
show that there is a fivefold difference in labor productivity between these deciles in
2000 in the UK.

What could explain these differences in productivity, and how can they persist in a
competitive industry? One explanation is that if we accounted properly for the different
inputs in the production function there would be little residual productivity differences. It
is certainly true that moving from labor productivity to total factor productivity (TFP)
reduces the scale of the difference. For example, in Syverson (2004a) the 90-10
productivity difference falls from a factor of 4 to a factor of 1.9, a smaller but still
substantial difference.

These productivity differences show up clearly even for quite homogeneous goods. An
early example is Salter (1960) who studied the British pig iron industry between 1911

8

The welfare losses of such regulations could be substantial – up to 5% of GDP according to Garicano et al
(2013).

7

and 1926. He showed that the best practice factory produced nearly twice as many tons
per hour as the average factory. A major problem in measuring productivity is the fact
that researchers rarely observe plant level prices so an industry price deflator is usually
used. Consequently, measured TFP typically includes an element of the firm-specific
price-cost margin (e.g. Klette and Griliches, 1996; De Loecker and Goldberg, 2014).
Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) study 11 seven-digit homogeneous goods
(including block ice, white pan bread, cardboard boxes and carbon black) where they
have access to plant specific output prices. They find that conventionally measured
revenue based TFP (“TFPR”) numbers actually understate the degree of “true” quantitybased productivity dispersion (“TFPQ”) especially for newer firms as the more
productive firms typically have lower prices and are relatively larger.9

Higher TFP is positively related to firm size, growth and survival probabilities. Further,
Bartelsman and Dhrymes (1998, Table A.7) show that over a five-year period around one
third of plants stay in their productivity quintile. This suggests that productivity
differences are not purely transitory but significant component of persistence.

The evidence of substantial TFPQ dispersion found in Foster et al (2008) and in other
studies that have tried to control for firm-specific prices implies that observed
productivity heterogeneity is not all simply attributable to temporary fluctuations. For
example, one could imagine a model where firms have homogenous productivity but are
subject to heterogeneous price shocks. This would show up in variations of measured
TFPR but not in TFPQ. Of course, there may well be adjustment costs and other frictions
that cause a deviation between market-wide factor prices and their marginal revenue
products. This will show up in variations of TFPR, and such deviations are also indicators
of misallocation. In Hsieh and Klenow (2009) intra-industry variation in TFPR is due to
distortions as firms face different unobserved input prices (due to subsidies and political
connections for example).
9

Foster et al (2009) show that measured revenue TFP will in general be correlated with true TFP but also
with the firm specific price shocks. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) detail a model where heterogeneous TFPQ
produces no difference in TFPR because the more productive firms grow larger and have lower prices, thus
equalizing TFPR.

8

In summary, there is a substantial body of evidence of persistent firm-level heterogeneity
in firm productivity (and other dimensions of performance) in narrowly defined
industries in many countries and time periods. Differential observable inputs,
heterogeneous prices and idiosyncratic stochastic shocks are not able to adequately
account for the remarkable dispersion of productivity. So what else could account for
these persistent productivity differences?

There are two levels to addressing this issue. One level is the proximate causes of the
differences and the second is more fundamental causes. This is like peeling the layers of
an onion. If we discovered that all labour productivity differences were due to fixed
capital like plant and machinery (i.e. no TFP differences) we would then have to address
the question of why these differed. But at least observable capital would give us a
proximate explanation. Consider one of the possible proximate causes of productivity
differences - hard technologies. The generation of new technologies (as proxied by
measures of R&D or citation-weighted patents) or the adoption of technologies (as
proxied by such things as hybrid corn, new drugs or information and communication
technologies) would therefore be the things to focus on. There is a huge literature on such
observable measures of innovation and diffusion.

Differences in hard technologies, however, are not able to fully account for productivity
spreads for at least two reasons. First, even after controlling for a host of observable
technology measures there remains a very large TFP residual. Second, the impact of
observable technologies seems to vary systematically with the management and
organization of the firm. This has most clearly been seen in studies of the effect of ICT
on productivity (e.g. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2002). There is a very wide range
of effects of ICT on productivity and the impact seems to be much higher when firms are
more decentralized and have stronger “people management” practices – structured
policies over hiring and a strong emphasis on ability and effort when determining
promotion, dealing with underperformance and pay (Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen,
2012a).
9

Since technologies have been much more of a focus of empirical economic research, we
will focus on management practices for the rest of this paper.

3. Management and the World Management Survey

Francis Walker, the first president of the American Economic Association wrote an 1887
paper published in the first volume of the Quarterly Journal of Economics that argued for
the primacy of managerial ability in understanding the phenomenon of firm heterogeneity

“This excess of produce [TFP] has not, speaking broadly, been generated by
any greater strain upon the nervous or muscular power. Indeed, it may, as a
rule, be confidently stated that, in works controlled by men who have a high
power of administration and a marked degree of executive ability, where
everything goes smoothly and swiftly forward to its end, where emergencies
are long foreseen and unfavorable contingencies are carefully guarded
against, where no steps have to be retraced, and where nothing ever comes
out wrong end foremost, there is much less nervous and muscular wear and
tear than in works under inferior management” (our bolding)

Walker’s observations were based on his experience running the 1870 US Census, and
this emphasis on management has been taken up wholeheartedly by business schools. But
as the survey by Syverson (2011) remarks, “no potential driving factor of productivity
has seen a higher ratio of speculation to empirical study”. There are a huge number of
case studies discussing the importance of management, mostly focusing on CEOs of top
corporations. Much can be learned from case studies in the formulation of hypotheses and
the understanding of theories and mechanisms. They are wonderful tools for teaching, but
they are poor tools for hypothesis testing.

The typical case study has a sample size of one. Even more problematic is the fact that
the sample is highly non-random. Indeed, it is selected precisely to illustrate a point
10

rather than being something that could test a theory. In the late 1990s, there were
numerous case studies and books praising a highly successful firm with a dynamic CEO
that had a relentless emphasis on talent, aggressively promoting and paying smart young
professionals with freshly minted MBAs from top US Business Schools. Everything
possible was outsourced, the organization was extremely flat and innovation prized over
dull experience. This company was called Enron (see Gladwell, 2002). When the firm
collapsed due to extensive accounting frauds and huge losses, the case studies switched
from the strategy sequence to the ethics sequence in the Business School curriculum.10

Thus, for an informative discussion on the importance of management in driving
productivity, we needed to collect systematic data on representative samples of firms to
empirically test our hypothesis.

3.1 How Can Management Practices Be Measured?
To measure management practices, we developed a new survey methodology first
described in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). In summary, we use an interview-based
evaluation tool that defines and scores from 1 (“worst practice”) to 5 (“best practice”)
across 18 key management practices. Appendix Table 1 lists the management questions
for manufacturing, and it also gives some sense of how each is mapped onto the scoring
grid.11

As mentioned, this evaluation tool attempts to measure management practices in three
key areas. First, monitoring: How well do organizations monitor what goes on inside the
firm, and use this information for continuous improvement? Second, targets: Do
organizations set the right targets, track the right outcomes, and take appropriate action if
10

A similar but slightly more subtle phenomenon is the “Halo effect” (Rosenzweig, 2007). This is the
psychological tendency to try and backwardly induct causal factors in success from the characteristics of
those who are successful. The fundamental problem is the lack of a clear counterfactual group that we need
to compare to the successful group. This is a problem with approaches such as Peters and Waterman (1982)
who interviewed 43 US firms who had out-performed their peers over a number of years and detailed eight
themes that they claimed determined success.
11
For the full set of questions for each sector (manufacturing, retail, schools and hospitals) see
www.worldmanagementsurvey.org. The difference in the survey questions across industries primarily
reflect different organizational structures—for example, using the words “nurse manager” and “unit” in
hospitals as compared to “plant manager” and “factory” in manufacturing firms.

11

the two are inconsistent? Third, incentives/people management: Are organizations
promoting and rewarding employees based on performance, prioritizing careful hiring,
and trying to keep their best employees?12

Our methodology gives a firm a low score if it that fails to track performance, has no
effective targets, does not take ability and effort into account when deciding on
promotions (e.g. completely tenure-based) and has no system to address persistent
employee underperformance. In contrast, a high scoring organization frequently monitors
and tries to improve its processes, sets comprehensive and stretching targets, promotes
high-performing employees and fixes (by re-training/rotating and, if unsuccessful, exit)
underperforming employees.

To collect the data, we hired and trained teams of MBA-type students who had some
business experience to conduct the telephone interviews. These students were all from the
countries we surveyed (and so could interview managers in their native languages) and
were studying at top U.S. or European universities. The survey was completed by plant
managers in manufacturing, retail store managers, clinical service leads in hospitals, and
school principals or headmasters. This level of middle managers was purposely selected:
they were senior enough to have an overview of management practices but not so senior
as to be detached from day-to-day operations.

We interviewed these managers using a double-blind survey technique. The first part of
this double-blind technique was that managers were not told they were being scored or
shown the scoring grid. They were told only that they were being “interviewed about
their day-to-day management practices.” To do this, we asked open-ended questions in
the survey. For example, on the first monitoring dimension in the manufacturing survey,
we start by asking the open question “Could you please tell me about how you monitor
your production process?” rather than closed questions such as “Do you monitor your
production daily [yes/no]?”

12

These practices are similar to those emphasized in earlier work on management practices, by, for
example, Osterman (1994), Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997) and Black and Lynch (2001).

12

We continue with open questions focusing on actual practices and always elicit examples
until the interviewer can make an accurate assessment of the firm’s practices. For
example, the second question on that monitoring dimension is “What kinds of measures
would you use to track performance?” rather than “Do you track your performance?” and
the third is “If I walked around your factory what could I tell about how each person was
performing?” The combined responses to the questions within this dimension are scored
against a grid that goes from 1, which is defined as “Measures tracked do not indicate
directly if overall business objectives are being met. Tracking is an ad hoc process
(certain processes aren’t tracked at all),” to 5, which is defined as “Performance is
continuously tracked and communicated, both formally and informally, to all staff using a
range of visual management tools.”

The other side of our double-blind approach was that our interviewers were not told in
advance anything about the organization’s performance; they were provided only with
the organization’s name, telephone number, and industry. We randomly sampled
medium-sized firms (employing between 50 and 5,000 workers) in manufacturing and
retail, hospitals that deliver acute care, and schools that offered education to 15-year-olds
(which corresponds to high schools in most of the countries we surveyed). The formal
practices we focus on are not likely to be relevant for very small organizations with few
employees.13

We used a variety of procedures to obtain a high success rate and to remove potential
sources of bias from our estimates. First, we obtained government endorsements for the
surveys in most countries and industries.14 Second, we never asked interviewees for
performance or financial data; instead, we obtained such data from independent sources
such as company accounts or hospital and school league tables. Third, the interviewers
were encouraged to be persistent; they ran about two interviews, lasting 45 minutes each
on average, per day, with the rest of the time spent contacting managers to schedule
13

In the MOPS survey we survey firms of all size classes in the US and confirm this intuition.
We positioned the surveys as “an interview on management,” never using the word “survey” or
“research,” as telephone operators usually block surveys and market research.
14

13

interviews. We also ran interviews in the managers’ native languages to make the process
as comfortable as possible. These steps helped yield a response rate of about 50% across
industries, which was uncorrelated with the (independently collected) performance
measures for the firm—thus, we were not disproportionately interviewing successful or
failing organizations.

We also collected a series of “noise controls” on the interview process itself (such as the
time of day and the day of the week), characteristics of the interviewee (such as tenure in
firm), and the identity of the interviewer (so we could include a full set of dummy
variables for the interviewer to deal with interviewer bias). Including these in our
regression analysis typically helps to improve the precision of our estimates by stripping
out some of the measurement error.

3.2 Validating the Management Practices Data
To accurately validate the data we took several steps. First, for almost three quarters of
all interviews we had a second person listening in on a phone extension as a “silent
monitor” to independently score the interview. For these double-scored interviews we
found the correlation across scores was 0.887, which shows that two interviewers
typically gave the same score to the same interview.

Second, we also ran repeat interviews on 222 firms from our manufacturing sample,
using a different interviewer and a second plant manager within the same firm. This
helped to evaluate how consistently we were measuring management practices within
firms by interviewing one manager. We found that the correlation between our
independently run first and second interview scores was 0.51 (p-value< 0.001). Part of
this difference across plants within the same firms is likely to be real internal variations
in management practices; no two plants within the same firm will have identical
management practices. The rest of this difference across plants within firms reflects
measurement error in the survey process. Nevertheless, while our management score is

14

clearly noisy, it picks up significant management differences across firms. Similar high
correlations are found in the hospital surveys.15

3.3 Some basic descriptive statistics on the WMS Management data
Manufacturing
The median firm is privately owned, employs around 300 workers, and operates two
production plants. Initially, we take the simple average across the 18 questions, but we
discuss more sophisticated methods of aggregating individual management scores. Figure
4 presents the average management practice score across countries. The US has the
highest average management score followed by Japan, Germany and Sweden. Half way
down the table are Southern European countries like Portugal and Greece, followed by
emerging economies like India and China. African countries come at the bottom of the
table. This cross-country ranking is perhaps not surprising, since it approximates the
cross-country productivity and income rankings. Figure 5 plots the management scores
against GDP per capita which has a reasonably tight fit.

We plot a firm-level histogram of the distribution of management practices within
countries in Figure 6. There is a wide variation everywhere, just like the productivity
distribution. One of the features distinguishing the US is not just that the mean of the
distribution is to the right of other countries, but also that there is an unusually thin left
tail of very badly managed firms. This is suggestive of harsher forces of selection in the
US that could be related to tougher competition, a theme we return to below.

Figure 7 shows the average management scores broken down by country and whether it is
an affiliate of a foreign multinational or a (non-multinational) domestically owned firm.
The domestic firms dominate the overall sample so the light bars look like Figure 4. By
contrast, the subsidiaries of foreign multinationals score highly regardless of which
15

Further evidence of the consistency of the management scores is in Grous (2011). He conducted
extensive factory visits of 23 British aerospace firms, administering both the WMS telephone survey on the
plant manager and face-to-face interviews with up to three other employees (the CEO/Managing Director, a
manager and a shopfloor worker). The management scores from his site visits were highly associated with
the scores from the telephone interviews (the correlation coefficient was 0.89). Similar results were found
in the India project (Bloom et al. 2013, footnote 11) where the management scores were compared to
factory visits practice evaluations run by Accenture, with a correlation (p-value) of 0.404 (0.077).

15

country they operate in. This is not just a feature of size as the multinational premium on
management persists after controlling for firm size. It is consistent with the idea that
multinationals are able to spread better practices across the countries that they work in.
We also found that multinationals transplant other features of their organizational form
overseas, such as the average degree of decentralization (Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen,
2012b). The higher people management scores of US multinational subsidiaries in
Europe, for example, helps explain the greater association of their IT with productivity
(Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2012a).

Outside manufacturing: Hospitals, Schools, Retail and beyond
In Figure 8, we report management scores for almost 2,000 hospitals (Bloom, Sadun and
Van Reenen, 2013b). US hospitals and retailers are again the best managed across our
international sample and emerging economies like India and Brazil the worst. The
ranking is similar in the retail sector.16 Figure 9 reports a similar exercise for over 1,800
schools (Bloom, Lemos, Sadun and Van Reenen, 2014). Whether or not we control for
observable characteristics, US schools are more in the middle of the pack with UK and
Swedish schools topping the ranks. One reason for this may be that both UK and Swedish
schools have undergone a series of reforms in the last decade to improve management
(see McNally, 2010).

As in manufacturing, we observe a wide spread of management practices within
countries.17 To illustrate this, Figure 10 plots the distributions of management scores for
hospitals, schools, and manufacturing firms in the US for the 16 questions that are
identical across the surveys. Figure 10 also highlights that average management scores
for manufacturing are higher than for hospitals that are, in turn, higher than for schools.

One possible reason for the difference is that schools are dominated by the public sector
compared to manufacturing, with hospitals in between. In each individual sector
16

Bloom, Genakos, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012) show that the US tops the cross country ranking
followed by Canada and then the UK.
17
These spreads in management practices appear to mimic the wide dispersions in performance in these
sectors as reported in, for example, Skinner and Staiger (2009) for hospitals, Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Krizan (2006) for retail, and Hoxby (2000) for schools.

16

(manufacturing, hospitals and schools), government owned organizations have lower
average management scores than the non-government owned. This is true even after
controlling for size, country and other factors. The main reason government owned
organizations have lower scores is that they have weaker people management practices.
In particular, promotion is often based on time served, and persistent underperformers are
not retrained or moved to different positions. Interestingly, it is not the profit motive that
matters. ‘Not for profit’ hospitals and more autonomous public schools18 look as good as,
or better than their private counterparts in terms of management. This suggests that it
may be the lack of managerial autonomy, the power of unions or the unobserved
characteristics of public sector employees that matter more than public ownership per se.

Other research teams have also used our management scoring method to study other
sectors. For example, Delfgaauw et al. (2011) look at fostering, adoption, and nursing
homes; Dohrmann and Pinshaw (2009) survey various tax agencies in OECD countries;
Homkes (2011) studied global public-private partnerships; McConnell et al. (2009)
examine substance abuse clinics; McCormack et al (2013) examine UK university
departments; McKinsey (2009) studied Irish tradable service firms; and Rasul and
Rogger (2013) look at Nigerian Civil Servants. In every case the researchers found
extremely wide variations in management practices across the organizations studied.

3.4 Some drawbacks of the World Management Survey

Many important aspects of management are left out
The focus of the WMS questions are on practices that are likely to be associated with
delivering existing goods or services more efficiently. We think there is some consensus
over better or worse practices in this regard. By contrast, we are not measuring
“strategic” aspects of management such as innovation, pricing, advertising, M&A,
leadership, the decision whether to enter new markets, shut down existing operations, etc.

18

Such as magnet or charters in the US; academies, foundations, and voluntary-aided schools in England or
free schools in Sweden.

17

These are important, no doubt, but we do not feel confident of judging anything to be on
average better or worse in this regard.

It may be that a firm that scores highly on the WMS metrics may systematically also
score badly on these other unobserved dimensions of management. For example, some
firms may specialize in creativity rather than operational efficiency (a “high quality
instead of low cost” strategy). Trying to improve our notion of management practices
may dull the creative spark. We see this view as an interesting hypothesis over whether
our measures of management are substitutes or complements with other strategic aspects.
A priori one could equally well make a case that the WMS management scores correlate
positively with these other dimensions (rather than substitute for them). For example, if a
company’s R&D lab is run efficiently with good collection of data, value mapping and
strong incentives, then it may be better at producing innovations.19 In the data there is a
positive correlation between the management practice scores and measures of R&D,
patenting and technology adoption.

A related concern is that the measures we focus on may be beneficial for productivity, but
they come at the expense of making life miserable for workers or the environment.
Again, we cannot rule this out, but the simple correlations go in the opposite direction.
Measures of work-life balance and family friendly policies are positively correlated with
the WMS management measures (Bloom, Kretchmer and Van Reenen, 2011), as are
measures of energy efficiency (Bloom, Genakos, Martin and Sadun, 2010).

Are the WMS questions culturally biased?
Another concern with the questions is that they are picking up “Anglo Saxon” practices
(or the ability of a manager to talk them up) rather than something that is genuinely
related to better performance. Although we were very concerned about this when we
started the project, we do not think this is a major concern. First, the methodology is
19

For example, see Levy (2011, Chapter 3) for a description of how Google uses the kind of people
management practices over performance to determine employee rewards. These were brought in by CEO
Eric Schmidt when Google’s size had become too large to manage in the informal way they began with in
their early start-up period.

18

expressly designed to mitigate this problem – we focus on practices rather than
aspirations, what is happening on the ground rather than what the firm claims are its
formal policies. Second, each interviewer is multilingual. They interview managers in
their own language, but they can all speak English so they also interview another English
speaking country, typically the US or UK. Because we have many interviews of US
firms, we can check whether the US firms score higher regardless of the nationality of the
person doing the interview (they do). Third, we test whether the association between
productivity and management is stronger in the US than elsewhere. It is not: the
correlation is similar across all countries. Fourthly, multinationals from every country
appear to adopt these management practices in every country around the world (recall
Figure 7), suggesting these monitoring, targets and incentives practices are seen as the
global basics of good management.

Naturally, in some countries these types of practices will be adopted less frequently
because of differences in regulations, legal system, culture and other factors. For
example, in Italy there are strong regulations on dismissing long-tenured employees
which make it hard to have the highest scoring practices for dealing with underperformers.20 However, we still want to measure the adoption of these management
practices in Italy, so we can potentially examine the impact of these regulations on the
use of this and other forms of management practice (rather than simply assume these
regulations bind and change the survey technique on a country-specific basis). Hence,
using the same instrument across countries is essential for the evaluation of the adoption
of a core set of management practices across firms and countries.

WMS interviews are expensive
The methodology involves the recruitment, paying and training of high human capital
interviewers. They have to be able to ask open questions intelligently and press for
examples as well as use their judgment to score. We deliver the surveys from the same
20

Question 15 in Appendix Table 1. Note that the highest score here is awarded to firms who actively
identify and try to fix under-performers. Usually, this will initially be through moving position or retraining. Only if these first type of interventions fail, will the high scoring firm try to move the employee
out of the company.

19

location so we can do intensive calibration of scores and de-briefings. These all make the
interviews relatively expensive: including fixed cost, each interview costs in the order of
$400. By contrast, a more traditional survey approach with a fixed script and closed
answers requires minimal training and is easier to administer.

We have therefore experimented with lower cost versions of the management survey.
First, we switch to a completely traditional “tick box” approach with closed questions
called the Management, Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS). We added these
questions to the US Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM) with support from the
Census Bureau. Because answering the survey is mandatory (like the ASM) we obtained
an 85% response rate from about 40,000 plants. Preliminary results from MOPs are
contained in Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Saporta and Van Reenen (2012). In
MOPS, as with the WMS, we scored highly responses indicating heavy data collection
and monitoring, extensive and stretching targets, and aggressive performance incentives.
Doing this yields qualitatively similar patterns of results to our standard WMS
management data - TFP and management are positively correlated both in the cross
section and time series with (we asked retrospective questions in MOPS). Furthermore,
because we have many multi-plant firms with TFP and management from each plant, we
can include firm level effects in a cross sectional plant level production function. Even in
this demanding specification, there is a significant and positive association between TFP
and management.21

What is the right unit of normalization?
The WMS attempts to measure practices, so it is like a test score. In principle the test is
administered in the same way to all firms who take it and attempts to be a cardinal
measure. But there is no natural unit of measurement. Hence, we tend to discuss changes
in terms of standard deviations of the management score (transformed from the support
21

An intermediate approach between MOPS and WMS is a face-to-face interview with closed questions
(MOPS is answered remotely on the internet or by filling in a questionnaire and mailing it back to the
Census). Bloom, Schweiger and Van Reenen (2012) implemented this in a large number of East European
and Eurasian nations. The results were again broadly comparable to what emerged from the other
methodologies, but with measurement error a greater problem than with WMS. Our sense is that the MOPS
approach is better value for money, at least in countries where there is already a reasonably good Census
data infrastructure system.

20

between the minimum of one and the maximum of five). In regressions we usually zscore each individual question, average across all 18 questions and take the z-score of the
resulting index (taking the first principal component from a factor analysis yields a very
similar result).

In terms of what this means economically, we tend to then look at the association of the
management scores with some other cardinal outcome such as productivity or
profitability (see Section 4). An attractive alternative would be to measure the time cost
of building up managerial capital in a similar way in which we would look at human
capital (the time spent in education such as years of schooling) or physical capital (the
depreciated sum of past investment spending). This is the approach of authors in the
growth accounting literature who seek to measure intangible capital in an analogous way
to other forms of capital and build these into the national accounts. In principle, one
could do this by looking at spending on (external and internal) consultants and the time
managers spend in building such capital. This often comes under the category of
“economic competencies”, for example in the work of Corrado, Hulten and Sichel
(2009). Currently this is done crudely by assuming some fraction of time of high human
capital workers is spent in management. But such estimates could be refined, for example
with time use surveys of senior managers on the lines of Bandiera, Prat and Sadun
(2013). Combining such managerial capital measures with those in WMS would be a
major advance in measuring management.

4. The influence of management on organizational performance
There is a large literature examining the effects of management on firm performance. We
survey this in Bloom and Van Reenen (2011) with an emphasis on human resource
management (such as incentive pay). The vast majority of these studies are not
Randomized Control Trials (RCTs), but non-experimental regressions in either a cross
sectional or panel data setting. In personnel economics there is a tradition of exploiting
changes in firm policies initiated by a CEO (a natural experiment such as Lazear, 2000)
or engineered by the team of researchers (e.g. the fruit farm field experiments
summarized by Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul, 2011). Consequently, sub-section 4.1
21

focuses on non-experimental work using our management data and sub-section 4.2
discuss the more sparse RCT evidence.

22

4.1 Non-experimental Evidence
Performance and Management in Manufacturing
A simple way to summarize the management practices of the firm is to use the same
summary management quality measure underlying Figure 6 and correlate this with
various firm performance outcomes. For example, Figure 11 shows the local linear
regression of ln(firm sales) on the management score. Since we would expect the bettermanaged firms to capture a larger fraction of sales, the positive and monotonic
relationship is consistent with this prediction. Figure 12 repeats this analysis for plant size
(left panel) and firm size (right panel) but using the establishments in the US MOPS
instead. A similar positive and monotone relationship is revealed.

Higher management scores are positively and significantly associated with higher
productivity, firm size, profitability, sales growth, market value and survival. For
example, Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a) estimate production functions where
they regress real firm sales on the management score controlling for conventional inputs
(e.g. labor, capital, employee education) and other covariates (e.g. firm age, noise
controls, industry, country and year dummies). In the cross section their results show that
a one standard deviation increase in management is associated with an increase in TFP of
15%. An example of such a result is in Figure 13, which shows the results of a local
linear regression of estimated TFP on the management score. The relationship is
monotonically increasing over the support of the distribution. The figure also has a hint
of convexity towards the top end of the management distribution (scores above about 4.2)
suggesting that introducing many top practices simultaneously has an especially large
correlation with productivity. Meagher and Strachan (2013) apply Bayesian techniques to
the Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) data over four countries and also find that there is
some convexity for high scores. They interpret this as consistent with the idea that there
is complementarity between multiple managerial practices (as in Gibbons and Henderson,
2013; Milgrom and Roberts, 1990).22

22

Meagher and Strachan (2013) also find that the relationship between management and performance is flat
and decreasing for lower levels of management (between average scores of 1 and 2). But it is unclear

23

The panel dimension of the management data allows more sophisticated ways of
estimating the performance-management relationship. Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen
(2013a) show that Olley-Pakes (1996) style estimates are similar results to levels OLS.
Fixed effects estimates of the management coefficient are also positive and significant,
although the magnitude of the association is much smaller. These within group estimates
may bias downwards the coefficient on the management score due to attenuation and/or
because of unobservable shocks. For example, firms may only upgrade their management
significantly when they face a crisis.

The relationship between productivity and management is also robust to different ways of
combining the management questions. For example, factor analysis on our 18
management questions reveals one principal component that loads positively on all
questions and explains most of the variance. This reflects a common factor of “good
management”: if a firm is strong on one managerial question it will tend to be strong on
all of them. Replacing our management score with this factor in a regression yields very
similar results. There is also a second factor that explains only a small amount of the data.
This loads positively on the monitoring and targets questions and negatively on
incentives, suggesting that some firms specialize more in monitoring (often those from
Germany, Sweden, and Japan) and other firms specialize more in incentives (often those
from Anglo-Saxon countries). One explanation of these cross patterns is that countries
with weaker labor regulations will tend to have relatively better incentives management
compared to monitoring and targets management.

Performance and Management outside Manufacturing
The association of management with organizational performance is also clear in other
sectors outside manufacturing. Bloom, Propper, Seiler, and Van Reenen (2010)
interviewed managers and physicians in the orthopedic and cardiology departments of
100 UK hospitals. They found that management scores were significantly associated with

whether this is particular to the smaller sample or estimation technique. The more recent data in Figure 13
looks like a clear and string positive relationship for lower scores.

24

better patient outcomes (as indicated by survival rates from emergency heart attacks and
general surgery) as well as other productivity indicators (such as average length of stay
and finished consultant episodes per patient). For example, a one standard deviation
increase in management is associated with about a one percentage point fall in the riskadjusted mortality rate (say from the sample mean of 17% to 16%).

Chandra, Finkelstein, Sacarny, and Syverson (2013) show that there is also a positive
association between case mix adjusted AMI (heart attack) survival rates and management
scores among US hospitals. In subsequent work, Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013b)
show that this positive relationship between patient outcomes and management holds in
other countries. In Figure 14 we report their regression of AMI mortality rates in four
countries (the UK, US and Sweden and Canada). Columns (1) and (2) show that with or
without general controls higher management scores are associated with lower death rates.
Breaking this down by country in the last four columns shows that there is a significant
relationship in all countries.

Figure 15 examines the relationship between pupil outcomes as measured by test results
and our management scores in schools in six countries where we can obtain school level
pupil outcome data (UK, US, Sweden, Brazil, India and Canada). There is again a
positive and monotonic relationship between pupil test scores and management.

Most of the other studies also find that the management scores are positively associated
with measures of organizational performance. For example, McCormack, Propper and
Smith (2013) examine UK university departments and also find that better managed
departments appear to have higher scores in teaching and research. Chong et al (2013)
find that the management score is correlated with postal service efficiency at the country
level. Delfgaauw et al (2011) find a positive and significant association amongst forprofit nursing homes (but no significant relationship for the not-for profits).

One exception, however, is the Rasul and Rogger (2013) study of the Nigerian civil
service. They have information on the success rates of 4,721 projects such as plans to
25

build bore holes, dams and roads. After implementing the WMS method they found that
contrary to the other studies, organizations with high management scores were less likely
to successfully complete projects. By contrast, decentralization was found to be
associated with a greater likelihood of project success. The authors’ preferred explanation
of this is that the greater monitoring associated with higher management scores crowds
out the intrinsic motivation of the public servants.

4.2 Management and Performance: RCT Evidence
A problem with the non-experimental evidence is that management is likely to be
endogenous. Even in the panel estimates, there may be time-varying unobservables
correlated with both management and performance. There may also be reverse causality:
perhaps better performing firms can employ superior management consultants, for
example. In recent years there has been an emphasis on Randomized Control Trial
(RCTs) evidence to obtain causal estimates.

Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts (2013) provided free management
consulting to a set of randomly selected textile plants outside Mumbai to help them adopt
the kind of modern management practices measured by WMS and compared their
performance to another randomly chosen set of control plants. The Indian experiment
revealed that the adoption of these management practices leads to large increases in
productivity. This took several months to occur as the firms slowly adopted modern
management practices. As shown in Figure 16 there was an improvement of about 20%
in productivity from an increase in the management score which the authors show is
equivalent to twice the initial cross-sectional standard deviation. This implies that a one
standard deviation increase in the management score would increase productivity by
10%: a figure lying between the OLS levels cross sectional and within groups panel
estimates in Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a). Profits increased on average by
$325,000 in the first year which compared to a market cost of the intervention of
$200,000. So the intervention more than paid for itself in the first year – the returns
would be even higher to the extent the improvements persisted, which they appear to do.

26

Interestingly, the Indian experiment also found that the adoption of these types of
practices were more likely to occur when production conditions were bad. When facing
tough times, firms were more likely to try to upgrade their management practices. In
contrast, when conditions were better, firms were reluctant to change or adjust
management practices. If this type of endogeneity was common, it would lead to
systematic underestimation of the impact of management on performance, especially in
panel data estimates that rely on changes in performance following changes in
management.

There are also a growing number of RCTs on other management interventions in
developing countries in micro-enterprises (single or few person firms) many of which are
still in the field. The results of these are much more ambiguous than the Indian textile
experiment which focused on large (several hundred employee) firms.
Karlan, Knight and Udry (2012) survey 11 studies of managerial interventions.23 Several
of these find positive effects on profits like the Indian textile RCT such as Mano, Iddrisu,
Yoshino and Sonobe (2011) on sub-Saharan Africa, Valdivia (2012) in Peru, Bruhn,
Karlan and Schoar (2012) and Calderon, Cunha and De Giorgi (2013) in Mexico. Others
find insignificant or mixed results – Berge, Oppedal, Bjorvatn, and Tungodden (2011) for
example find positive effects for men but negative effects for women. Some other studies
find negative effects – such as Giné and Mansuri (2011) or Drexler, Fisher and Schoar’s
(2011) basic accounting training. Karlan, Knight and Udry (2012) run their own
experiment providing consulting advice (and later, free cash) for tailors in Ghana.
Surprisingly, they found that neither the business advice not the cash infusion raised firm
profits. They interpret these results in the context of a model whereby such interventions
enable entrepreneurs to take more risks and increase the probability of extreme positive
draws.

23

See also the McKenzie and Woodruff (2012) survey of managerial RCT interventions which has similar
qualitative conclusions.

27

Why does the wider literature not find uniformly strong and positive effects like Bloom et
al’s (2013) RCTs? There are several possibilities. First, this intervention (like the WMS)
emphasizes formal systems for monitoring output, inputs and defects, setting short and
long-run targets, and rigorous employee appraisal systems. These are less likely to be
important for the micro and mini-enterprises – mostly single person firms - that the rest
of the literature focuses on. The Indian textile RCTs (and the WMS survey) explicitly
target medium sized firms with several hundred employees spread across multiple
factories. Secondly, the firms who deliver the management consultancy services in the
wider literature are usually local firms, unlike Accenture who delivered the services for
the Indian experiment. Local consultancy firms will struggle to deliver the quality of
intervention of that global consultancy firms can. Thirdly, the type of management
training differs substantially. The WMS method focuses on operational improvements
whereas many of the treatments have a focus on “strategic management” such as
improved marketing and pricing.

This is an emerging field and hence there is unlikely to be a quick consensus. The RCT
closest to the WMS approach does find causal effects that are consistent with the nonexperimental work. Understanding the heterogeneity of the effects across different RCTs
is an important area for future research. This is a general lesson for economics. RCTs are
a much more credible way of establishing causal relations between variables than
conventional approaches, but it is still necessary to relate these treatment effects to
“deep” parameters in order to understand the world and make robust policy
recommendations.

4.3 How much of TFP spread can management account for?
If we take some of the effects of management on TFP seriously, how important are they
from a macro-economic perspective? In the spirit of development accounting, Bloom,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a) estimate that management accounts for (on average) a
quarter of the TFP gaps between the US and other countries. To do this they use: (i) the
size-weighted average management scores by country, (ii) an average treatment effect of
a 10% increase in TFP from a one standard deviation increase in management; and (iii)
28

the cross country TFP differences from Jones and Romer (2010).24 For some Southern
European countries such as Portugal and Italy, management accounts for half of the TFP
gap with US, whereas for other nations like Japan or Sweden the fraction is only one
tenth. Management can potentially account for a great deal of the TFP spread within
countries. In the US and UK about a third of the 90-10 difference in TFP can be related to
management practices.

Although these estimates highlight that there are many other things apart from
management that are important for TFP and are very crude, they do imply that
management is potentially quantitatively as well as qualitatively important in explaining
TFP differences between and within countries.

5. Models of management
When considering how to interpret management scores there are two broad approaches in
economics. First, we can consider higher scores as reflecting at least in part better
management quality (vertical dimension). Our work, following inter alia Walker (1887)
has focused on this perspective and we discuss this further below. An alternative view is
that no one practice is on average better than another (the horizontal dimension of
management). We call this the “Design” perspective because here all practices are
designed to be adapted to the idiosyncratic local environment and do not systematically
reflect any better or worse management quality. In management science this is called
“contingency theory” (Woodward, 1958).

5.1 The Design Perspective on management
To fix ideas, consider an example around promotion practices. In WMS we measure
whether or not firms take effort and ability into account when making promotion
decisions or whether (for example) they simply promote on tenure regardless of
performance. We suspect that ignoring any measure of ability or effort is not, on average,
a wise policy. The design view, however, would emphasize that basing promotions on
24

For example, there is about a 1.65 standard deviation gap in the management score between Greece and
the US and a TFP gap of 51%. This implies management “accounts” for a third ( = (1.65*0.1)/0.5) of
Greece’s TFP deficit with the US.

29

objective performance measures has many well-studied problems such as multi-tasking
(Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1991). Management involves many hard to measure tasks. In
the face of high-powered incentives around promotions, managers may focus only on
activities which are easily observable (such as output production) and ignore those which
are hard to observe (like safety maintenance). What about subjective performance
metrics? Such measures may be subject to influence activities (Milgrom and Roberts,
1988) with workers investing time (and bribes) to get a better grading from their
supervisors rather than focusing on production. If these problems were severe enough,
then even if collecting performance information were monetarily costless it may be
optimal to ignore all performance metrics and promote purely on, say, tenure.
Consequently, firms with low WMS scores on this question are in no sense “worse
managed”. Forcing them to promote partly on performance would cause a reduction in
the firm’s productivity and value. Similar remarks could be made on all other questions
in the WMS survey since organizational economics has a wealth of theories why
seemingly inefficient management practices may, in fact, be profitable.

We do find some evidence for the Design perspective. As noted above factor analysis
suggests a second factor of some firms specializing in targets and monitoring and others
in incentives/people management. Some countries (like the US and UK) have a much
higher relative score of people compared to monitoring/targets management than others
(such as Germany and Japan). This appears related to labor regulations. Across sectors,
we systematically relate these relative scores to industry characteristics. Industries that
are more innovative (e.g. with higher R&D and patents) and that have more human
capital tend to focus relatively more on people management. By contrast, industries that
are more physical capital intensive tend to be relatively stronger in monitoring/targets.

Despite important elements of contingency, the main aspect of the WMS data does
appear to be more tightly linked to firm performance. If management was all by design it
is unclear why higher scores should be systematically linked to higher performance. The
evidence from Figure 16 is that the Indian textile firms who were “forced” to increase

30

their management scores became more productive and profitable. If the Design
perspective was the whole story their performance should have deteriorated.

31

5.2 Management vs. Managers: Management as entrepreneurial talent
One popular approach is to consider management as a matter of the talent of the CEO and
an interpretation of the WMS scores is that they simply reflect entrepreneurial ability.
The Lucas (1978) model is in this spirit whereby individuals are endowed with some
element of managerial talent. Those individuals with the highest level of talent will run
the largest firms and earn rents from their talent as the residual claimants on a firm’s
profits. Managerial overload means that there are diminishing returns so that the best
manager does not take over the entire economy. In equilibrium, there will be a cut-off
below which and individual will optimally decide to be a worker rather than a firm. A
power law in managerial ability then gives rise to the power law in the firm size
distribution (Garicano, Lelarge and Van Reenen, 2013).

There is empirical evidence that CEOs do matter. For example, Bertrand and Schoar
(2003) use CEO data from ExecuComp and Forbes matched to publicly listed US firms to
show that there are important CEO fixed effects in corporate strategy and performance.
These fixed effects are also systematically correlated with observables. CEOs from later
cohorts and those with an MBA tend to be more aggressive in leveraging up debt and
have a closer correlation between investment and stock market value (as measured by
Tobin’s average Q).25

More broadly, the skills of all managers (indeed, all employees) are important for a firm’s
performance.26 If these are all available in perfectly competitive factor markets then they
should be measured as factor inputs and not part of TFP. Of course, this is unlikely to
happen in practice if management has an element of intangible capital as discussed in the
next sub-section.

25

Benmelech and Frydman (2014) show that CEOs with a military background have more conservative
investment policies and perform better during industry downturns. They also survey the literature showing
how CEO characteristics affect company performance.
26
Lazear, Shaw and Stanton (2012) show the importance of supervisor specific effects in a large IT firm.

32

Despite the appeal of the managerial talent approach, it seems to us likely that
management is a broader concept than simply adding up the atoms of human capital of
the entrepreneur and all employees. Some firms seem to be able to obtain more
productivity from the same group of employees than other firms, which is likely to relate
to the deep-seated organization of firms.27 The CEO and founder will have a large
influence on this corporate culture, but the culture may persist after the departure of the
CEO or founder. Toyota would be such an example. For example, in the Indian RCTs,
the managers largely stayed in place, but the productivity of the firm improved
enormously.

5.3 Management as intangible capital
Walker’s (1887) emphasis on managerial ability as the source of firm heterogeneity was
met with a response by Alfred Marshall (1887) in the next edition of the Quarterly
Journal of Economics. Marshall wrote “I am very nearly in agreement with General
Walker’s Theory of profits….the earnings of management of a manufacturer represents
the value of the addition which his work makes to the total produce of capital and
industry....”. In other words, management should be thought of as endogenously chosen
by a firm and paid a wage consummate with its contribution to marginal productivity.

The intangible capital approach to management is to treat it as another factor of
production. Its level can be altered at some cost. One could think of this as purchasing
advice from consultants, hiring new managers or diverting some current time by
employees into building managerial capital.

Formally, consider the production function where the value added, Y, of firm i depends
on TFP (A), labor (L), non-managerial capital (K) and managerial capital (M).

Yi  Ai Ki Li M i

(1)

Since managerial capital is usually not measured, it will typically be picked up by
residual TFP. For example, if management was upgraded through the purchase of
27

This is why wage decompositions of matched worker-firm data typically find that firm effects are as
important as individual effects (and more important than worker-firm match effects). See Abowd, Kramarz
and Margolis (1999) and Card, Henning and Kline (2013).

33

consultancy services, these would normally be charged as intermediate inputs and not be
counted in Y. However, these purchases would actually be serving to increase M,
managerial capital.

5.4 Management as a technology

In Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a) we try to combine some of these ideas into a
simple model that we call “Management as a Technology”. The production function is
the same as equation (1). We add a monopolistic competition demand side (a greater
demand elasticity will index higher competition). Profits will depend on revenues less a
fixed cost and adjustment cost for changing managerial or non-managerial capita. When
firms enter the market they pay a sunk cost and take a draw from a known distribution of
managerial talent. This is a reduced form way of capturing many factors that may
influence management such as entrepreneurial talent, but also the informational, incentive
and co-ordination problems that cause the underlying heterogeneity of management
practices (see next section).

In this set-up management differs from tangible capital because there is initial
heterogeneity in the distribution of management at entry, which will be a cause of (quasi)
persistent firm differences. We allow other sources of idiosyncratic heterogeneity as the
firm also has a draw of the TFP distribution and the distortions distribution (frictions that
act like taxes to reduce revenue28). What distinguishes management from these other two
sources of initial heterogeneity is that it can be altered endogenously. We allow the
economy to evolve as firms are subject to idiosyncratic TFP shocks which will cause it to
want to alter its optimal level of management and other factors of production. Adjustment
costs mean that the shocks will cause a firm to choose a different path for investment in
managerial (and non-managerial) capital. Consistent with the panel data evidence that
management practices change very slowly we assume that management has higher
adjustment costs than capital. But we allow firms to alter the level of management over

28

These are a way of capturing corruption, size contingent regulations, etc. following Restuccia and
Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009).

34

time (at a cost) rather than assume it is completely fixed in an individual like Lucas
(1978) or in a firm like Melitz (2003).

Although very stylized, we find that this simple model does a reasonable job of
describing some of the first order facts of the data. First, there should be a positive
covariance between management and performance. As discussed above, this seems to be
a robust stylized fact. Second, tougher competition should increase average management
quality through selecting out the badly managed firms. Since the average surviving firm
will also tend to grow as the market is larger (lower prices) and with fewer firms, there
will also be an increase in management endogenously on the intensive margin. We will
discuss this prediction in the next section and find it receives considerable empirical
support. Thirdly, when the price of management falls, its level should increase. Proxying
the cost of managerial skills by the geographic proximity of universities and business
schools, we also find evidence for this proposition.

A fourth, and more subtle implication of the management as a technology model, is that
in economies where there are greater distortions (arbitrary taxation, many size-contingent
bribes and regulations, etc.) the covariance between management and size should be
lower. In other words, even firms with very high managerial quality will struggle to grow
and reach a large size in an economy like India compared to one like the US. Bloom,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a) find considerable evidence in support of this. The
covariance between management and size is stronger in the US than other countries.
Furthermore, in environments where explicit policy indicators of distortions (such as
industry-country specific tariffs, trade costs or labor regulations) are worse, the
management-size covariance is weaker. This finding is consistent with Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013). Across countries they found that the TFP-size
covariance was much stronger in the US than other countries and that this covariance
grew stronger in Eastern European countries that moved towards a market economy.

6. What causes the heterogeneity in Management Practices?

35

The theories discussed in the previous section have different implications over what
causes the (large) heterogeneity that we observe in management in just about every
sector. If the persistent performance differentials observed are more than design, then
they do pose an important question as to why seemingly profit-enhancing practices are
not universally adopted.

At a high level we can follow Rivkin (2000) and distinguish between four reasons (four
‘shuns’). First there is perception. The CEO may simply not even know her firm is badly
run – there are many other excuses for under-performance. Further, even if she does
know the firm is poorly managed she may not know how to change it (inspiration). Both
these relate to informational frictions (and CEO human capital), but even if the CEO is
fully informed she may lack motivation to adopt best practices. This is where economists
have focused on problems of incentives due to weak competition in product markets,
agency and governance problems, etc. Finally, even if the CEO is fully informed and well
incentivized, she may still not do the right thing as changing the firm is a complex matter
of persuasion (Gibbons and Henderson, 2013). It is not just a decision-theoretic problem:
it requires a coalition of many agents in the organization to introduce major changes.
Even if the change increases the size of the surplus many powerful insiders may receive a
smaller slice, thus generating resistance to change.29 This is the meat and blood of
organizational economics (Gibbons and Roberts, 2013) and the political economy
approach to firms.

6.1 Product Market Competition

The broader productivity literature has found an important role for competition in raising
productivity (Van Reenen, 2011) and argue that one mechanism through which this
happens has been through improving management quality. The management as a
technology model of sub-section 5.5 has this property, for example.

29

In a Coasian world, losers could be bought off with appropriate side payments. But such credible
promises are extremely difficult in the real world of incomplete contracts. Relational contracts may be
critical in generating a high trust environment that enables change to occur.

36

In our work we have consistently found that greater levels of competition in the product
market are associated with higher management scores, both in the cross section and in the
panel dimension. There is no one ideal measure of competition that can be used across all
sectors. In Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) we used three indicators: (i) trade openness as
measured by the ratio of imports to production measured in the industry-country pair; (ii)
the Lerner index which is a proxy for super-normal profits also measured at the industrycountry pair level30 and (iii) the perceived number of competitors faced as declared by the
plant manager. In all three cases we found that higher levels of competition were
associated with higher management quality, both with and without firm fixed effects.

A concern with all of the associations is that they are not necessarily causal. We can try
to tackle this by exploiting quasi-experiments. The number of rivals, often weighed by
sales as in a Herfindahl Index, is often used as an indicator of competition in the hospital
sector as patients dislike being treated far from where they live. In our hospital data we
also tend to find a positive correlation between competition as measured by the number
of rivals and our management scores. Bloom, Propper, Seiler, and Van Reenen (2010)
exploit the fact that in the UK politicians control exit and entry. They keep hospitals open
in politically marginal districts as shutting down all or part of a hospital is incredibly
unpopular and loses large numbers of votes in elections. This creates some quasi-random
variation in the number of hospitals across different areas. We use political marginality as
an instrumental variable for market structure (more hospitals in marginal areas) and find
that the positive causal effect of competition on management (and better clinical
outcomes) is stronger than the simple correlation would suggest.

Returning to the manufacturing sector, Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2011) use the
growth of Chinese imports as a quasi-experiment for import competition. The trade
success of China has come from the ongoing liberalization process begun by Deng
Xiapong since the early 1980s - an exogenous supply shock. The impact has also varied
30

We defined the Lerner index as 1 minus the average profits/sales ratio of all other firms in the country
industry cell over the past five years. High values suggest low long-run profits, suggestive of tough
competition. When we used this and the import measure data we added country and industry dummies to
control for factors like country size and different reporting requirements.

37

between industries, with China’s import threat being much greater in low-wage
industries. This was particularly strong around the time of China’s Accession to the
World Trade Organization in December 2001 in the textile and apparel industries. Using
the differential exposure across industries to quotas as an instrumental variable (e.g. the
differential effect of the abolition of Western quotas against Chinese goods due to the
WTO) the authors find a positive causal impact of competition on management (as well
as innovation and productivity).

6.2 Ownership and Governance

We can divide the firms by ultimate ownership. One interesting group that emerges is
family firms, which our research defines as firms owned by the descendants of the
founder – usually their sons, grandsons, etc. Those firms that are family owned and
family managed have on average much worse management scores, while the family
owned but externally managed look much better. The negative effect of family firms
holds up after controlling for a host of factors such as age and size (see Bloom and Van
Reenen, 2007). The reason appears to be that many family firms adopt a rule of
primogeniture (the eldest son becomes the next boss regardless of merit).

These results are consistent with the negative effect of family firms on performance as
shown by Perez-Gonzalez (2006) on US data. Bennesden et al (2007) show that this
result is even stronger when using the gender of the founder’s first born child as an
instrument (using Danish data). The reason is family firms appear to get in outside
managers during a crisis, leading to an underestimate of the negative impact of family
management on performance in standard OLS regressions. Hence, OLS regressions of
changes in performance on changes in management may underestimate its importance.

Many governments around the world also provide tax subsidies for family firms. For
example, the UK has many more family-run and -owned firms than the US, which is

38

likely to be related to the more generous treatment of estate tax exemption for inherited
business in the UK.31

6.3 Human Capital

The human capital of managers as measured by the proportion who have college degrees
is strongly positively associated with management scores. It is interesting that this is also
true for non-managers which suggests that having workers who are smart enough to
respond to continuous improvement initiatives, for example. It is possible to geocode the
locations of all the WMS plants and calculate the drivetimes to the closest university and
business schools. Conditional on other local characteristics like population density, being
close to a university is significantly correlated with better management scores (Feng,
2013). This is consistent with the idea that reductions in the costs of management cause
firms to increase managerial investment.

6.4 Information

Although lack of knowledge is frequently mentioned as a constraint on the adoption of
managerial practices, hard evidence is difficult to come by. This was frequently
mentioned in the Indian textile experiment for example. Some suggestive evidence is
contained in a question we ask at the end of the management survey “Excluding yourself,
how well managed would you say your firm is on a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is worst
practice, 5 is average and 10 is best practice”. Unlike the management score, this is a
purely subjective question capturing how the managers’ perceive the management quality
in their firms.

Figure 17 plots these scores against labor productivity. Unlike the management scores in
Figure 13 there is no relationship at all. Many good managers underestimate their firm’s
quality whereas many poor managers over-estimate it. This illustrates the challenge
31

Since family firms typically have less debt, product market competition may not be as effective in
driving them out of business if they are badly managed. Without debt firms have to cover operating costs
(e.g., salaries and wages) but not capital costs (e.g., the rent on property or equipment since these were
typically bought outright many years ago). Hence, family firms can continue to generate positive cash flow
while generating economic losses because their family owners are subsidizing them through cheap capital.

39

facing firms in how to upgrade their practices: there is much ignorance in simply
knowing how well managed a firm is. This is why when a consultancy attempts an
operational transformation, the first thing they typically do to perform a “diagnostic” to
evaluate the performance and practices of the firm. Having some objective sense of
strength and weakness is the first step to improvement.

7. Conclusions

Studying the causes and implications of variation in productivity across firms has become
an important theme in social science. While several fields have been studying
management for many decades, empirical economists after some early focus in the 19th
century under Francis Walker and Alfred Marshall, have more recently mostly ignored
management as a factor behind differences in productivity. We believe the discipline
would benefit from more interaction with management. We have started to bridge this
gap by developing a simple methodology to quantify some basic aspects of management
practices across sectors and countries, and using experiments to identify causal impacts.
These are hard, but not impossible, to measure, and we hope the methodology we have
developed will be refined and used by other researchers to help draw the international
map of management in finer detail in additional countries, industries, and practices.

The patterns we find lead us to believe that an important explanation for the substantial
differences in productivity among firms and countries are variations in management
practices. Preliminary estimates suggest around a quarter to a third of cross-country and
within-country TFP gaps appear to be management related.

From a policy perspective, several factors seem important in influencing management
quality. Product market competition has a critical influence in increasing aggregate
management quality by thinning the ranks of the badly managed and incentivizing the
survivors to improve. One reason for higher average management scores in the United
States is that better managed firms appear to be rewarded more quickly with greater
market share and the worse managed forced to rapidly shrink and exit. Regulatory
barriers to entry, protection of inefficient incumbents, and having a vigorous competition
40

policy appear to promote strong management practices, while tax incentives to protect
family firms, onerous regulations to slow reallocation, and barriers to skill acquisition
tend to retard them.

It is also likely that there is a role for reducing informational frictions. There is no reason
to generally subsidize management consulting, but reducing barriers to the market for
advice should be high on the agenda. The creation of better benchmarks, advice shops
and management demonstration projects, especially for smaller firms could be beneficial.
A plethora of these business support policies exist, but they are never credibly evaluated.
Rigorous RCTs and other evaluations would both help governments determine “what
works” and also shed light on the fundamental drivers of firm heterogeneity.

From a research perspective, understanding the causes of the variation in management is
a key issue. As economists we have focused a lot on human capital, incentives and
selection through market competition. But it is likely that informational constraints and
within firm co-ordination are equally important, but even harder to measure.
Understanding these factors will help us advance the field and develop better policies for
improving management and productivity.

REFERENCES

Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis (1999) “High Wage Workers and
High Wage Firms” Econometrica, 67(2) 251–333
Aghion, Philippe and Howitt, Peter (2009) The Economics of Growth, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Alexopoulos, Michelle and Trevor Tombe “Management Matters” (2012) Journal of
Monetary Economics 59, 269–285
Baily, Martin, Charles Hulten and David Campbell “Productivity Dynamics in
Manufacturing Plants” (1992) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics, 187-267
Bandiera,
Oriana,
Iwan
Barankay
and
Imran
Rasul
(2011)
“Field Experiments With Firms” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (3)
Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, Raffaella Sadun (2013) “Managing the Family Firm:
Evidence from CEOs at Work” CEP Discussion Paper 1250
Bartelsman, Eric and Phoebus Dhrymes (1998) “Productivity Dynamics U.S.
Manufacturing Plants 1972-1986”, Journal of Productivity Analysis, 9(1), 5-33.
41

Bartelsman, Erik, Haltiwanger, John and Scarpetta, Stefano (2013) “Cross Country
Differences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection” American
Economic Review, 103(1) 305-334
Benmelech, Efraim and Antoinette Schoar (2014) “Military CEOs” NBER Working
Paper 19782
Bennedsden, Morten, Kasper Nielsen, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez and Daniel Wolfenzon
(2007) “Inside the family firm: the role of families in succession decisions and
performance”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 647-691.
Berge, Lars Ivar Oppedal, Kjetil Bjorvatn, and Bertil Tungodden (2011) “Human and
financial capital for microenterprise development: Evidence from a field and lab
experiment” CMI Working Papers 1
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar (2003) “Managing with Style: The Effect of
Managers on Firm Policies” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4): 1169-1208.
Black, Sandra and Lisa Lynch (2001) “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace
Practices and Information Technology on Productivity”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, 83(3), 434–445
Bloom, Nick, Christos Genakos, Ralf Martin and Raffaella Sadun, 2010. ‘Modern
Management: Good for the Environment or Just Hot Air’, Economic Journal, May.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen (2007) “Measuring and explaining management
practices across firms and countries” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1351–
1408.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen (2011) “Human Resource Management and
Productivity”, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4B in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card (eds), Chapter 19 1697-1769.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca and John Van Reenen (2011) “Trade induced technical
change? The impact of Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity” Centre
for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 1000.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2012a) “Americans do I.T.
better: US multinationals and the productivity miracle” American Economic Review
102 (1), 167-201
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2012b) “The organization of
firms across countries” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(4): 1663-1705
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2013a) “Management as a
Technology”,
LSE
mimeo
http://cep.lse.ac.uk/textonly/_new/staff/vanreenen/pdf/mat_2013dec1.pdf
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen (2013b) “Does Management
Matter in Healthcare” LSE mimeo
Bloom, Nicholas, Helena Schweiger and John Van Reenen (2012) “The land that Lean
manufacturing forgot? Management practices in transition countries” Economics of
Transition, 20(4), 569-785
Bloom, Nicholas, Carol Propper, Stephan Seiler and John Van Reenen (2010) “The
impact of competition on management quality: Evidence from public hospitals”
Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 983.
Bloom, Nick, Tobias Kretschmer and John Van Reenen (2011) “Are Family Friendly
Workplace Practices a valuable firm resource?” Strategic Management Journal 32(4)
343-367
42

Bloom, Nicholas, Renata Lemos, Raffaela Sadun and John Van Reenen (2014) “Does
management matter in schools?” LSE mimeo
Bloom, Nicholas, Ben Eifert, Abrijit Mahajan, David McKenzie and John Roberts (2013)
“Does management matter? Evidence from India” Quarterly Journal of Economics
128 (1): 1-51.
Bloom, Nick Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Itay Saporta-Eksten and John
Van Reenen (2012) “Management in America” Census Bureau Centre for Economic
Studies Working Paper 13-01
Bresnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt (2002) “Information Technology,
Workplace Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 339-376.
Bruhn, Miriam and Bilal Zia (2011) “Stimulating managerial capital in emerging
markets: the impact of business and financial literacy for young entrepreneurs” Policy
Research Working Paper Series 5642, The World Bank.
Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar (2012) “The Impact of Consulting
Services on Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in
Mexico,” Yale Economics Department Working Paper No. 100
Calderon, Gabriela, Jesse M. Cunha and Giacomo De Giorgi (2013) “Business Literacy
and Development: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural Mexico”
NBER Working Paper 19740
Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson (2013)
“Healthcare Exceptionalism? Productivity and Allocation in the U.S. Healthcare
Sector”, NBER Working Paper 19200.
Corrada, Carol, Charles Hulten and Daniel Sichel (2009) “Intangible Capital And U.S.
Economic Growth” Review of Income and Wealth, 55(3), pages 661-685, 09.
Card, David, Joerg Heining and Patrick Kline (2013) “Workplace Heterogeneity and the
Rise of West German Wage Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 9671015.
Caselli, Francesco (2005) “Accounting for Cross Country Income Differences” in
Handbook of Economic Growth, Philippe Aghion and Stephen Durlauf (eds) NorthHolland: Elsevier.
Chong, Alberto Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer (2012)
“Letter Grading Government Efficiency” NBER Working Paper 18268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18268
De Loecker, Jan and Penelopi Goldberg (2014) "Firm Performance in a Global Market"
forthcoming, Annual Review
Delfgaauw, Josse, Dur, Robert, Proper, Carol and Smith, Sarah (2011), “Management
practices: are not for profits different?”, CMPO working paper 11/263.
Dohrmann, Thomas and Gary Pinshaw. 2009. The road to improved compliance: A
McKinsey benchmarking study of tax administrations 2008-2009. New York:
McKinsey and Company.
Drexler, Alejandro, Greg Fischer, and Antoinette Schoar (2011). “Keeping it Simple:
Financial Literacy and Rules of Thumb,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP7994.
Feng, Andrew (2013) “Essays in management and human capital”, LSE mimeo

43

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001). “Aggregate Productivity
Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence” in New Developments in
Productivity Analysis University of Chicago Press
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2006). Market selection, reallocation,
and restructuring in the U.S. retail trade sector in the 1990s. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88(4), 748–758.
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., and Syverson, C. (2008) “Reallocation, firm turnover, and
efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?” American Economic Review,
98(1), 394–425.
Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge and John Van Reenen, J. (2013) “Firm Size Distortions
and the Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France” NBER Working Paper
18841
Gibrat, Robert, 1931. Les Inegalites Economiques, Sirey, Paris.
Gibbons, Robert and John Roberts (2013) “Introduction” Handbook of the Economics of
Organization, Princeton: Princeton University Press
Gibbons, Robert and Rebecca Henderson (2012) “Relational Contracts and
Organizational Capabilities” Organizational Science, 23 (5), 1350-1364
Giné, Xavier, and Ghazala Mansuri (2011) “Money or Ideas? A Field Experiment on
Constraints to Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan,” mimeo.
Gladwell,
Malcolm
(2002)
“The
Talent
Myth” New
Yorker
July
http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2002/07/22/020722fa_fact
Griliches, Zvi (1996) “The Discovery of the Residual: A Historical Note”, Journal of
Economic Literature, 34(3), 1324-1330.
Grous, Alex (2011) “Management Practices in the UK Aerospace Sector”, LSE mimeo
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
(2013) “Human Capital and Regional Development” Quarterly Journal of Economics
128(1) 105-164
Homkes, Rebecca (2011) “The missing management link: Why Management Matters in
global public-private partnerships” LSE mimeo
Hoxby, Caroline (2000). “Does competition among public schools benefit students and
taxpayers?” American Economic Review, 90(5), 1209–1238.
Hsieh Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow, 2009. ‘Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
China and India’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXIV (4).
Hernández-Pérez, Ricardo, Federico Angulo-Browna and Dionisio Tun (2006)
“Company size distribution for developing countries”, Physica A, 359, 607-618
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1991) “Multitask Principal-Agent Analysis:
Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design” Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization 7, 24-52
Ichniowski, Casey, Katheryn Shaw and Prennushi, Giovanni. (1997) “The effects of
human resource management practices on productivity: A study of steel finishing
lines” The American Economic Review, 87(3), 291–313.
Jones, Charles and Paul M. Romer (2010) “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions,
Population, and Human Capital” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
2(1), 224-45,
Jorgenson, Dale W and Griliches, Zvi (1967) “The Explanation of Productivity
Change” Review of Economic Studies, 34(3), 249-83.
44

Karlan,
Dean,
Ryan Knight and
Christopher Udry
(2012)
“Hoping to Win, Expected to Lose: Theory and Lessons on Micro Enterprise Develop
ment” NBER Working Paper 18325
Karlan, Dean and Martin Valdivia (2011) “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact Of
Business Training On Microfinance Clients and Institutions,” Review of Economics
and Statistics,93(2):510‐527.
Klette, Tor and Zvi Griliches, 1996. “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators
When Output Prices are Unobserved and Endogenous”, Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 11, 343-361.
Lazear, Edward (2000) “Performance Pay and Productivity”, American Economic Review
90(5), 1346-1361.
Lazear, Edward P. Kathryn L. Shaw and Christopher T. Stanton (2012) “The Value of
Bosses” NBER Discussion Paper 18317
Levy, S. (2011) In The Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our Lives
Lucas, Robert (1978) ‘On the Size Distribution of Business Firms’, Bell Journal of
Economics, 9, 508-523
Mano, Yukichi, Alhassan Iddrisu, Yutaka Yoshino, and Tetsushi Sonobe (2011). “How
Can Micro and Small Enterprises in Sub‐Saharan Africa Become More Productive?
The Impacts of Experimental Basic Managerial Training,” Policy Research Working
Paper Series 5755, World Bank.
Marshall, Alfred (1887) “The Theory of Business Profits: Reply” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 1 (4): 477-481
McCormack, Carol Propper and Sarah Smith (2013) “Herding cats? Management and
university performance”, forthcoming Economic Journal
McConnell, John, Hoffman, Kim, Quanbeck., Andrew, and McCarty, Dennis. (2009)
“Management practices in substance abuse treatment programs” Journal of Substance
Abuse, 37(1), 79-89.
McNally, S. (2010) “Evaluating education policies: The evidence from economic
research” CEP Election Analysis, http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/ea008.pdf
McKinsey and Company (2009) “Management Matters in Northern Ireland and the
Republic of Ireland”, http://www.delni.gov.uk/managementmatters
McKenzie, David, and Christopher Woodruff (2012) “What are we learning from
business training and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?”
working paper.
Meagher, K. and Strachan, R. (2013) “Evidence on the Non-Linear Impact of
Management” Australian National University mimeo
Melitz, Marc (2003) “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
productivity growth” Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725
Melitz, Marc, and Saso Polanec (2013) “Dynamic Olley-Pakes Productivity
Decomposition with Entry and Exit”, Harvard mimeo
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, (1988) “An Economic Approach to Influence Activities
and Organizational Responses” American Journal of Sociology 96: S154–S179.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1990) “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing:
Technology, Strategy, and Organization”, American Economic Review, 80(3), 511–
28.

45

Olley, Steven and Ariel Pakes (1996) “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry”, Econometrica 64(6), 1263–1298.
Osterman, Paul (1994) “How common is workplace transformation and who adopts it?”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47(2), 173–188.
Peters, Tom and Robert Waterman (1982) In Search of Excellence, New York: Harper
business
Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco (2006), “Inherited Control and Firm Performance,” American
Economic Review, 1559–1588.
Rasul, Imran and Daniel Rogger (2013) “Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service
Delivery” UCL mimeo
Rivkin, Jan (2000) “Imitation of Complex Strategies.” Science 46(6) 824–844.
Rosenzweig, Phillip (2007) The Halo Effect and the Eight Other Business Delusions that
Deceive Managers New York: Free Press
Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson (2008) “Policy Distortions and Aggregate
Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707720
Salter, W G., (1960) Productivity and Technical Change. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Skinner, J., and Staiger, D. (2009) “Technology diffusion and productivity growth in
health care” NBER Working Paper No. 14865
Solow, Robert (1957) “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3) 312-320
Syverson, Chad (2004a) “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion” Review of
Economics and Statistics 86(2), 534-550.
Syverson, Chad (2011) “What determines productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature,
49(2) 326–365
Valdivia, Martin (2012) “Training or Technical Assistance for Female Entrepreneurship?
Evidence from a Field Experiment in Peru,” GRADE working paper.
Van Reenen, John (2011) “Does competition raise productivity through improving
management practices?” International Journal of Industrial Organization, (2011)
9(3), 306-317
Walker, Francis W. (1887) “The Source of Business Profits” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 1(3): 265-288
Woodward, Joan (1958) Management and technology. London: H. M. Stationery Office.

46

Appendix Table 1. Management Practice Questions32
Categories
1) Introduction of modern
manufacturing techniques
2) Rationale for introduction of
modern manufacturing techniques
3) Process problem documentation

4) Performance tracking
5) Performance review

6) Performance dialogue
7) Consequence management
8) Target balance
9) Target interconnection

10) Target time horizon
11) Target stretching
12) Performance clarity
13) Managing human capital
14) Rewarding high performance

15) Fixing poor performers
16) Promoting high performers
17) Attracting human capital

18) Retaining human capital

Score from 1 to 5 based on:
What aspects of manufacturing have been formally introduced, including justin-time delivery from suppliers, automation, flexible manpower, support
systems, attitudes, and behavior?
Were modern manufacturing techniques adopted just because others were
using them, or are they linked to meeting business objectives like reducing
costs and improving quality?
Are process improvements made only when problems arise, or are they
actively sought out for continuous improvement as part of normal business
processes?
Is tracking ad hoc and incomplete, or is performance continually tracked and
communicated to all staff?
Is performance reviewed infrequently and only on a success/failure scale, or
is performance reviewed continually with an expectation of continuous
improvement?
In review/performance conversations, to what extent are the purpose, data,
agenda, and follow-up steps (like coaching) clear to all parties?
To what extent does failure to achieve agreed objectives carry consequences,
which can include retraining or reassignment to other jobs?
Are the goals exclusively financial, or is there a balance of financial and
nonfinancial targets?
Are goals based on accounting value, or are they based on shareholder value
in a way that works through business units and ultimately is connected to
individual performance expectations?
Does top management focus mainly on the short term, or does it visualize
short-term targets as a “staircase” toward the main focus on long-term goals?
Are goals too easy to achieve, especially for some “sacred cow” areas of the
firm, or are goals demanding but attainable for all parts of the firm?
Are performance measures ill-defined, poorly understood, and private, or are
they well-defined, clearly communicated, and made public?
To what extent are senior managers evaluated and held accountable for
attracting, retaining, and developing talent throughout the organization?
To what extent are people in the firm rewarded equally irrespective of
performance level, or is performance clearly related to accountability and
rewards?
Are poor performers rarely removed, or are they retrained and/or moved into
different roles or out of the company as soon as the weakness is identified?
Are people promoted mainly on the basis of tenure, or does the firm actively
identify, develop, and promote its top performers?
Do competitors offer stronger reasons for talented people to join their
companies, or does a firm provide a wide range of reasons to encourage
talented people to join?
Does the firm do relatively little to retain top talent, or does it do whatever it
takes to retain top talent when they look likely to leave?

32

The full set of questions that are asked to score each dimension are included in Bloom and Van Reenen
(2007) and also at www.worldmanagementsurvey.com.

47

FIGURE 1: PER CAPITA & TFP BETWEEN COUNTRIES

Source: Jones and Romer (2010). US=1

FIGURE 2: DISTRIBUTION OF TFP: US HAS MUCH SMALLER
“LEFT TAIL” OF LESS PRODUCTIVE PLANTS THAN INDIA

Source: Hsieh and Klenow (2009); mean=1, manufacturing plants

(ln) Share of firms
.0001
.001

.01

FIGURE 3: FIRM SIZE DISTRIBUTION IN THE US & FRANCE

1

10

20

50

100

200 300 500

Firm size (employment)
US firm size distribution
FR firm size distribution

Source: Garicano, Lelarge and Van Reenen (2013)
Notes: 2007 data. FICUS from France and Census of Manufacturing for US

1000

5000

FIGURE 4: AVERAGE MANAGEMENT SCORES BY COUNTRY
United States
Japan
Germany
Sweden
Canada
Great Britain
France
Italy
Australia
Mexico
Poland
Singapore
New Zealand
Northern Ireland
Portugal
Republic of Ireland
Chile
Spain
Greece
China
Turkey
Argentina
Brazil
India
Colombia
Kenya
Nigeria
Nicaragua
Zambia
Tanzania
Ghana
Ethiopia
Mozambique

N=1289
N=176
N=658
N=403
N=412
N=1208
N=632
N=313
N=455
N=523
N=364
N=323
N=150
N=136
N=307
N=160
N=611
N=214
N=269
N=755
N=332
N=569
N=1150
N=840
N=180
N=183
N=99
N=103
N=58
N=145
N=108
N=130
N=84

2

2.5
3
Average Management Scores, Manufacturing

Source: Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a)
Notes: Data includes 2013/14 survey wave as of April 14th 2014

Africa
Asia
Australasia
Europe
Latin America
North America

3.5

3.5

FIGURE 5: AVERAGE MANAGEMENT SCORES BY COUNTRY
ARE STRONGLY CORRELATED WITH GDP PER CAPITA
Africa
Australasia
Asia

United States

Average management practices
2.5
3

Europe

North America
management x log of GDP PPP per capita

ItalyFrance
Australia
MexicoPoland

China
India
Kenya

Chile
Turkey
Argentina
Brazil

Singapore
New Zealand
Portugal
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Greece

Colombia

Nigeria

Nicaragua

Ethiopia

2

Japan
Germany
Sweden
Canada

Latin America

Zambia
Tanzania

Ghana

Mozambique

7
8
9
10
11
Log of 10-yr average GDP based on PPP per capita GDP(Current int'l $ - Billions)

Source: Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a)
Notes: Data includes 2013/14 survey wave as of April 14th 2014

Argentina

Australia

Brazil

Canada

Chile

China

France

Germany

Greece

India

Italy

Japan

Mexico

New Zealand

Poland

Portugal

Republic of Ireland

Sweden

United Kingdom

United States

0

.5

1

1.5

0

.5

1

1.5

0

.5

1

1.5

0

.5

1

1.5

FIGURE 6: LARGE VARIATION IN MANAGEMENT SCORES
ACROSS FIRMS WITHIN COUNTRIES

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

Source: Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a)
Notes: Data includes 2013 survey wave as of Oct 4th 2013, Bars are the histogram of the
actual density. Scores from 9,995 management interviews across 20 countries.

5

FIGURE 7: MULTINATIONALS ACHIEVE HIGH
MANAGEMENT SCORES WHEREVER THEY LOCATE
United States
Sweden
Germany
Japan
Canada
UK
Italy
France
Australia
Poland
Mexico
China
New Zealand
Portugal
India
Chile
Brazil
Argentina
Republic of Ireland
Greece

Domestic firms
Foreign multinationals

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

Management score
Notes: Sample of 7,303 manufacturing firms, of which 4,926 are purely domestic and 2,377 are foreign multinationals. Domestic
multinationals are excluded – that is the domestic subsidiaries of multinational firms (like a Toyota subsidiary in Japan).

FIGURE 8: COUNTRY MANAGEMENT SCORES: HOSPITALS

Source: Bloom, Sadun & Van Reenen (2013b)
Notes: 1,971 acute care hospitals with a cardiology and orthopedics department

FIGURE 9: COUNTRY MANAGEMENT SCORES: SCHOOLS
Management practice score - by country
2.9
3.0

UK
2.8

Sweden

3.0

US

2.8
2.7

Canada

2.8
2.7
2.5
2.5

Germany
2.1

Italy

2.2
2.0

Brazil
India

2.2
Average

1.7
1.5

1.5

Average with controls

1.7

1.9

2.1

2.3

2.5

2.7

2.9

3.1

Note: Controls for school size, type, pupil teacher ratio & interview noise controls

Source: Bloom, Lemos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2014)
Notes: 1,851 secondary schools (defined as those teaching 15 year olds); Controls include #
students, pupil/teacher ratio, school type (autonomous government, private, regular government);
curriculum type (academic, vocational), noise controls

FIGURE 10: MANAGEMENT SCORES IN THREE SECTORS (IN US)

Schools

Hospitals
Manufacturing

Source: Bloom, Lemos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2014)
Notes: Management kernel density plot

9.5

10

Log Sales
10.5
11

11.5

12

FIGURE 11: FIRM SIZE IS INCREASING IN MANAGEMENT SCORE

1

2

3
Management

4

5

Source: Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a)
Notes: WMS: Management is average of 18 questions. Sales is log(sales) in US$. N=10,197

FIGURE 12: BETTER MANAGED FIRMS & PLANTS ARE LARGER

Plants

Firms

Notes: Management data from the 2011 MOPS, Management and Organizational Performance
Survey (US Census data on 32,000 Annual Survey of Manufacturing establishments).
Source: Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Saporta and Van Reenen (2012)

-1

-.5

TFP
0

.5

1

FIGURE 13: TFP IS INCREASING IN MANAGEMENT

1

2

3
Management

4

5

Source: Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a)
Notes: Management average of all 18 questions (set to sd=1). TFP residuals of sales on capital,
labor, skills controls plus set of SIC-3 industry, country and year dummies controls. N=8,314

FIGURE 14: PATIENT OUTCOMES BETTER WHEN MANAGEMENT
SCORES HIGHER (US, UK, CANADA & SWEDEN)
Dependent Variable:

Case mix adjusted AMI 30 day mortality rates (z-scored by country)

Countries
Management (z-score)

All

US

UK

Canada

Sweden

-0.162*** -0.246***

-0.211**

-0.416*

-0.717**

-0.543***

(0.056)

(0.075)

(0.100)

(0.224)

(0.316)

(0.193)

324

324

178

74

24

48

Country dummies

y

y

Hospital controls

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

Observations

Region & noise controls

Notes. OLS estimates with standard errors clustered by hospital. Hospital controls:
size, specialty, % managers with a clinical degree. “Noise controls”: interviewer
dummies, seniority & tenure of manager; interview duration, reliability indicator,
interviewee type (nurse, doctor or manager).
Source: Bloom, Sadun & Van Reenen (2013b)

FIGURE 15: PUPIL TEST SCORES ARE CORRELATED WITH
HIGHER MANAGEMENT SCORES
.4

Management Practices - Student Performance

-.4

Student Performance (z-score)
-.2
0
.2

0.343
N=200

0.133
N=200
0.004
N=200

-0.124
N=201

-0.319
N=201

Bottom quintileSecond quintileMiddle quintile Forth quintile

Top quintile

Note: Includes performance measures for 1002 obs: 472 BR, 77 CA, 152 IN, 82 SW, 86 UK,
133 US schools. Controls added, see notes

Source: Bloom, Lemos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2014) Notes: We use the math exam pass rate from HSEEs in US public
schools, GCSE score in UK, the school-level rating produced by the Fraser Institute in Canada, the 9th grade GPA in Sweden, the
school-level average in maths in the High School National Exam in Brazil, and the X Standards Math Score in India. We z-score
the student achievement data within country to take into account differences in school performance measures. Regional dummies
and school-level controls for number of students, pupil/teacher ratio, school type dummies and noise controls included.

120

Treatment plants

100

Control plants

80

Total factor productivity
(normalized to 100 prior to diagnostic)

140

FIGURE 16: PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENTS IN RCT ON
ADOPTION OF MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Weeks after the start of the management changes
Notes: Weekly average total factor productivity for 14 treatment & 6 control plants. All plants make cotton fabric near Mumbai,
India, with between 100 and 1000 employees. Values normalized so both series have an average of 100 prior to the start of the
intervention. Confidence intervals bootstrapped over firms.
Source: Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie & Roberts (2013).

-6

-4

p
-2

Labor Productivity

0

2

FIGURE 17: SELF-SCORED MANAGEMENT UNCORRELATED
WITH PRODUCTIVITY

0

2

4

6

Self scored management
Source: Bloom, Sadun & Van Reenen (2013b)
Note: Insignificant 0.03 correlation with labor productivity

8

10

