                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EFFECTS OF MATERNAL DEPRESSION ON FAMILY FOOD INSECURITY

                                            Kelly Noonan
                                            Hope Corman
                                          Nancy E. Reichman

                                         Working Paper 20113
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20113


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014




This project was supported with a grant from the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research
through funding by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, contract number
AG-3198-B-10-0028. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the author(s)
and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policies of the UKCPR or any agency
of the Federal Government. The authors are grateful to Victoria Halenda for excellent research assistance.
The authors wish to thank Laura Argys, participants at the Economics seminar series at the University
of Iceland and participants of the Progress Report Conference for the University of Kentucky’s Research
Program on Childhood Hunger (Champaign, March, 2014) for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kelly Noonan, Hope Corman, and Nancy E. Reichman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Maternal Depression on Family Food Insecurity
Kelly Noonan, Hope Corman, and Nancy E. Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 20113
May 2014, Revised June 2014
JEL No. H53,I1,I3

                                           ABSTRACT

Theory suggests that adverse life events—such as unemployment or health shocks—can result in food
insecurity, which has increased substantially in the U.S. over the past decade alongside the obesity
epidemic. We test this proposition by estimating the effects of a specific and salient mental health
event—maternal depression during the postpartum year—on child and family food insecurity. Using
data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—Birth Cohort, we estimate the effects of maternal
depression on food insecurity using both single- and two-stage models, and explore potential buffering
effects of relevant public assistance programs and supports. We find that moderate to severe maternal
depression increases the likelihood that children and households experience any food insecurity—by
between 50 and 80%, depending on the measure of food insecurity. We also find that maternal depression
increases the likelihood of reliance on the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children; Medicaid; and the Temporary Assistance to
Needy Families program, suggesting that these programs play a buffering role.


Kelly Noonan                                      Nancy E. Reichman
Department of Economics                           Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Rider University                                  Department of Pediatrics
2083 Lawrence Road, Room SWG 306                  Child Health Institute of New Jersey
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                           89 French St., Room 1348
and NBER                                          New Brunswick, NJ 08903
knoonan@rider.edu                                 reichmne@rwjms.rutgers.edu

Hope Corman
Department of Economics
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
corman@rider.edu
Introduction

      Food insecurity, which represents deprivation of an essential aspect of human well-being,

has increased substantially in the U.S. over the past decade (alongside the obesity epidemic) and

the reasons for this trend have not been established. In 2001, the first year that the Current

Population Survey started collecting food insecurity data consistently in December of each year,

10.7% of households in the U.S. were food insecure (defined by the United States Department of

Agriculture [USDA] as not having consistent access to enough food for active, healthy lives for

all members) at some point in the past twelve months; that figure increased to 14.5% in 2012

(Coleman-Jensen et al., 2013). Among U.S. households with children in 2012, 10% included one

or more children who experienced food insecurity (defined by the USDA as having their food

intake reduced and their normal eating patterns disrupted because the household lacked money

and other resources for food) in the past 12 months (Coleman-Jensen et al., 2013). Income is

perhaps the strongest known correlate of food insecurity, although many poor families do not

experience food insecurity and some non-poor families are food insecure (Rose, 1999;

Gundersen & Gruber, 2001).

       Theoretical work by Gundersen and Gruber (2001) suggests that adverse life events, such

as unemployment or health shocks, may be important determinants of food insecurity. In terms

of health events in particular, according to Gundersen, Kreider and Pepper (2011), “the literature

on the effects of food insecurity on health outcomes has implicitly assumed that food insecurity

has an influence on health outcomes, rather than the other way around. Research on the impact of

health care limitations on food insecurity would be of interest, especially when the causal

direction is mixed, both in terms of improved estimates of the impact of food insecurity and in

terms of further delineating the causes of food insecurity (p. 298).” We address this gap by



                                                                                                   3
estimating the effects of a salient and specific mental health event—maternal depression during

the postpartum year—on child and family food insecurity.

       Using nationally representative data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—

Birth Cohort, we estimate the effects of maternal depression during the postpartum year on the

various measures of child and family food insecurity from the USDA Core Food Security

Module (described later) using both single- and two-stage models, with the latter using severe

infant health conditions and multiple births as identifiers for maternal depression. We also

explore potential buffering effects of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; Supplemental

Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children; Medicaid; and Temporary Assistance to

Needy Families.

Background

Food security as a social problem

      Food insecurity is an important indicator of well-being and a pressing public health issue.

Because poverty can be hard to measure, it is important to look at direct measures of material

hardship as indicators of well-being (Bhattacharya, Currie & Haider, 2004). Food insecurity is a

hardship experienced by millions of households across the country and has been linked to current

and long-term health problems. Attention to the causes and consequences of food insecurity is

particularly important in light of the combined forces of the reduced safety net due to welfare

reform in the 1990s, the Great Recession that began in 2008, and recent cutbacks to the

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.

       Gundersen, Kreider, and Pepper (2011) provide an extensive review of the literature on

the effects of food insecurity on health. They cite studies indicating that both children and adults

living in food insecure households have greater incidence of specific health conditions such as



                                                                                                    4
asthma and anemia, are more likely to have mental and behavioral problems, and have worse

educational outcomes. However, few to none of the existing studies provide evidence of causal

effects. That is, they do not address the possibility that there are unobserved factors associated

with both food insecurity and health problems (endogeneity). Addressing this issue using data

from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and nonparametric bounding

methods, Gundersen and Kreider (2009) found evidence that food insecurity has adverse effects

on children’s health status, measured as obesity and general health (excellent, very good, or good

versus fair or poor). From these results, the authors inferred that previous estimates of (adverse)

effects of food insecurity on health are likely downward biased. Gundersen, Kreider, and Pepper

(2011) highlighted the issue of reverse causality, concluding that more rigorous research on

connections between food insecurity and health is needed.

Causes of food insecurity

      Poor households face serious constraints and must decide how to allocate their income in

order to purchase food and other essential goods such as housing and medical care. As such,

economic theory points to the importance of income as an important determinant of food

security. However, according to Gundersen and Gruber (2001), it is necessary to move beyond

current or average income by considering other aspects of financial wherewithal. The authors

argued that unexpected negative changes to a household’s budget (such as losing a job or public

assistance) can make a family vulnerable to food insufficiency (a term somewhat narrower but

closely related to food insecurity, as discussed by Scott & Wehler, 1998), particularly when

savings are low or liquidity constraints are high. Using the 1991 and 1992 panels of the Survey

of Income and Program Participation, Gundersen and Gruber found that food-insufficient

households are more likely than households that are not food insufficient to experience income



                                                                                                      5
shocks and that those suffering from income shocks are less likely to have liquid savings, be

homeowners, and have health insurance.

       Past studies of the effects of families’ financial status on food insecurity and related

outcomes have generally focused on the effects of job loss, income levels, assets, or income

volatility, and have found that: monthly net income is associated with food security among

former and current welfare recipients even when controlling for time-invariant individual-level

characteristics (Corcoran, Heflin & Siefert, 2007); negative changes in monthly income from its

mean increase food insufficiency, but not other hardships such as eviction and having utilities

shut off (Sullivan, Turner & Danziger, 2008); negative changes in both levels and deviations in

income are associated with increases in the probability of food insufficiency among non-elderly

U.S. households (Leete & Bania, 2010); being sanctioned under welfare (that is, having benefits

reduced or eliminated for non-compliance with work requirements or other program rules) is

associated with subsequent hunger because of not being able to afford food (Reichman, Teitler &

Curtis, 2005); and the macroeconomic shock of the Great Recession of 2008 did not appear to

increase household hunger because of not being able to afford food (Pilkauskas, Currie &

Garfinkel, 2011). Guo (2011) found that households with assets (particularly savings) are able to

buffer the adverse consequences of low income with regard to food insecurity, and Gundersen

and Gruber (2001) found that although income shocks and high income variance are associated

with food insecurity, households with the ability to borrow can smooth their food consumption

over time.

       The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (food stamps) was designed to alleviate

the problem of hunger and food insecurity. However, studies have found that food stamp

recipients are more, not less, likely than non-recipients to be food insecure (Gundersen &



                                                                                                  6
Oliveira, 2001). Gundersen and Oliveira pointed to the need for employing newer

methodological techniques to address (likely adverse) selection into program participation.

Bartfeld and Dunifon (2006) found that states with easier access to food assistance programs

have lower levels of food insecurity. Studies by Borjas (2004), Van Hook and Balistreri (2006),

and Nord and Prell (2011) exploited natural experiments, such as changes in program eligibility

for immigrants or temporary increases in benefits, to estimate effects of food stamps and other

transfer programs on food insecurity. Collectively, this research led Gundersen, Kreider, and

Pepper (2011) to conclude that food stamps do reduce (but certainly do not eliminate) food

insecurity. Overall, the literature suggests that food stamps and other programs are partial buffers

against food insecurity, although endogeneity and measurement error continue to present

estimation challenges (Gundersen & Kreider, 2008; Gundersen & Ribar, 2011).

The importance of mental health

       The prevalence of mental health problems makes investigation of their effects

particularly important. According to data from the 2009 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance

System, about one-third of individuals answered at least “one” to the question, “…Now thinking

about your mental health, which includes stress, depression, and problems with emotions, for

how many days during the past 30 days was your mental health not good?” (CDC, 2010). In

addition, more than one in thirteen individuals in the U.S. aged 12 years and older experienced

depression in the past two weeks (measured in 2007–2010) , with women more likely to

experience depression than men and working-aged adults more likely to experience depression

than children or senior citizens (Pratt, 2008). While untreated mental health problems can

severely compromise the quality of life of those afflicted and potentially their families and




                                                                                                  7
communities, there are effective treatments for many types of mental illness, particularly

depression (Farr et al., 2011).

       According to Almlund et al. (2011), non-cognitive traits are as important as cognitive

ability in determining economic success, and according to Layard (2013), mental health is an

understudied form of human capital despite evidence that it is a major factor affecting

productivity and well-being. While several methodologically rigorous studies have investigated

the effects of mental health on labor market outcomes (and by inference, income), few have

investigated effects of mental health problems on household production and decision-making.

       Four studies using the National Comorbidity Survey found that mental health disorders,

including depression, reduce the likelihood that women are in the labor force and that they are

employed—Banerjee et al. (2013), using a structural modeling approach; Chatterji et al. (2011),

bivariate probit models; Marcotte, Wilcox-Gok and Redmon (2000), instrumental variables

models; and Ettner, Frank, and Kessler (1997), a latent variable approach. These findings are

consistent with other studies, all of which used instrumental variables techniques, by Frijters,

Johnston, and Shields (2010) using Australian Household Labour Dynamics data; Ojeda et al.

(2010), the National Household Survey of Drug Use and Health; and Teftt (2012), Behavioral

Risk Factor Surveillance System data. Nelson and Kim (2011), using a propensity score

matching technique with Medical Expenditure Panel Survey data, found that employed

individuals with mental illness are more likely to lose their jobs. Marcotte, Wilcox-Gok, and

Redmon (2000) and Marcotte and Wilcox-Gok (2003) also found, using data from the National

Comorbidity Study and an instrumental variables approach, that women with depression have

lower earnings and that the earnings penalty from depression is greater for those with lower

incomes. However, using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and estimating



                                                                                                   8
fixed-effects models, Cseh (2008) found that although depressed individuals have lower wages

than non-depressed peers, a change in depression status did not correspond to a wage change.

Berndt et al. (1998), using data from a clinical trial, found improvements in self- perceived

productivity as a depressive symptoms were reduced, suggesting that depression negatively

affects productivity on the job.

Mental health and food insecurity

        Siefert et al. (2000), Carter et al. (2011), Heflin, Siefert and Williams (2005), Casey et al.

(2004) and others all found positive associations between mental health problems and food

insecurity. Unlike the recent literature on mental health and labor market outcomes described

above, these studies did not attempt to model causality or address potential endogeneity. An

exception, a study by Heflin and Ziliak (2008), used a fixed effects approach with two waves of

the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics. The fixed effect approach allows the authors to address

potential sample heterogeneity, but does not necessarily address the potential for reverse

causality. These authors found some evidence that food insufficiency causes emotional distress.

However, as argued by Casey et al. (2004) and others, it is difficult to establish causal

relationships (and their direction) in this literature.

        In a very recent study, Dahal and Fertig (2013) used data from the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics to estimate effects of mental illness on spending behavior, addressing the potential

endogeneity of mental illness by estimating two-stage and fixed-effects models. They found that

women with mental health problems spend more on a variety of consumer goods, but less on

investments such as education. They attributed this pattern of spending to a hypothesized process

of “retail therapy” akin to self-medication. For low income women, this phenomenon might

translate to poorer budget management and not being able to afford food at some point in their



                                                                                                     9
budget cycle.

       As far as we know, no previous studies have attempted to estimate the causal effects of

mental illness, or depression in particular, on food insecurity, despite evidence that the two are

correlated, that depression reduces labor force participation (and, by inference, earned income),

that depression appears to lower productivity on the job (and, by extension, potentially in the

household), and that mental illness affects women’s spending patterns. We address this gap in

the literature by estimating the effects of a salient and specific mental health event—maternal

depression during the postpartum year—on child and family food insecurity. Postpartum

depression, which is generally defined as moderate to severe depression in a woman after she has

given birth, is experienced by 10–20% of all childbearing women within 6 months of delivery

(Miller, 2002). Symptoms include despondent mood, changes in sleeping and eating patterns,

feelings of inadequacy as a parent, and impaired concentration (Miller, 2002). Postpartum

depression has at least some random component according to the medical community (O’Hara &

Swain, 1996) and often has lingering effects well beyond the 6 month period (Vliegen, Casalin &

Luyten, 2014). This particular health event—to mothers of very young children—has been

causally linked to parents’ relationship dissolution (Reichman, Corman & Noonan, 2014), as

well as to homelessness and housing problems that are often precursors to homelessness (Curtis

et al., 2013). Homelessness has been linked to food insecurity with some evidence of a causal

link from the former to the latter (Gundersen et al., 2003).

Theoretical framework

       Following Gundersen and Gruber (2001), we consider a household utility-maximization

model, wherein utility is a function of food and other goods (Eq. 1), subject to budget constraints

based on current assets (Eq. 2) and current income (Eq. 3):



                                                                                                     10
       (1) Ut = U (Ft, OGt )

       (2) At = At-1 +Yt-1 - pFt-1Ft -1 - pOGt-1OGt -1

       (3) Yt = wtLt + Yot + YTRt

       Assets in the current period (At) are a function of the past period’s assets (At-1), the past

period’s income (Yt-1), the past period’s food expenditures (the price times the quantity of food),

and the past period’s expenditures on other goods (the price times the quantity of other goods).

Income can have three sources: own earnings based on the wage (w) and the number of hours

worked (L), other income (Yot), and transfer income (YTRt). Food insecurity occurs when income

and assets are insufficient for obtaining adequate food plus other needed or desired goods, and

the household allocates its resources such that adequate food intake is not achieved. Based on

this model, Gundersen and Gruber considered a number of factors that may affect a household’s

propensity to experience food insufficiency (which, as mentioned earlier, is related to food

insecurity)—low average income, negative income shocks such as loss of employment or

earnings, having a spouse leave, moving, lack of savings, and access to borrowing. Gundersen

and Oliveira (2001) noted another (generally unobserved) factor—the householders’ skills at

budgeting. This specific form of human capital may be correlated with education, but there could

be variation in budgeting skills even holding education constant.

       Following the Gundersen/Gruber model, we posit that a household’s propensity for

experiencing food insecurity is a function of past savings/assets, current income, prices of food

and other goods, the householder’s budgeting efficiency (BEt), and the household’s access to

credit (CRt).

       (4) FIt = g(At-1, Yt, pF, pOG; BEt, CRt)

       We would expect the mother’s depression to have a negative effect on her income based



                                                                                                   11
on the literature, discussed above, demonstrating that depression and mental health problems

more generally reduce women’s employment and productivity, and recent findings that

depression during the postpartum year in particular leads to relationship dissolution (which likely

has negative income ramifications) and risk for homelessness (which has been related to food

insecurity). Depression could also result in a depreciation of one’s budgeting efficiency to the

extent that it compromises mental processing (see Berndt et al. 1998) or induces retail therapy

(see Dahal & Fertig, 2013).

       Gundersen and Oliveira (2001) modeled the decision to participate in the food stamps

program as a function of earned and other income, expected benefits from the program (which is

a function of income and family size), and the cost of participation in the program. In this

framework, which can be applied to other form of public assistance, Gundersen and Oliveira

considered as costs the potential stigma of participating in the program, which may particularly

acute for food stamps; search for information on how and where to apply for benefits; and

burdens associated with enrollment and maintenance of eligibility. Holding constant earned and

other income, we would expect participation to increase overall income and therefore reduce

food insecurity—as long as the benefits of the increased income outweigh the relevant costs.

Data

       The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) is a nationally

representative panel study of over 10,000 children born in the United States in 2001. Births were

sampled from Vital Statistics records and consist of children born in 2001 who were alive at 9

months, had not been placed for adoption, and were born to mothers aged 15 years or older

(Bethel et al. 2005). Twins, low birthweight infants, and American Indian/Alaskan Natives and

Asian/Pacific Islanders were oversampled. The initial (baseline) survey was conducted when the



                                                                                                   12
child was 9 months old, and follow-up surveys were completed at 2, 4, and 5 years (the 4 and 5

year follow-up data are not used in our study). Additionally, the ECLS-B includes detailed data

on maternal and infant health from the infants’ birth records (as recorded in the Standard

Certificate of Live Birth). Data can be weighted to produce nationally representative results,

although the analyses we present in this paper are based on unweighted data in order to capitalize

on the oversampling of multiple births as described below.

       We investigate the effects of the mother’s depression (assessed when the child was 9

months old) on various measures of child and household food insecurity at the 2-year follow-up

using the USDA Core Food Security Module (see Coleman-Jensen et al. 2013 for a full

description of the module and measures), which was embedded in the mother’s 2 year interview.

We thus limit the sample to cases for which we have 2-year follow-up data. All sample sizes are

rounded to the nearest 50 as required by the National Center for Education Statistics to protect

subject confidentiality. Of the 10,500 participants in the ECLS-B (all of whom had birth

certificate data), 9,600 completed the 2-year follow-up survey. Of those, 1,500 respondents were

dropped from the analyses owing to missing data on maternal depression, which was assessed in

a separate self-administered questionnaire, and another 200 cases were dropped owing to missing

data on other analysis variables, leaving an analysis sample of 7,900 cases. Those in our analysis

sample were less likely to be non-Hispanic black, less likely to be Hispanic, less likely to be

Asian, less likely to be foreign born, less likely to have a birth covered by Medicaid or other

public insurance, more likely to have been employed, and more likely to be married than those

not in our sample. The selection into our sample of those who are less disadvantaged, and

therefore at decreased risk for experiencing food insecurity, may lead to downward biased

estimated effects of maternal depression on food insecurity. That is, because more disadvantaged



                                                                                                   13
women are closer to the margin for experiencing food insecurity, this additional health event

may push them “over the edge.” We test this hypothesis in supplemental models described later.

       The ECLS-B is highly appropriate for studying the effects of maternal depression during

the postpartum year on child and household food insecurity because it: (1) is a nationally

representative, panel data set with a large sample size; (2) includes information on maternal

depression and household food insecurity collected using widely-used and accepted standardized

instruments; (3) allows us to measure both maternal depression and food insecurity at relevant

time points; (4) includes a rich set of relevant control variables, including the mother’s own

mother’s history of depression; (5) includes state indicators, allowing us to control for potentially

confounding factors at the state level; and (6) oversampled multiple births (normally a relatively

rare event), allowing us to use multiple birth as an identifier for maternal depression, as

described below.

Methodological Approach

       In modeling the impact of maternal depression in the postpartum period on subsequent

food insecurity, we estimate a reduced form version of Eq. 4, generalized as follows:

       (5) FIt = h(Mt-1, Ct-1, St-1, Dt-1).

       Food insecurity in the current period is a function of the mother’s (M) and child’s (C)

characteristics before experiencing the depression, prices and program environments (proxied by

a state indicator, St-1), and whether the mother experienced depression during the postpartum

year (Dt-1). The estimated effect of D in this specification will be unbiased as long as maternal

depression is an exogenous shock, or a random event. However, it is difficult to operationalize

mental illness as a shock. Indeed, as discussed earlier, few existing studies have isolated causal

relationships between physical or mental health and food insecurity, in either direction, precisely



                                                                                                    14
because identification opportunities are scarce. We take an important step in addressing this gap

by exploiting a mental health event—maternal depression during the postpartum year—which is

thought to have at least some random component according to the medical community, and

observing its effects on subsequent food insecurity. According to O’Hara and Swain (1996),

postpartum depression (which is related to—but not one and the same as—depression during the

postpartum year, as discussed below under “Measures”) is unrelated to many sociodemographic

characteristics, but strongly associated with having a history of psychopathology. We explore the

extent to which this is the case in our sample, include the maternal grandmother’s history of

depression in our models in addition to detailed sociodemographic characteristics, and estimate

two-stage models to address the potential endogeneity of maternal depression.

       In the first set of analyses, we estimate multivariate probit models of the effects of

maternal depression (assessed at 9 months) on various measures of food insecurity at 2 years,

controlling for a host of potentially confounding variables (Eq. 5). Although the ECLS-B

includes the USDA Core Food Security Module in every wave, we focus on food insecurity at 2

years in order to be confident that the depression precedes the food insecurity (which would not

be the case if we focused on food insecurity at 9 months) but not by so much time that effects, if

any, may be missed (which could be the case if we focused on food insecurity at 4 or 5 years).

We consider a number of different model specifications in order to assess robustness of our

results and explore patterns in our estimates.

       In the next set of analyses, we estimate 2-stage models that use whether the birth was a

multiple and whether the infant had a serious health condition as identifiers for depression during

the postpartum year and conduct relevant statistical tests. In prior research, we identified infant

health conditions that are potentially associated with long-term morbidity, but are unlikely



                                                                                                  15
related to maternal behaviors (see, e.g., Curtis et al. 2013). We relied on the coding of specific

health conditions by an outside pediatric consultant who was directed to classify each condition

listed in infants’ medical records vis-à-vis degree of severity (in terms of expected significant

long-term morbidity) and likelihood, according to the medical community, of having been

caused by parental behavior. The goal was to capture severe conditions that are for the most part

random (e.g., Down Syndrome, congenital heart malformations), given that the pregnancy

resulted in a live birth. We applied this coding to information contained in the birth certificate

module of the ECLS-B to create a measure of “moderate or severe health condition” as described

in Appendix Table 1.

          While few studies have investigated the effects of newborn characteristics on mother’s

depression, a previous study using the ECLS-B found that multiple birth is associated with

depression during the postpartum year (Choi, Bishai & Minkovitz, 2009) and another found that

mothers of high risk very low birthweight infants (those diagnosed with bronchopulmonary

dysplasia) reported more psychological distress (based on the Brief Symptom Inventory Scale)

than mothers of term infants at 1 month and 2 years postpartum (Singer et al., 1999). These

findings provide some support for our use of multiple birth and poor child health as identifiers.

Of course, we will test for the predictive strength of these variables, as well as the necessary

exclusion restrictions (that is, whether the variables being used as identifiers are associated with

food insecurity only through maternal depression) and whether the error term in the maternal

depression equation is uncorrelated with the error term in the food insecurity equation.

       Finally, we explore the potential buffering effects of the Supplemental Nutrition

Assistance Program (SNAP); Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children

(WIC); Medicaid; and the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) program by



                                                                                                     16
modeling participation in each program (at 2 years) using the same right-hand-side variables as

in Eq. 5. That is, we explore whether maternal depression during the postpartum year is

associated with participation in the various programs at 2 years. Finding positive associations

(that maternal depression appears to increase participation in a given program) would suggest

that the programs are mitigating, at least to some extent, adverse effects of maternal depression

on food insecurity. This set of analyses is considered preliminary and descriptive because we do

not address the endogeneity of maternal depression in the models of program participation.

Measures and descriptive analysis

       The means for all analysis variables other than the mother’s state of residence are shown

in Table 1, both for the sample as a whole and by one of two measures of maternal depression

during the postpartum year (described later) that we use. Below we discuss the overall

characteristics of the sample and then the differences in those characteristics by whether the

mother had depression.

Food insecurity

       We use the USDA Core Food Security Module, which consists of 18 different questions

about food hardship during the past year, to create measures of food insecurity of children and of

households at 2 years. Per USDA definitions, children are considered to have very low food

security if the mother gave affirmative responses to 5 or more of the 8 questions pertaining to

children, and low food security if the mother gave affirmative responses to 2, 3 or 4 of the 8

questions. Owing to small sample sizes, we combine very low and low food insecurity, which

together, apply to 3.9% of the children in our sample, in our multivariate analyses.

       Also per USDA definitions, households are considered to have: (1) very low food

security if the mother responded affirmatively to 8 or more of the 18 questions in the Core Food



                                                                                                  17
Security Module, (2) low food security if she responded affirmatively to 3 to 7 of the questions,

and (3) marginal food security if she responded affirmatively to 1 or 2 questions. In our sample,

1.7% of the households experienced very low food security, 6.8% experienced low food security,

and 8.0% experienced marginal food security during the year preceding the 2-year interview.

These figures are lower than the national figures from Nord, Andrews and Carlson (2004), who

reported that, about 17% of households with children in 2003 were low or very low food

insecure. However, according to Snow et al. (2009), households with very young children (as in

the ECLS-B) have lower levels of food insecurity than households with older children. In our

models, we use two measures of household food insecurity—the first combines very low and low

household food security as defined above, and the second combines all three categories (very

low, low and marginal household food insecurity).

Maternal depression during the postpartum year

       Maternal depression was assessed at 9 months using an abbreviated form of the Center

for Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-D) Scale that assesses depressed affect, positive

affect, somatic symptoms, psychomotor retardation, and interpersonal activity (Radloff 1977).

The instrument contains 12 items with each item coded on a 4-point scale between 0 and 3, with

each of the symptoms occurring never (a score of zero), 1–2 days (score of 1), 3–4 days (score of

2), or 5–7 days (score of 3), with the range of total scores being 0 to 36. Using cutoff scores

provided by the ECLS-B, a score of 15 or more suggests severe depression and a score of at least

10 suggests moderate or severe depression. Approximately 7% of the mothers in our sample are

characterized as experiencing severe depression during the week preceding the 9-month

interview and approximately 18% of the mothers are characterized as experiencing moderate or

severe depression. We use the latter as our main measure of maternal depression, but perform



                                                                                                  18
supplementary analyses using the more stringent measure.

       It is important to point out that the measures of maternal depression based on the CES-D

do not capture postpartum depression per se (which is generally based on the first 6 months after

childbirth) or an actual diagnosis. Rather, these measures characterize maternal depression at a

specific point during the postpartum year (when the focal child was 9 months old) based on one

of a number of different instruments that are used in the literature to assess postpartum

depression from surveys. According to a very recent review article about the course of

postpartum depression, the 0 to 6 month time interval typically used to assess postpartum

depression may be overly rigid, as 30–50% of mothers with postpartum depression continue to

have major depression during their child’s first year of life and even beyond (Vliegen, Casalin &

Luyten, 2014). As such, our measures of maternal depression during the postpartum year likely

capture many cases of conventionally-defined postpartum depression, which is an unexpected

event for many mothers (O’Hara and Swain, 1996). However, because our measure does not

conform to the 0–6 month period after childbirth, we refrain from referring to our CES-D-based

measures as postpartum depression. Rather, we refer to these measures as “maternal depression,”

“depression during the postpartum year,” or “maternal depression during the postpartum year.”

Other analysis variables

       Multivariate models include a basic set of sociodemographic characteristics of the

mother—age, race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, Asian or Pacific

Islander, Native American), nativity (foreign born), education (less than high school, high school

graduate, any college), marital birth, whether the birth was covered by Medicaid or other public

insurance (proxy for poverty), whether the mother was employed during the 12 month preceding

the child’s birth, whether the mother lived with both of her own parents at age 16 (proxy for

family structure and hardship growing up), and urbanicity (densely populated urban area, less

                                                                                                   19
densely populated urban area, non-urban area, as classified by the ECLS-B based on U.S. Census

categories). We also include number of children under 18 in the mother’s household at the time

of the birth, proxied by a measure of the number of other children in the household at 9 months

minus 1 or more for the focal child and his/her multiple birth siblings. Most models also include

indicators for the mother’s state of residence at the time of the birth in order to control for state

policies or other potentially confounding state-level factors (states with fewer than 100

observations are grouped together in a single indicator). All models include the child’s sex.

       Mothers were about 28 years old, on average, at the time the focal child was born. Over

half (53%) of the mothers were non-Hispanic white, 16% were non-Hispanic black, 14% were

Hispanic, 12% were Asian or Pacific Islander, and 5% were American Indian. Over half of the

mothers had attended at least some college. Over two-thirds (68%) of the mothers were married

at the time of the birth, and there was about one other child the household on average. About one

third of births were covered by Medicaid or other public insurance. The majority of mothers

(73%) worked within the 1-year period preceding the child’s birth. Only 58% of mothers lived

with both of their parents when they were 16 years old. Most mothers lived in urban areas (71%

in densely populated urban areas and 13 percent in less densely populated urban areas).

       Because mental illness is often associated with physical illness and the directionality is

not always clear (Prince et al., 2007), we include a measure of the mother’s physical health at the

time of the birth—whether the mother had any prenatal medical risk factors (such as cardiac

disease) as reported on the birth certificate. Eight percent of the mothers in the sample had a

prenatal medical risk factor.

       Finally, in certain models we include a measure of the mental health history of the

mother’s own mother (the child’s maternal grandmother). Mothers were asked the following



                                                                                                        20
question at the 2-year survey, “Now thinking about your relatives, whether they live with you or

not, have you or any of your blood relatives ever had …Major Depression?” If the answer to this

question was yes, the mother was asked which relative had the given condition. Seven percent of

the mothers in the sample had mothers with a history of major depression. This measure is

intended to capture the mother’s family-related (genetic or environmental) predisposition for

depression. It is possible that depression during the postpartum year is less of a shock for

mothers, whose own mothers had a history of depressive symptoms, making this measure an

important control variable. However, if the mother’s depression and her mothers’ history of

depressive symptoms are highly correlated, including the measures of the mother’s parents’

depressive symptoms might lead to underestimated effects of the mother’s depression. As such,

we include these measures in some models and not others and interpret our findings accordingly.

       Most of the covariates—maternal age, race/ethnicity, nativity, education, marital status

and prenatal physical health condition, state of residence, and the child’s sex—are measured

from birth certificate module to ensure that these characteristics preceded the birth and therefore

the maternal depression if that occurred. Whether the mother was employed 12 months prior to

birth, whether her prenatal care was financed through Medicaid, and whether she lived with both

of her parents at age 16 were measured retrospectively at 9 months, but apply to the period

preceding the birth. Whether the mother lived in a densely populated urban area, a less-densely

populated urban area, or a non-urban area and the number of children in the household were

measured at 9 months. The grandmother’s history of depression were all assessed at 2 years, but

in many—if not most—cases these measures would be the same if they had been collected at the

time of the birth (i.e if the grandmother did not have a first episode of depression between the

birth and the 2-year interview). By definition, the child’s age at the time of food security



                                                                                                   21
assessment was measured at time of the 2-year survey. As mentioned earlier, we use two

additional variables in bivariate probit models as identifiers for maternal depression—multiple

birth and moderate or severe infant health condition, which was based on data from the birth

certificate module as described earlier.

Differences in sample characteristics by maternal depression

       There are clear differences in characteristics between mothers who had depression during

the postpartum year and those who did not. Those who had depression were younger, less likely

to be non-Hispanic white, more likely to be non-Hispanic black, less likely to be foreign born,

less educated, less likely to be married at the birth, more likely to have births covered by

Medicaid or other public insurance, and less likely to have lived with both parents at age 16. This

result is at odds with the findings by O’Hara and Swain (1996) that postpartum depression (as

more typically measured) is unrelated to many socioeconomic characteristics. This systematic

pattern of less advantaged mothers being more likely to experience depression during the

postpartum year underscores the importance of addressing the potential endogeneity of maternal

depression through means other than statistical adjustment, such as two-stage models. As

expected based on O’Hara and Swain and many others, the maternal grandmother’s history of

depression is strongly associated with the mother’s depression during the postpartum year,

pointing to this measure as an important control variable.

Multivariate Analysis

Single equation models

       Table 2 presents probit estimates of the effects of maternal depression on the probability

of child and household food insecurity at 2 years. For each of the three food insecurity outcomes

and each of the two measures of maternal depression (moderate or severe depression and severe



                                                                                                  22
depression, as described earlier), we present the estimated effects of maternal depression from

four different probit models (altogether, from 24 different models). Model 1 includes no

covariates. Model 2 includes child’s characteristics plus all of the maternal characteristics in

Table 1 other than the maternal grandmother’s history of depression. Model 3 includes all of the

variables in Model 2 plus the grandmother’s history of depression, which we argued earlier is

conceptually an important control variable, but due to its strong correlation with the mother’s

depression, could potentially pick up some of the effects of the mother’s depression. Model 4

includes all of the variables in Model 3 plus state indicators. Each cell contains the probit

coefficient, the standard error which is corrected for state clustering of observations using the

Huber-White method (in parentheses), and the marginal effect [in brackets].

       In all models, maternal depression significantly increases the likelihood of food

insecurity. The marginal effect size generally declines as more covariates are added, with the

biggest declines between Models 1 and 2 (when adding all control variables other than

grandmother’s history of depression and state indicators). That is, once the large set of control

variables, most of which are sociodemographic, are included, the strong association between

maternal grandmother’s history of depression and the mother’s depression during the postpartum

year for the most part disappears (alleviating our concerns about potentially over-controlling),

and the state indicators also do not affect the estimates. For both child and household low or very

low food insecurity, the estimates are uniformly higher when using the more stringent measure

of maternal depression, suggesting a dose-response relation.

       The effect sizes are very large—e.g., in the most adjusted model (Model 4), moderate or

severe maternal depression increases the likelihood that the children and families will be food

insecure by 76% and 65% (relative to the relevant sample means), respectively. The effect size is



                                                                                                    23
somewhat smaller when using the broader measure of household food insecurity (53%). In

additional analyses (results not shown, but available on request), we tested our hypothesis, stated

earlier, that the effects of maternal depression on food insecurity are stronger for more

disadvantaged women. Specifically, we estimated the effects of moderate or severe maternal

depression on the three food insecurity outcomes from Table 2 along three dimensions of

socioeconomic disadvantage—marital status, health insurance for the birth, and education.

Specifically, we estimated and compared the effects of maternal depression on food insecurity

for subsamples of mothers who were married versus unmarried, who had Medicaid or other

publicly insured births versus privately insured births, and who had any college education versus

a high school education or less For all three outcomes, we found that the effects of maternal

depression on food insecurity were stronger for the more disadvantaged group (unmarried,

Medicaid or other public insurance, high school education or less) than for the comparison

group, providing support for our hypothesis.

       Table 3 presents the full probit results for Model 4 from Table 2, using the measure of

moderate or severe depression, for all three measures of food insecurity (corresponding results

from all other models in Table 2 are available from the authors upon request). Estimates for the

state identifiers are not presented. Racial and ethnic differences are usually significant, and lower

education and poverty (proxied by Medicaid-financed birth) and additional children in the

household strongly and significantly increase the likelihood of food insecurity, while having

lived with both parents at age 16 decrease the risk of food insecurity. It is notable that all of the

health variables are significant predictors of household food insecurity. Not only does maternal

depression during the postpartum year have strong associations with food insecurity, but a

prenatal physical health condition increases the likelihood of household food insecurity and the



                                                                                                    24
maternal grandmother’s history of depression is a strong independent predictor of both child and

household food insecurity.

Two-stage models

       The accuracy of the estimates presented thus far, from single-equation models, depends

on the degree to which maternal depression during the postpartum year is an exogenous shock.

Our results in Table 1 suggest that this may not be the case even with our extensive control

variables, which substantially reduced the estimated effects of maternal depression on food

insecurity. To further investigate the potential endogeneity of maternal depression, we estimate

2-stage (bivariate probit) models that use multiple birth and moderate or severe infant health

conditions as identifiers for depression during the postpartum year. Both of these infant-related

factors are significantly associated with maternal depression, as we saw in Table 1.

       We explored the appropriateness of the two identifiers in several different ways. First, we

relied on previous research, discussed earlier, to confirm that these two variables have been

linked to mother’s subsequent mental health. Second, we ran supplementary models of the

effects of moderate or severe depression on the three measures of food insecurity that

corresponded to Model 4 from Table 2 but also included the two identifiers, and found that

multiple birth and poor infant health were not independently associated with food insecurity.

Third, we estimated the same models just described but that excluded mothers with moderate or

severe depression and found no direct associations between the two identifiers and food

insecurity in this mentally healthy cohort. These results provide further evidence that the two

child-related identifiers are related to food insecurity only through maternal depression.

       Results from the bivariate probit models, which estimate maternal depression in the

postpartum year (using the moderate or severe measure) in the first stage and household food



                                                                                                  25
insecurity in the second stage, are presented in Appendix Table 2, for all three measures of food

insecurity. These results indicate that: (1) the two identifiers are jointly significant predictors of

maternal depression (chi-square joint significance tests), (2) the two identifiers are excludable

from each outcome equation (exclusion tests), and (3) the error term in the maternal depression

equation is not significantly correlated with the error term in the outcome equation, for either

outcome (Wald test of Rho=0), suggesting that our fully-adjusted single-equation estimates of

the effects of maternal depression on food insecurity are not biased (that is, that they account for

all relevant confounding factors).

Potential buffering effects of food and cash assistance programs

        Given the literature reviewed earlier, there are good reasons to believe that women with

maternal depression are more likely than those without depression to have gaps in income due to

reduced labor force activity. This would increase their need for, and possibly make them

qualified for, a range of public support programs. However, as discussed earlier in the context of

the theoretical model, depression may reduce women’s ability to apply and maintain eligibility.

Thus, it is unclear whether maternal depression would increase, reduce, or have no net effect on

program participation. For the programs to buffer the effects of maternal depression on food

insecurity, maternal depression would have to increase program participation; we explore this

question as a first step in trying to understand the potential roles that the programs play in

buffering the effects of maternal depression on child and household food insecurity.

        We consider the potential effects of maternal depression during the postpartum year on

food assistance through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, or food stamps)

and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)

program; health care coverage through Medicaid; and cash assistance through the Temporary



                                                                                                     26
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) programs. In Table 4, we present estimated effects of

maternal depression during the postpartum year—for the full sample, for the subsample of

mothers at or below 185% of poverty at 9 months, and for the subsample of mothers at or below

poverty at 2 years—on participation in each of the four programs from models that include the

same set of covariates as in Table 3. Covariates estimates for the full sample are presented in the

Appendix Table 3. Because we do not explicitly address the potential endogeneity of maternal

depression in these analyses, the results should be interpreted with caution vis-à-vis causal

inferences.

       We find that maternal depression is significantly and positively related to participation in

all four programs for the full sample, implying that increased need for support among depressed

mothers outweighs a possible reduced ability to navigate the system. Effect sizes are similar for

all four programs, varying from 17% for WIC to 25% for Medicaid (considering the marginal

effects relative to the relevant sample program participation means). When limiting the sample to

poor women, we find that the estimated effects of depression on SNAP and TANF participation

(17 to 19%) are similar to those for the full sample, but that depression is no longer associated

with WIC participation and is much less associated with Medicaid participation that it was in the

full sample (effect size declines to about 10%). We infer from the estimates in Table 4 that

families with depressed mothers would have had worse food security outcomes in the absence of

public support programs, and that the SNAP and TANF programs appear to be particularly

important in buffering food insecurity effects of depression among poor mothers. The covariate

estimates are consistent with expectations in terms of directionality and relative magnitudes, both

against other covariates and across program participation outcomes.




                                                                                                    27
Conclusion

       Using nationally representative data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—

Birth Cohort, we found robust evidence that a health shock in the family—maternal depression

during the postpartum year—is strongly associated with child and household food insecurity

approximately 3–15 months later. The effects are stronger for more disadvantaged women, who

are at greater risk for food insecurity to begin with. As far as we know, this study represents the

first strong test of the Gundersen and Gruber model as applied to a health shock. While we know

from much past literature that food insecurity affects health, the findings from this study

demonstrate that health can also affect food insecurity and that, more generally, health and

socioeconomic status are intertwined into an intricate knot and cannot be characterized as a “one

way street.” We found less direct—and therefore suggestive—evidence that maternal depression

increases the likelihood of participation in SNAP, WIC, Medicaid, and TANF, and therefore that

these programs appear to buffer the effects of health shocks on food hardship.

       Future research is needed to complement the findings of this study by investigating the

effects of other types of health shocks, as well as the importance of timing of those shocks, on

individuals’ and family members’ food-related hardship at various stages of the lifecourse.

Rigorous research is also needed to obtain better estimates of the buffering effects of the various

public support programs in the context of maternal depression on food insecurity among children

and households, as well as vis-à-vis other health shocks and contexts (e.g., a mental health shock

to a child on his/her siblings; a physical health shock to a middle-aged individual on the food

insecurity of his/her elderly parents).

       From a policy perspective, the findings have implications for the targeting of

programmatic interventions and underscore the importance of communication and coordination



                                                                                                   28
between healthcare providers, social service agencies, and public support programs. For

example, maternal depression screening by pediatricians in the perinatal and postpartum is

currently recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics’ Bright Futures Initiative and

Task Force on Mental Health. Such family-centered practices, along with cooperation and

referrals between pediatricians, maternal healthcare providers, and public support programs that

provide food, healthcare, and cash assistance, have the potential to improve both health and

household food security in the United States.




                                                                                               29
References

Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. D. (2011). Personality Psychology
        and Economics (No. w16822). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Banerjee, S., Chatterji, P., Lahiri, K. (2013). Effects of Psychiatric Disorders on Labor Market
        Outcomes: A Latent Variable Approach Using Multiple Clinical Indicators (CESifo
        Working Paper No. 4260). Retrieved from the CESifo website
        https://www.econstor.eu/dspace/bitstream/10419/77680/1/cesifo_wp4260.pdf
Bartfeld, J., & Dunifon, R. (2006). State-Level Predictors of Food Insecurity among Households
        with Children. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(4), 921–942.
Berndt, E. R., Finkelstein, S. N., Greenberg, P. E., Howland, R. H., Keith, A., Rush, A. J., ... &
        Keller, M. B. (1998). Workplace Performance Effects from Chronic Depression and its
        Treatment. Journal of Health Economics, 17(5), 511–535.
Bethel J, Green J, Kalton G, et al. Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECLS–B),
        Sampling. Volume 2 of the ECLS-B Methodology Report for the 9-Month Data
        Collection, 2001–02 (NCES 2005–147). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
        Education, National Center for Education Statistics 2005.
Bhattacharya, J., Currie, J., & Haider, S. (2004). Poverty, Food Insecurity, and Nutritional
        Outcomes in Children and Adults. Journal of Health Economics, 23(4), 839–862.
Borjas, G. J. (2004). Food Insecurity and Public Assistance. Journal of Public Economics, 88(7),
        1421–1443.
Carter, K. N., Kruse, K., Blakely, T., & Collings, S. (2011). The Association of Food Security
        with Psychological Distress in New Zealand and Any Gender Differences. Social Science
        & Medicine, 72(9), 1463–1471.
Casey, P., Goolsby, S., Berkowitz, C., Frank, D., Cook, J., Cutts, D., Black, M., et al. (2004).
        Maternal depression, changing public assistance, food security, and child health
        status. Pediatrics, 113(2), 298–304.
CDC (2010). Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 2009 Codebook Report.
        http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual_data/annual_2009.htm. Accessed 2/5/14.
Chatterji, P., Alegria, M., & Takeuchi, D. (2011). Psychiatric Disorders and Labor Market
        Outcomes: Evidence from the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication. Journal of
        Health Economics, 30(5), 858–868.
Choi, Y., Bishai, D., & Minkovitz, C.S. (2009). Multiple Births Are a Risk Factor for Postpartum
        Maternal Depressive Symptoms. Pediatrics, 123(4), 1147–1154.
Coleman-Jensen, A., Nord, M., Singh, A. (2013). Household Food Security in the United States
        in 2012 (Economic Research Report No. 155). Retrieved from United States Department
        of Agriculture website: http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/err-economic-research-
        report/err155.aspx#.UvAJKVf9WSo. Accessed 2/3/2014.
Corcoran, M., Heflin, C., & Siefert, K. (2007). Work Trajectories, Income Changes and Food
        Insufficiency in a Michigan Welfare Population. Social Service Review, 81, 3–25.
Cseh, A. (2008). The Effects of Depressive Symptoms on Earnings. Southern Economic Journal,
        75(2), 383–409.
Curtis, M. A., Corman, H., Noonan, K., & Reichman, N. E. (2013). Life shocks and
        homelessness. Demography, 50(6), 2227–2253.
Dahal, A., & Fertig, A. (2013). An Econometric Assessment of the Effect of Mental Illness on
        Household Spending Behavior. Journal of Economic Psychology, 37, 18–33.

                                                                                               30
Ettner, S. L., Frank, R. G., & Kessler, R. C. (1997). The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders on
        Labor Market Outcomes (No. w5989). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Farr, S.L., Dietz, P.M., Williams, J.R., Gibbs, F.A., Tregear, S. (2011) Depression screening and
        treatment among nonpregnant women of reproductive age in the United States.
        Preventing Chronic Disease ;8(6):A122.
        http://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2011/nov/11_0062.htm. Accessed [2/5/14].
Frijters, P., Johnston, D. W., & Shields, M. A. (2010). Mental Health and Labour Market
        Participation: Evidence from IV Panel Data Models (No. 4883). Discussion paper
        series//Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit.
Gundersen, C., & Ribar, D. (2011). Food Insecurity and Insufficiency at Low Levels of Food
        Expenditures. Review of Income and Wealth, 57(4), 704–726.
Gundersen, C., Kreider, B., & Pepper, J. (2011). The Economics of Food Insecurity in the United
        States. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 33(3), 281–303.
Gundersen, C., & Kreider, B. (2009). Bounding the Effects of Food Insecurity on Children’s
        Health Outcomes. Journal of health economics, 28(5), 971–983.
Gundersen, C., & Kreider, B. (2008). Food Stamps and Food Insecurity What Can Be Learned in
        the Presence of Nonclassical Measurement Error? Journal of Human Resources, 43(2),
        352–382.
Gundersen, C., Weinreb, L., Wehler, C., & Hosmer, D. (2003). Homelessness and Food
        Insecurity. Journal of Housing Economics, 12(3), 250–272.
Gundersen, C., & Gruber, J. (2001). The Dynamic Determinants of Food Insecurity, in Second
        Food Security Measurement and Research Conference, Volume II: Papers. Food
        Assistance and Nutrition Research Report 11-2, pp. 92–110. Margaret Andrews and Mark
        Prell (eds.), USDA, Economic Research Service.
Gundersen, C., & Oliveira, V. (2001). The Food Stamp Program and Food
        Insufficiency. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 83(4), 875–887.
Guo, B. (2011). Household Assets and Food Security: Evidence from the Survey of Program
        Dynamics. Journal of family and economic issues, 32(1), 98–110.
Heflin, C. M., Siefert, K., & Williams, D. R. (2005). Food Insufficiency and Women's Mental
        Health: Findings from a 3-year Panel of Welfare Recipients.Social science &
        medicine, 61(9), 1971–1982.
Heflin, C. M., & Ziliak, J. P. (2008). Food Insufficiency, Food Stamp Participation, and Mental
        Health. Social Science Quarterly, 89(3), 706–727.
Layard, R. (2013). Mental Health: The New Frontier for Labour Economics. IZA Journal of
        Labor Policy, 2(1), 1–16.
Leete, L., & Bania, N. (2010). The Effect of Income Shocks on Food Insufficiency. Review of
        Economics of the Household, 8(4), 505–526.
Marcotte, D. E., & Wilcox-Gok, V. (2003). Estimating Earning Losses due to Mental Illness: A
        Quantile Regression Approach. Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 6(3),
        123–134.
Marcotte, D., Wilcox-Gok, V., & Patrick Redmon, D. (2000). The Labor Market Effects of
        Mental Illness—The Case of Affective Disorders. Research in Human Capital and
        Development, 13, 181–210.
Miller, L. (2002). Postpartum Depression. Journal of the American Medical Association, 287(6),
        762–765.



                                                                                              31
Nelson, R. E., & Kim, J. (2011). The Impact of Mental Illness on the Risk of Employment
        Termination. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 14(1), 39–52.
Nord, M., Andrews, M. & Carlson, S. (2004) Household Food Security in the United States,
        2003. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. Research Report No.
        42. Accessed from: http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/fanrr-food-assistance-nutrition-
        research-program/fanrr42.aspx#.UvvB04XEkkA on 2/12/14.
Nord, M., & Prell, M. A. (2011). Food security improved following the 2009 ARRA increase in
        SNAP benefits. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Ojeda, V. D., Frank, R. G., McGuire, T. G., & Gilmer, T. P. (2010). Mental Illness, Nativity,
        Gender and Labor Supply. Health Economics, 19(4), 396–421.
O'Hara, M.W., & Swain, A.M. (1996). Rates and Risk of Postpartum Depression: A Meta
        Analysis. International Review of Psychiatry, 8, 37–54.
Pilkauskas, N.V., Currie J., & Garfinkel, I. (2011). The Great Recession and Material Hardship.
        Working Paper 1312, Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and
        International Affairs, Center for Research on Child Wellbeing.
Pratt LA, Brody DJ. Depression in the United States household population, 2005–2006. NCHS
        Data Brief. 2008(7):1–8.
Radloff, L.S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general
        population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1(3), 385–401.
Reichman, N.E., Teitler, J., & Curtis, M. (2005). TANF Sanctioning and Hardship. Social
        Service Review, 79(2), 215–236.
Reichman, N.E., Corman, H., & Noonan, K. (2014). Effects of Mental Health on Couple
        Relationship Status, Review of Economics of the Household. Available online ahead of
        press: http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11150-013-9237-2.
Rose, D. (1999). Economic Determinants and Dietary Consequences of Food Insecurity in the
        United States. The Journal of Nutrition, 129, 517s–520s.
Scott, R.I., & Wehler, C.A. (1998). Food Insecurity/Food Insufficiency: An Empirical
        Examination of Alternative Measures of Food Problems in Impoverished U.S.
        Households. Madison: Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper #1176-98.
Siefert, K., Bowman, P. J., Heflin, C. M., Danziger, S., & Williams, D. R. (2000). Social and
        Environmental Predictors of Maternal Depression in Current and Recent Welfare
        Recipients. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 70(4), 510–522.
Singer, L.T., Salvator, A., Guo, S., Collin, M., Lilien, L., & Baley, J. (1999). Maternal
        Psychological Distress and Parenting Stress After the Birth of a Very Low-Birth-Weight
        Infant. JAMA, 218(9), 799–805.
Snow, K., Derecho, A., Wheeless, S., Lennon, J., Rosen, J., Rogers, J., Kinsey, S., Morgan, K.,
        & Einaudi, P. (2009). Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECLS-B),
        Kindergarten 2006 and 2007 Data File User’s Manual (2010-010). Washington, DC:
        National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, US Department
        of Education.
Sullivan, J., Turner, L, & Danziger, S. (2008). The Relationship between Income and Material
        Hardship. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(1), 63–81.
Van Hook, J., & Balistreri, K. S. (2006). Ineligible parents, eligible children: Food Stamps
        receipt, allotments, and food insecurity among children of immigrants. Social Science
        Research, 35(1), 228–251.



                                                                                              32
Vliegen, N., Casalin, S., & Luyten, P. (2014). The Course of Postpartum Depression: A Review
       of Longitudinal Studies. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 22(1), 1–22.




                                                                                           33
Table 1: Sample Characteristics
                                                    Full           Had        Did Not
                                                  Analysis      Maternal        Have
                                                   Sample      Depression     Maternal
                                                 (N = 7,900)   at 9 Months   Depression
                                                               (N = 1,400)   (N = 6,500)


Food Insecurity (measured at 2 years)

     Low food security—children                    .04***          .08           .03

     Very low food security—children               <.01**         <.01          <.01

     Low food security—household                   .07***          .12           .06

     Very low food security—household              .02***          .04           .01

     Marginal food security—household              .08***          .11           .07

Maternal Characteristics

     Age, in years                                27.6***         26.1          27.9

                                                    (6.3)         (6.4)         (6.2)

     Non-Hispanic white                            .53***          .48           .54
     (reference category in regression models)

     Non-Hispanic black                            .16***          .24           .14

     Hispanic                                      .14**           .12           .14

     Asian or Pacific Islander                     .12**           .11           .13

     American Indian                               .05**           .06           .05

     Foreign born                                  .20***          .16           .21

     < High school graduate                        .17***          .24           .16

     High school graduate                          .30***          .38           .29

     Any college                                   .52***          .37           .56

     Marital birth                                 .68***          .53           .71

     Number of other children in the household    1.06***         1.17          1.03


                                                                                        34
    Medicaid birth                                     .33***           .49             .29

    Employed at all during year prior to the birth     .73***           .68             .74

    Lived with both parents at age 16                  .58***           .48             .60

    Lives in less densely populated urban area           .13            .13             .13

    Lives in densely populated urban area               .71*            .69             .71

    Lives in non-urban area                             .16*            .18             .16
    (reference category in regression models)

    Prenatal physical health condition                   .08            .08             .08

    Own mother had history of depression               .07***           .11             .06

Child Characteristics

    Male child                                           .51            .51             .51

    Child’s age, in months, when outcome was            24.5            24.5            24.5
    measured
                                                        (1.3)          (1.4)           (1.3)

    Identifiers (used only in 2-stage models):

    Multiple birth                                     .17**            .19             .17

    Infant health condition                            .10***           .13             .09

Program participation (measured at 2 years)

    SNAP                                               .21***           .35             .18

    WIC                                                .41***           .55             .37

    Medicaid                                           .34***           .51             .30

    TANF                                               .08***           .13             .06

Notes: All figures are proportions unless indicated otherwise. *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10
for significant differences between mothers with and without depression. Figures are
unweighted. All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 50 as required by the National Center for
Education Statistics to protect subject confidentiality. SNAP = Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program. WIC = Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children;
TANF = Temporary Assistance to Needy Families.



                                                                                               35
Table 2: Effects of Maternal Depression on Food Insecurity at 2 Years Using Alternative
Measures and Model Specifications (N = 7,900)
                                                                                Basic
                                                                            Covariates +
                                                              Basic       Grandmother’s
                                                          Covariates +       Depression
                               No           Basic       Grandmother’s          + State
                          Covariates      Covariates       Depression        Indicators
                               (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)
                             Probit         Probit            Probit            Probit
                          Coefficient     Coefficient      Coefficient       Coefficient
                              (SE)           (SE)              (SE)              (SE)
                             [ME]           [ME]              [ME]              [ME]

Moderate or Severe Maternal Depression (at 9 months)
Low or Very Low Food     .520***         .430***                 .422***            .425***
Security—Child            (.057)           (.060)                 (.060)             (.062)
                          [.057]           [.036]                 [.035]             [.031]
Low or Very Low Food     .524***         .390***                 .380***            .391***
Security—Household        (.046)           (.049)                 (.049)             (.050)
                          [.098]           [.060]                 [.058]             [.055]
Low, Very Low, or        .494***         .362***                 .352***            .362***
Marginal Food             (.040)           (.043)                 (.043)             (.044)
Security—Household        [.139]           [.090]                 [.087]             [.087]


Severe Maternal Depression (at 9 months)
Low or Very Low Food      .681***        .560***                 .547***            .553***
Security—Child             (.074)         (.076)                  (.076)             (.078)
                           [.092]         [.057]                  [.055]             [.049]

Low or Very Low Food         .673***          .534***            .519***            .527***
Security—Household            (.064)           (.067)             (.067)             (.069)
                              [.146]           [.094]             [.091]             [.086]

Low, Very Low, or            .521***          .366***            .351***            .354***
Marginal Food                 (.059)           (.062)             (.062)             (.064)
Security—Household            [.155]           [.095]             [.091]             [.089]

Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. SE = Standard Error. ME = Marginal Effect. Basic
Covariates include all Maternal Characteristics from Table 1 other than maternal grandmother’s
depression, plus the focal child’s sex and age at the time of the 2-year interview. Estimates are
unweighted. All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 50 as required by the National Center for
Education Statistics to protect subject confidentiality.




                                                                                              36
Table 3: Effects of Moderate or Severe Maternal Depression on Child and Household Food
Insecurity (N = 7,900)
                                                                     Low, Very Low, or
                             Low or Very Low     Low or Very Low       Marginal Food
                              Food Security—      Food Security—         Security—
                                    Child            Household           Household
                              Probit Coefficient  Probit Coefficient  Probit Coefficient
                                     (SE)                (SE)                (SE)
                                    [ME]                [ME]                [ME]

Moderate or severe               .425***              .391***              .362***
depression (9 months)             (.062)               (.050)               (.044)
                                  [.031]               [.055]               [.087]
Mother's age, in years           .008***                -.002               -.008
                                  (.006)               (.004)              (.004)
                                  [.000]               [-.000]             [-.002]
Non-Hispanic black               .251***               .155**              .183***
                                  (.084)                (.068)              (.058)
                                  [.016]                [.020]              [.042]
Hispanic                         .344***                .089               .129**
                                  (.100)               (.080)               (.066)
                                  [.024]               [.011]               [.029]
Asian or Pacific Islander          -.177              -.310***            -.300***
                                  (.149)                (.112)              (.086)
                                  [-.008]              [-.020]             [-.056]
American Indian                   .230**                .153               .179**
                                   (.116)              (.097)               (.082)
                                   [.015]              [.020]               [.042]
Foreign born                       .157                .168*               .265***
                                  (.098)               (.078)               (.063)
                                  [.009]               [.021]               [.062]
High school graduate               -.095                -.072              -.086*
                                  (.074)               (.061)              (.051)
                                  [-.005]              [-.008]             [-.018]
Any college                      -.369***             -.223***            -.365***
                                   (.090)               (.072)              (.060)
                                  [-.021]              [-.026]             [-.079]
Marital birth                      .052                 -.012              -.080*
                                  (.074)               (.058)              (.048)
                                  [.003]               [-.001]             [-.017]




                                                                                      37
Number of other children             .120***                 .080***                .092***
in the household                      (.020)                  (.018)                 (.015)
                                      [.007]                  [.009]                 [.020]
Medicaid birth                       .349***                 .532***                .375***
                                      (.072)                  (.058)                 (.047)
                                      [.022]                  [.072]                 [.086]
Employed at all during year            .044                    .026                   .045
prior to the birth                    (.063)                  (.050)                 (.042)
                                      [.002]                  [.003]                 [.009]
Mother lived with both                -.118**               -.156***               -.144***
parents at age 16                      (.060)                 (.048)                 (.039)
                                       [-.007]               [-.019]                [-.031]
Lives in less densely                  .153                    .122                  .111*
populated urban area                  (.099)                  (.078)                 (.066)
                                      [.009]                  [.015]                 [.025]
Lives in densely populated             .029                   -.019                  -.018
urban area                            (.084)                  (.066)                (.056)
                                      [.002]                 [-.002]                [-.004]
Prenatal physical health               .118                  .165**                 .131**
condition                             (.094)                  (.076)                 (.065)
                                      [.007]                  [.021]                 [.030]
Own mother had history of             .188*                  .207***                .185***
depression                            (.101)                  (.079)                 (.068)
                                      [.012]                  [.028]                 [.043]
Male child                             .067                   .080*                 .079**
                                      (.055)                  (.044)                 (.036)
                                      [.004]                  [.009]                 [.017]
Child's age, in months,                -.001                  -.006                  -.003
when outcome was                      (.021)                 (.016)                 (.013)
measured                              [-.000]                [-.001]                [-.001]
Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. SE = Standard Error. ME = Marginal Effect.
Estimates are unweighted. All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 50 as required by the
National Center for Education Statistics to protect subject confidentiality. All models include
state indicators (estimates not shown).




                                                                                                  38
Table 4: Estimated Effects of Moderate or Severe Maternal Depression on Program
Participation at 2 years for various sub-samples
                              SNAP             WIC         Medicaid          TANF
                              Probit           Probit       Probit           Probit
                           Coefficient      Coefficient   Coefficient      Coefficient
                                (SE)            (SE)          (SE)             (SE)
                               [ME]            [ME]          [ME]             [ME]
Full Sample
(N=7900)
Moderate or severe           .231***         .176***       .243***          .200***
depression (at 9              (.047)           (.045)       (.048)           (.057)
months)                       [.051]           [.068]       [.085]           [.015]


185% of Poverty at 9 months (N=3700)
Moderate or severe        0.175***           0.044         0.153***          0.152**
depression (at 9           (0.053)          (0.054)         (0.057)          (0.063)
months)                    [0.068]          [0.015]         [0.056]          [0.027]

185% of Poverty at 2 years (N=3500)
Moderate or severe        0.208***           0.087         0.201***         0.185***
depression (at 9           (0.054)          (0.056)         (0.059)          (0.062)
months)                    [0.082]          [0.028]         [0.070]          [0.037]




                                                                                         39
Appendix Table 1: Coding of Poor Infant Health

        The coding of health conditions was designed to characterize conditions that are at least
moderately severe, unlikely caused by prenatal behavior, have a relatively poor long term
prognosis, and are present at birth. The coding was originally developed and used for the Fragile
Families and Child Wellbeing (FFCWB) Study, wherein a pediatric consultant was directed to
glean information from the infants’ medical records (augmented with 1-year maternal reports)
and to assign all infant conditions a number between 1 and 16 according to the grid below. After
giving the consultant the grid and clear instructions, the investigators had no further input into
how particular conditions were coded. If a child had multiple conditions, each condition was
assigned a separate number.
       For this paper, we applied the FFCWB coding methodology to the ECLSB, using
information on newborn conditions and congenital anomalies from the birth certificate module
and assigning the same codes to conditions that were assigned in the FFCWB.
Moderate or Severe Infant Health Condition was coded as a one (yes) if the child had a
condition in either cell #1 or cell #2. Examples of conditions in cell #1 are renal agenesis,
microcephalus, and Down Syndrome. Examples of conditions in cell #2, which are considered
random at birth but may or may not have long-term health consequences, are, hydrocephalus,
cleft palate, and heart malformations.
Examples of high severity conditions considered possibly related to parents behavior are
seizures (cell 5) and likely related to prenatal behavior are fetal alcohol syndrome (cell 9). These
conditions are not coded as ones in the above measures.

                                                            Severity

                                   High             Medium              Low            Unknown

Not Behavior Related                 1                  2                 3                 4


Possibly Behavior Related            5                  6                 7                 8


Likely Behavior Related              9                 10                11                12


Not Enough Information
To Determine if Behavior            13                 14                15                16
Related




                                                                                                  40
Appendix Table 2: Bivariate Probit Estimates of Effects of Moderate or Severe Maternal Depression on Food Insecurity at 2-
Years (N = 7,900)

                                        Low or Very                         Low or Very                        Low, Very Low,
                      Moderate or        Low Food         Moderate or        Low Food        Moderate or         or Marginal
                    severe depression    Security—      severe depression    Security—     severe depression   Food Security—
                      (at 9 months)        Child          (at 9 months)      Household       (at 9 months)        Household

                       Coefficient       Coefficient       Coefficient       Coefficient       Coefficient        Coefficient
                          (SE)              (SE)              (SE)              (SE)              (SE)               (SE)
                                           [ME]                                [ME]                                 [ME]

Moderate or                                 .292                                .005                                 .053
severe depression                          (.578)                              (.419)                               (.314)
(at 9 months)                              [.019]                              [.001]                               [.012]
Mother's age, in          .002              .008               .001              -.001            .001              -.008**
years                    (.004)            (.006)             (.004)            (.004)           (.004)              (.004)
                                           [.000]                              [-.000]                              [-.002]
Non-Hispanic            .155***           .257***            .155***          .172***           .155***            .196***
black                    (.055)            (.087)             (.055)           (.069)            (.055)             (.058)
                                           [.017]                              [.022]                               [.045]
Hispanic                 -.117*           .338***            -.114*             .072             -.116*             .116*
                         (.067)            (.106)            (.067)            (.083)            (.067)             (.067)
                                           [.024]                              [.009]                               [.026]
Asian or Pacific        .302***             -.168            .304***          -.278**           .302***            -.277***
Islander                 (.075)            (.155)             (.075)           (.118)            (.075)              (.090)
                                           [-.008]                            [-.028]                               [-.053]
American Indian           .084             .232**              .087            .158*              .085              .182**
                         (.083)             (.116)            (.082)           (.096)            (.082)              (.081)
                                            [.016]                             [.021]                                [.043]



                                                                                                                         41
Foreign born        -.112**      .153     -.124**     .151*      -.121*    .253***
                     (.062)     (.101)     (.062)     (.080)     (.062)     (.065)
                                [.009]                [.019]                [.059]
High school           .027      -.094       .027       -.070      .025     -.084*
graduate             (.051)     (.074)     (.051)     (.060)     (.051)     (.051)
                               [-.005]               [-.008]               [-.018]
Any college         -.190***   -.376***   -.191***   -.242***   -.193***   -.379***
                      (.058)     (.095)     (.058)     (.074)     (.058)     (.061)
                                [-.021]               [-.029]               [-.082]
Marital birth       -.215***     .043     -.214***     -.036    -.215***   -.098*
                      (.046)    (.084)      (.045)    (.066)      (.045)    (.052)
                                [.002]               [-.004]               [-.021]
Number of other       .014     .120***      .014     .080***      .014     .092***
children in the      (.015)     (.020)     (.015)     (.017)     (.015)     (.015)
household                       [.007]                [.010]                [.020]

Medicaid birth      .294***    .361***    .293***    .560***    .292***    .399***
                     (.045)     (.088)     (.045)     (.062)     (.045)     (.052)
                                [.023]                [.079]                [.092]
Employed at all     -.118***     .039     -.118***     .012     -.118***     .034
during year prior     (.040)    (.067)      (.040)    (.053)      (.040)    (.044)
to the birth                    [.002]                [.001]                [.007]

Prenatal physical     -.011      .117       -.011    .161**       -.011    .128**
health condition     (.064)     (.094)     (.064)     (.076)     (.064)     (.065)
                                [.007]                [.021]                [.029]
Mother lived        -.088**    -.121**    -.087**    -.164***   -.089**    -.151***
with both parents    (.037)     (.061)     (.037)      (.048)    (.037)      (.039)
at age 16                       [-.007]               [-.020]               [-.033]




                                                                                42
Lives in less       -.018     .152      -.015     .117      -.016     .108
densely            (.065)    (.099)    (.065)    (.078)    (.065)    (.066)
populated urban              [.009]              [.015]              [.024]
area

Lives in densely    .041      .031      .042       -.013    .041       -0.14
populated urban    (.052)    (.084)    (.015)     (.066)   (.052)     (.056)
area                         [.002]              [-.002]             [-.003]

Own mother had     .404***    .205     .405***   .254***   .405***   .222***
history of          (.063)   (.126)     (.063)    (.092)    (.063)    (.077)
depression                   [.013]               [.036]              [.053]

Male child          .017      .067      .015     .081*      .014     .080**
                   (.034)    (.055)    (.034)    (.043)    (.034)     (.036)
                             [.004]              [.010]               [.017]
Child's age, in     .011      -.000     .011       -.005    .011       -.003
months, when       (.013)    (.021)    (.013)     (.016)   (.013)     (.013)
outcome was                  [-.000]             [-.001]             [-.001]
measured
Identifiers
Multiple birth     .177***             .178***             .178***
                    (.047)              (.045)              (.045)

Infant health      .126**              .122**              .123**
condition           (.055)              (.056)              (.055)

Rho                 .077                .224                .178

Test Results
(p-values)



                                                                          43
Wald Test of rho                     .817                                    .371                                     .326
=0

Chi-square joint           .000                                     .000                                    .000
significance test
of identifiers
Exclusion tests
(p-values):
Multiple birth                                  .692                                    .626                                     .713

Infant health                                  .948                                      .593                                       .850
condition
Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. SE = Standard Error. ME = Marginal Effect. All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 50
as required by the National Center for Education Statistics to protect subject confidentiality. All models include state indicators
(estimates not shown).




                                                                                                                                      44
Appendix Table 3: Estimated Effects of Moderate or Severe Maternal Depression on
Program Participation at 2 years (N = 7,900)
                            SNAP             WIC          Medicaid          TANF
                            Probit           Probit         Probit          Probit
                         Coefficient       Coefficient    Coefficient     Coefficient
                             (SE)             (SE)           (SE)             (SE)
                            [ME]             [ME]           [ME]             [ME]

Moderate or severe        .231***          .176***         .243***          .200***
depression (at 9           (.047)           (.045)          (.048)           (.057)
months)                    [.051]           [.068]          [.085]           [.015]
Mother's age, in years    -.008**          -.022***        -.025***          -.001
                           (.004)            (.003)          (.004)         (.005)
                          [-.002]           [-.008]         [-.008]         [-.000]
Non-Hispanic black        .647***          .470***         .376***          .639***
                           (.058)           (.055)          (.058)           (.073)
                           [.165]           [.184]          [.135]           [.063]
Hispanic                    .121           .501***           .051           .244**
                           (.074)           (.059)          (.068)           (.095)
                           [.026]           [.196]          [.017]           [.019]
Asian or Pacific            -.062          -.162**         -.197**          0.218*
Islander                   (.106)           (.072)          (.084)          (.132)
                           [-.012]         [-.060]         [-.063]          [.017]
American Indian            .184**          .255***           -.054           .209*
                            (.085)          (.082)          (.088)           (.109)
                            [.041]          [.099]          [-.018]          [.016]
Foreign born              -.321***         .356***          .150**         -.471***
                            (.076)          (.057)           (.065)          (.104)
                           [-.058]          [.138]           [.052]         [-.024]
High school graduate      -.194***          -.104*         -.168***        -.267***
                            (.053)          (.053)           (.055)          (.063)
                           [-.038]          [-.039]         [-.055]         [-.016]
Any college               -.642***         -.570***        -.533***        -.584***
                            (.062)           (.056)          (.059)          (.083)
                           [-.133]          [-.214]         [-.180]         [-.040]
Marital birth             -.377***         -.342***        -.551***        -.475***
                            (.048)           (.043)          (.045)          (.064)
                           [-.083]          [-.131]         [-.194]         [-.037]




                                                                                        45
Number of other              .100***            .093***          0.076***           .058***
children in the               (.017)             (.016)            (.017)            (.021)
household                     [.020]             [.035]            [.026]            [.004]
Medicaid birth               .925***           0.786***          1.131***           .617***
                              (.047)            (0.042)           (0.042)            (.064)
                              [.224]            [0.301]           [0.401]            [.051]
Employed at all               -.075*             -.002           -.178***            -.106*
during year prior to          (.045)            (.040)             (.043)            (.057)
the birth                     [-.016]           [-.001]           [-.061]            [-.007]
Mother lived with            -.187***           -.055**           -.079**           -.132**
both parents at age 16         (.041)            (.036)            (.039)            (.054)
                              [-.039]           [-.021]           [-.027]           [-.009]
Lives in less densely         .113*             -.149**            -.003              .099
populated urban area          (.068)             (.051)           (.066)             (.095)
                              [.024]            [-.143]           [-.001]            [.007]
Lives in densely               -.012           -.372***           -.138**            .188**
populated urban area          (.059)             (.051)            (.055)             (.081)
                              [-.002]           [-.143]           [-.047]             [.011]
Prenatal physical              .103             .132**             .131*              .079
health condition              (.069)             (.063)            (.068)            (.085)
                              [.022]             [.051]            [.045]            [.005]
Own mother had               .198***              .022              .079            .394***
history of depression         (.071)             (.065)            (.071)            (.086)
                              [.044]             [.008]            [.027]            [.035]
Male child                     -.035             -.031              .043              .019
                              (.039)            (.033)             (.036)            (.049)
                              [-.007]           [-.012]            [.014]            [.001]
Child's age, in                  -.020            -.035**              -.017              -.023
months, when                    (.015)             (.013)             (.014)             (.020)
outcome was                     [-.004]            [-.013]           [-.006]             [-.001]
measured
Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. SE = Standard Error. ME = Marginal Effect. SNAP =
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. WIC = Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants, and Children; TANF = Temporary Assistance to Needy Families. Estimates are
unweighted. All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 50 as required by the National Center for
Education Statistics to protect subject confidentiality. All models include state indicators
(estimates not shown).




                                                                                               46
