                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 CURRICULUM AND IDEOLOGY

                                            Davide Cantoni
                                              Yuyu Chen
                                             David Y. Yang
                                            Noam Yuchtman
                                             Y. Jane Zhang

                                         Working Paper 20112
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20112


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014




Helpful and much appreciated suggestions, critiques and encouragement were provided by Leonardo
Bursztyn, Stefano DellaVigna, Nicola Gennaioli, Paola Giuliano, Torsten Persson, Nancy Qian, Scott
Rozelle, Monika Schnitzer, Linxiu Zhang, David Zweig, seminar participants at Bocconi, CREI, IIES,
HKUST, UC Berkeley, and Warwick, as well as participants in the NBER Culture and Institutions
Program Meeting and the University of Munich Conference on the Long Shadow of History. Michael
Anderson very kindly shared with us his code for computing adjusted p-values. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the LMUexcellent Junior Research Fund and from the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council. Excellent research assistance was provided by Yana Huang, Xuan Wang, and Mark
Westcott. The authors thank several Chinese high school teachers and a current Education Ministry
official. The authors have no conflict of interest, financial or otherwise, related to this study. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Davide Cantoni, Yuyu Chen, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Curriculum and Ideology
Davide Cantoni, Yuyu Chen, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 20112
May 2014
JEL No. I20,P00

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the causal effect of school curricula on students’ stated beliefs and attitudes. We exploit a
major textbook reform in China that was rolled out between 2004 and 2010 with the explicit intention
of shaping youths’ ideology. To measure its effect, we present evidence from a novel survey we
conducted among 2000 students at Peking University. The sharp, staggered introduction of the new
curriculum across provinces allows us to identify the effects of the new educational content in a
generalized difference in differences framework. We examine government documents articulating
desired consequences of the reform, and identify changes in textbook content and college entrance
exams that reflect the government’s aims. These changes were often effective: study under the new
curriculum is robustly associated with changed views on political participation and democracy in
China, increased trust in government officials, and a more skeptical view of free markets.


Davide Cantoni                                    Noam Yuchtman
Seminar für Wirtschaftsgeschichte                 Haas School of Business
University of Munich                              University of California, Berkeley
80539 Munich                                      Berkeley, CA 94720
Germany                                           and NBER
Davide.Cantoni@econ.lmu.de                        yuchtman@haas.berkeley.edu

Yuyu Chen                                         Y. Jane Zhang
Applied Economics Department                      Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Guanghua School of Management                     Division of Social Science
Peking University                                 Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, HK
Beijing, 100871                                   janezhang@ust.hk
Chenyuyu@gsm.pku.edu.cn

David Y. Yang
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305
dyang1@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
Beliefs, attitudes, and ideology play a fundamental role in human societies: they shape interactions
within social networks and in markets; they shape political institutions and policy choices. People’s
attitudes are formed by a variety of sources: they are transmitted from parents to children (vertical
transmission); from peer to peer (horizontal transmission); from third parties, such as media, experts,
or the state (oblique transmission); and, they arise from individual experiences.1 The influence
of education on attitudes has also been widely studied across the social sciences, but without an
established body of clear, causal evidence of its effects.
    In this paper, we use novel survey evidence to study the causal effect of school curricula on stu-
dents’ beliefs and attitudes, examining the impact of a new high school political science curriculum
that was introduced by the Chinese Communist Party between 2004 and 2010 with the explicit inten-
tion of shaping students’ ideology. The State Council (the highest administrative body in the Chinese
government) and the Ministry of Education issued documents articulating the government’s objec-
tives for the new political science curriculum: among these were teaching students about Chinese
democratic institutions; emphasizing the adherence of the Chinese government to the rule of law; ex-
pounding on the “Three Represents” ideology; cultivating in students a traditional national identity
that bridged ethnic groups; teaching students about China’s unique economic development path; and,
promoting increased concern for the environment. We document the Chinese government’s aims in
undertaking the curriculum reforms and, based on a thorough reading of political science textbooks,
identify a set of specific changes to the high school politics curriculum that reflect the aims of the
Chinese government. We describe changes in textbook content across curricula, and changes in the
high-stakes college entrance exams (gaokao) associated with the old and new curricula.
    The curriculum reform we study offers a particularly promising setting in which to estimate the
causal effect of educational content on students’ beliefs and attitudes. Between 2004 and 2010, the
new curriculum (the “8th Curriculum Reform”) was sharply introduced to entering cohorts of high
school students (but not to older students) in a staggered manner, with different provinces adopting
the new curriculum in different years. We test for an impact of studying under the new curriculum
by analyzing the responses to a novel survey we conducted with nearly 2,000 Peking University
undergraduate students. The survey was designed to elicit students’ attitudes rather than test their
ability to memorize their high school curricula: we specifically ask students questions in a manner
that does not look like a series of examination questions.2 Our survey allows us to measure the beliefs
    1 Vertical transmission has received considerable attention, for example Bisin and Verdier (2001). Peers’ influence on

beliefs has been studied by Sacerdote (2001) and Sacerdote (2011). DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) and DellaVigna et al.
(forthcoming) study the influence of the media on ideological views; Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) study the effects
of growing up in a Communist system on policy preferences later in life. Di Tella et al. (2007), Giuliano and Spilimbergo
(2013), Malmendier and Nagel (2011), and Rao (2013) study the role of individuals’ experiences in shaping attitudes and
beliefs.
    2 We discuss the interpretation of students’ responses to our survey questions in more detail below. It is also worth




                                                            1
and attitudes of four cohorts of Chinese students, who entered high school between 2006 and 2010,
drawn from 29 Chinese provinces.
    We apply a generalized difference in differences framework to test whether students who studied
under the new curriculum do, in fact, express different views from those who studied under the old
curriculum. We find that the new curriculum was often successful in changing students’ preferences
and beliefs regarding important issues: controlling for province and cohort fixed effects (and, in vari-
ous specifications, a range of other controls), students who were exposed to the new curriculum were
more likely to view China’s political system as democratic; were more likely to trust government
officials; favored extending political influence to groups outside the CCP (in line with the “Three
Represents”); and, were more likely to view an unconstrained market economy with skepticism.
We do not find that the new curriculum changed Han Chinese students’ attitudes toward minorities
(though minorities view themselves as somewhat more Chinese); nor did the new curriculum cause
students to favor policies protecting the environment, perhaps because these can be seen as opposed
to economic growth—another high priority of the government. We find quantitatively large persua-
sion rates: around 20% of students who would not have held the government’s desired views in the
absence of exposure to the new curriculum are estimated to change their views.
    These findings contribute to a vast social science literature on the ability of educational content to
shape individuals’ beliefs, preferences and political ideology. Prior work ranges across centuries and
continents—from studies of the construction of a “national sentiment” through public schooling in
19th century Prussia and France (Weber, 1976) to studies of American schools in the 19th and 20th
centuries (Dewey, 1916; Lipset, 1959; Freire, 1970; Bowles and Gintis, 1976), and Communist and
Socialist education in the second half of the 20th century (Lott, Jr., 1999).3 The idea that schooling
can be used to mold (more pejoratively, “brainwash”) children’s views of the their social, economic,
and political environment is a powerful one, which resonates across time and space.
    Despite this resonance, and despite striking examples of schooling changes being associated with
ideological changes (e.g., education in Nazi Germany), it is extremely difficult to determine whether
schooling plays a causal role in shaping beliefs or if, instead, changes in curriculum simply coin-
cide with other social, political, or economic changes which themselves shape preferences, perhaps
differentially by age. For example, one might wish to study the effects of Nazi education on the
attitudes of individuals who were school-aged during the Third Reich. However, observing different
attitudes among individuals who studied in Nazi-era schools, one might question whether the schools
themselves affected beliefs, or whether young people in the time of the Third Reich were differen-
tially affected by the environment around them, their parents, the media, and what they observed in
emphasizing that patterns of student responses do not look like responses to examination questions: there is a great deal
of variation in responses—students do not concentrate on a single response. For example, the variation in responses to
questions about trust in government officials is actually greater within our sample of elite university students than in the
more general, AsiaBarometer sample of individuals.
   3 See also Kremer and Sarychev (1998), Spilimbergo (2009), Friedman et al. (2011), Campante and Chor (2012), and

Alesina and Reich (2013).


                                                             2
their daily lives.
    Recently, scholars have begun making progress in identifying the causal effect of education on
attitudes and ideology. Friedman et al. (2011) exploit experimental variation in access to additional
schooling on Kenyan women’s political and social views. Their work identifies an effect of schooling
on attitudes, but does not identify the effects of particular content on attitudes. Fisman et al. (2009)
do study variation in educational content, examining the effects of exposure to economics-oriented
faculty at Yale Law School on students’ behavior in an incentivized game. Their work exploits
random assignment to Law School instructors; one drawback, though, is the small size of the sample,
especially when considering the possibility of correlated errors within classes. In a fascinating study
of the impact of Catalan education on political attitudes, Clots-Figueras and Masella (2013) exploit
variation that is similar to ours—cohort-varying exposure to new educational content—but they lack
the sharp variation in educational content across cohorts that we can exploit, and they also lack
credible cross-sectional variation with which to address concerns about unobservable cross-cohort
differences (their work also studies the combined effect of changes in the language of instruction
with changes in content, in a context of broad political change).
    By examining sharp province×cohort variation in school curricula, we can plausibly identify the
causal effect of educational content on attitudes and ideology (we discuss threats to our identification
strategy in detail in Section 4.1). Specifically, our identification strategy allows us to rule out as con-
founding factors: (i) province-specific differences (e.g., levels of development); (ii) cohort-specific
differences (e.g., broad changes in attitudes across time); (iii) province×time varying shocks that
affect adjacent cohorts similarly (e.g., natural disasters or province-level political shocks that do not
differentially affect children of different ages); and (iv) province×time varying shocks that affect
adjacent cohorts smoothly (e.g., province-specific trends in economic activity), in our specification
that includes province×cohort-specific trends.
    In addition to identifying the causal effect of typically endogenous curriculum change, we be-
lieve our particular setting is of great interest. The variation in educational content we observe is
naturally occurring, introduced on a massive scale by an authoritarian state that explicitly aimed to
shape children’s views. Whether the Chinese government can shape the views of Chinese children
is difficult to know ex ante: on the one hand, the Chinese government seems to be very effective
in many domains; in addition, Chinese children spend a great deal of their time in school, absorb-
ing information on which they will be tested. On the other hand, students know that the Communist
Party disseminates information (school curricula and media) in part driven by political concerns. One
might believe that students will thus view the official curriculum with skepticism. The new curricu-
lum might also fail to persuade students because the internet allows students to easily access content
that differs from official Party positions. Thus, an important question in the internet age is whether
school curricula can affect ideology even when students know that their curriculum may be shaped
by political concerns, and when students have access to information that differs from the party line.


                                                    3
      Our findings of Communist Party success in shaping students’ views contributes to a growing
empirical literature on “persuasion” (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010), much of which has focused
on the persuasive effects of media communications (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Bursztyn and
Cantoni, 2012; Yanagizawa-Drott, 2012; DellaVigna et al., forthcoming). Recent work has focused
on attempts by authoritarian regimes to shape the views of their citizens (Alesina and Reich, 2013),
to which we contribute a study of the role of educational content in shaping ideology. Our findings
suggest that alongside other mechanisms of social and political control, political elites, indeed, can
shape students’ attitudes by choosing the content of the education system.
      The paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2, we provide an overview of China’s education sys-
tem, and discuss China’s 8th Curriculum Reform, which is the focus of our study. In Section 3,
we describe our novel survey of Peking University students, which is our primary data source; we
also discuss here what can be learned from direct survey questions in this context. In Section 4,
we present our empirical model, discuss the identifying assumptions, and present our main results,
including a discussion of statistical inference in a setting in which multiple hypotheses are tested.
In Section 5, we provide a discussion of our findings: we first present a variety of robustness and
placebo tests that support a causal interpretation of our findings; next, we try to benchmark the mag-
nitudes of our results, comparing the “persuasion rates” we find with those found by other scholars,
and also presenting evidence from the AsiaBarometer survey of a significant association between
reported attitudes and political behavior; we also discuss the external validity of our results. Finally,
in Section 6, we place our findings within the social science literature on the effects of schooling on
beliefs, and conclude.


2      China’s curriculum reform
The empirical setting we propose to study is China’s 8th Curriculum Reform, a nationwide edu-
cation reform undertaken by the Chinese central government beginning in 2001.4 Our focus will
be the reformed textbooks of senior high school (gaozhong xinkebiao) students, corresponding to
grades 10–12 in the Chinese educational system (see Figure A.1). For reference, in Appendix A, we
briefly describe the structure of the Chinese high school curriculum.

2.1     Government aims, changes in curriculum, and changes in the gaokao
An explicit goal of the 8th Curriculum Reform was to shape (or reshape) students’ political and social
beliefs. In a 2001 document preparing the reform (“Framework for Basic Education Curriculum
Reform”), the Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China stated that education should
    4 The   previous, 7th curriculum reform was initiated in 1992.




                                                              4
“form in students a correct worldview, a correct view on life, and a correct value system.”5 An author
of the new Politics textbooks described the development of the new curriculum as follows:6


       We believe that high school students are at an age of rapid development and transformation of
       their own political ideology. . . . The Politics textbook is the spiritual material that the country
       provides for the students. Writing the Politics textbook is an act at the state level, rather than an
       academic activity of the individual author. Although the high school Politics textbook teaches
       very basic knowledge, it possesses extremely strong political, policy-oriented, and scientific
       characteristics. With a large readership, it will influence an entire generation of young people.

    While the 8th Curriculum Reform affected the content of textbooks across the high school cur-
riculum (for example, there was an increase in the discussion of Confucianism in the reformed hu-
manities curriculum), we focus on changes made to the Politics curriculum because it is funda-
mentally designed for “moral and ideological education.”7 Indeed, the State Council, China’s chief
administrative authority, issued a memo in 2004 titled “Suggestions on Strengthening the Ideologi-
cal and Moral Construction of Our Youths,” which articulated the government’s aims for the reform,
and guided the writing of the new Politics textbooks. The memo declared the socialization of young
people to be an “important and urgent strategic task,” and saw schools as “the primary channel for
transmitting ideological and moral education to young people.”8 We consulted the State Council
memo, several other government documents, as well as the Ministry of Education’s “Curriculum
Framework for the Senior High School Politics Subject” to identify important government objectives
for the curriculum reform (these documents are described in Appendix B).
    To identify specific changes in curriculum content pre- versus post-reform, we performed a com-
prehensive comparison of the old and new editions of the Economic Life and Political Life textbooks
that made up half of the tenth grade Politics curriculum.9 The Politics curriculum textbooks are
common to all provinces of China, so our analysis was limited to a single set of textbooks for the
provinces/cohorts under the new curriculum, and one set for the provinces/cohorts under the old
    5 Translated excerpts from this and other official documents preparing the Curriculum Reform are presented in Ap-

pendix B.
    6 See Appendix C for translated excerpts from an essay written by Tian Xinming, chair of the committee in charge of

rewriting the Politics textbook. The original text can be found at http://www.pep.com.cn/sxzz/js/tbjx/kb/jsys/
bx1/201008/t20100830_824446.htm, last accessed February 9, 2014.
    7 Again, see Appendix C for translated excerpts from the essay written by the chair of the committee in charge

of rewriting the Politics textbook (original text at http://www.pep.com.cn/sxzz/js/tbjx/kb/jsys/bx1/201008/
t20100830_824446.htm, last accessed February 9, 2014). Along with changes in the content of the curriculum, there
was a desire to change the exam-oriented nature of primary and secondary education through the introduction of new in-
structional methods. However, this aspect of the reform is acknowledged to have failed, amounting to “wearing new shoes
to walk on the old path” (see, for example, Guo, 2010). We examine changes in instructional methods across curricula in
further detail in Section 5.
    8 The document is available online at http://www.people.com.cn/GB/jiaoyu/1053/2405224.html, last ac-

cessed February 9, 2014. See Appendix B for translated excerpts.
    9 The other half of the curriculum is composed of the Cultural Life and Philosophy textbooks; we felt that these were

too nebulous to systematically link to the political objectives of the Chinese government. Images of the covers of old and
new Politics curriculum textbooks can be seen in Appendix C.1.



                                                            5
curriculum.10 While much of the textbooks’ content is maintained across editions, some content
changed considerably. We identified sections that were entirely new to the reformed textbooks; we
also identified sections that were removed from the old curriculum and sections that were extensively
revised.
    It is important to relate the changes in textbook content to changes in the content of the high-
stakes college entrance exam (gaokao). The content of the gaokao is closely tied to the curriculum
students study. Students who studied under the old curriculum were examined based on a gaokao
framework that included material that was in the old curriculum; students who studied under the new
curriculum were examined based on a gaokao framework that incorporated the revisions, additions,
and deletions of the new curriculum—we extensively cite changes in the gaokao framework that
match changes in the textbook content, in our empirical analysis, below. The fact that the new
content was tested in the gaokao indicates that students were highly incentivized to learn it, and
teachers were incentivized to teach it. Carnoy et al. (2013, ch. 6) describe the importance of the
gaokao and the gaokao framework (or “syllabi”) as follows:


       [T]he college entrance exam in China is a two-day high stakes test whose score largely deter-
       mines into which college and major a student will be admitted. . . . Moreover, the curriculum in
       Chinese academic high schools is heavily structured around the college entrance exam. This is
       because most provinces in China release syllabi to high school teachers about what will generally
       be covered on each year’s (provincial-level) exam.

    Consistent with the textbook authors’ claims that they adhered to the State Council’s guidelines
in producing the new Politics curriculum, it is clear from our analysis that several sets of striking
curriculum changes were consistent with the objectives outlined in the government documents. For
example, the government documents repeatedly emphasize teaching students about “socialist democ-
racy.” The new curriculum includes multiple new sections on political participation, which discuss
how political decision making reflects the will of the people, explain the processes of democratic
elections in villages and urban resident committees, and describe the channels through which people
can voice their opinions.
    More broadly, we find significant changes in textbook content and in the gaokao framework
corresponding to the following goals outlined in government documents:

   1. Students should learn about Chinese democracy and political participation.

   2. Students should learn about the importance of the rule of law for legitimizing the Chinese
       government.

   3. Students should study the “Three Represents” ideology expounded by Jiang Zemin.
  10 The sole exception to the rule of textbook uniformity in the Politics curriculum is Shanghai, which follows its own

curriculum.


                                                           6
   4. Students should develop an appreciation for traditional Chinese ethnic heritage.

   5. Students should understand and appreciate Chinese (non-market) economic institutions.

   6. Students should be conscious of environmental issues.

      In Appendix D, we present an item-by-item discussion of each of these government aims: we
point to their discussion in government documents; we identify changes in the Politics textbooks that
match the government objectives; and, we describe changes in the gaokao framework that match the
objectives as well. We also quote extensively from the new textbooks as we present our empirical
analysis, below.11

2.2       The introduction of the new curriculum across space and time
The mode of introduction of the revised curriculum makes China’s curriculum reform an especially
promising context in which to study the causal effect of a change in curriculum. Between 2004
and 2011, different Chinese provinces, in different years, introduced entirely new high school cur-
ricula and textbooks for incoming cohorts of senior high school students.12 Students entering high
school one year would have an entirely different three-year curriculum from that of students who
entered high school just the year before. Students in the older, pre-reform cohort would not be “par-
tially treated” because the college entrance exam was based either on the old curriculum or on the
new one.
      The first entering cohorts to study under the new curriculum were students entering high school in
2004 (graduating in 2007) in the provinces of Shandong, Ningxia, Hainan, and Guangdong. Over the
next six years, every other province except Shanghai saw the introduction of the new textbooks, with
Guangxi, Sichuan, Guizhou, Qinghai, and Tibet finally introducing the new curriculum to entering
high school students in 2010 (graduating in 2013). The introduction dates by province are presented
in Table 1 and Figure 1.
      It is worth stressing that the introduction date of the new curriculum was not randomly assigned
across provinces. Provinces introduced the new curriculum when they had successfully trained teach-
ers and developed supplemental materials based on the new textbooks. We discuss how non-random
introduction of the new curriculum across provinces affects our identification of the causal effects of
the curriculum, below.
  11 Inaddition to the changes that matched the goals articulated in the government documents that shaped the reforms,
we identified other changes in content across textbooks that did not receive discussion in the government documents. For
example, a section was added to the Economic Life textbook on financial markets and financial instruments. While we
included survey questions relating to these changes that were not clearly tied to the objectives of the central government,
they are not our focus here.
  12 The gradual introduction of reforms is typical of Chinese government policy; see, for example, Martinez-Bravo et al.

(2011) on the introduction of village elections in rural China.




                                                            7
3      Survey of Peking University students
We measure students’ beliefs using a a web-based survey we conducted with Peking University
undergraduate students in April and May 2013. We sent an email invitation to participate in the
survey to the complete email list of undergraduate students at Peking University. Students were
offered payment for their participation, and were included in a raffle for a number of desirable Apple-
brand electronics. We received nearly 2,000 completed surveys, for a response rate of around 18.6%
of the undergraduate population of Peking University. Participants were paid an average of 58 RMB
($9.50), and were awarded 12 iPads and 10 iPods.13

3.1      Survey response rate
The response rate we achieved is very much in line with other online surveys that rely on impersonal,
email recruitment.14 Because the response rate is lower than that seen in surveys using alternative
methods, it is important to discuss a range of questions about the inferences one can make from our
sample. The first question that arises is one of power: even if selection into our survey were random,
a low response rate can limit our ability to precisely estimate treatment effects. However, because
our response rate was in line with our expectations from the literature on online surveys, our sample
size is large enough to identify statistically significant effects of the new curriculum.
      A second question is of greater concern for making causal claims: if selection into the sample
were non-random, this may bias our estimated treatment effects. It is important to emphasize that for
non-random selection into our sample to threaten the internal validity of our estimated effects, the
selection would need to be differential across curricula. We can test for differential selection into the
survey by curriculum in two ways. First, using information on the total number of students enrolled
in Peking University by province and cohort, we can estimate the difference in response rates by
curriculum, conditional on province and cohort fixed effects. In fact, we find that the (conditional)
response rate differs across curricula by only around 0.1 percentage points; this suggests that there is
essentially no differential selection into the survey according to the high school curriculum studied.
      As we discuss below (and can be seen Table 2, columns 7 and 8), we also find that our sample
is balanced between curricula across a range of observable covariates, another indication that any
selection into the survey was not correlated with a student’s curriculum. We also find evidence that
risk preferences are similar among new and old curriculum students in our sample. Thus, we believe
that our survey sample allows us to estimate an internally valid causal effect of the new curriculum,
    13 Therecruitment email (in Chinese and in English translation) can be seen in Appendix E.1. An image of an iPad
winner is provided in Appendix E.4.
  14 For example, in meta-analyses, Shih and Fan (2008) and Manfreda et al. (2008) find that around one-third of online

surveys examined have a response rate below 20% and over half have a response rate below 30%; see also Kaplowitz et al.
(2004).




                                                          8
conditional on being in our sample.15

3.2     Survey topics
The survey included sections on a broad range of topics. Here we provide a comprehensive descrip-
tion of the survey; we provide additional detail in Appendix E.2. Thus, although we did not register
a pre-analysis plan as part of our study, this discussion allows the reader to observe the range of
hypotheses that might be tested using our survey, and to interpret our results accordingly.
      We focus on the following subset of the survey questions in the main text of the paper: we
examine a set of questions on students’ personal backgrounds, which we use to test for balance
across curricula, and as controls in in our robustness analysis. We also examine a set of attitudes
that were clear priorities of the Chinese government and were linked to changes in the curriculum
content. First, students’ attitudes toward political participation and democracy. Second, questions
gauging students’ trust in governmental officials; we complement these questions with an analysis
of questions asking about students’ general levels of trust. Third, we asked students a question about
which segments of society should play a role in influencing government policy—we treat this as
a rough test of students’ internalization of the Three Represents ideology. Fourth, we ask students
about their views of minorities vis à vis the majority Han Chinese. Fifth, we examine students’ views
on free market economic institutions. Sixth, we examine students’ views on environmental policy.
In addition to these outcomes, we study whether students’ perceptions of teaching practices changed
along with the curriculum’s content as a result of the reforms.
      A second set of survey questions is of interest to us, because the questions touch on important
political attitudes; however, these questions are not our focus in the main text because they are not
discussed in the government documents outlining the curriculum reform, are not associated with
changes in the textbooks’ content, or because there is some ambiguity in the government’s desired
attitudes. The following sections are briefly examined in Appendix F. First, we examine students’
attitudes toward the “wisdom of the masses”; in addition, we study students’ views on political dis-
obedience. We present results on students’ reported political actions (though these are naturally lim-
ited given students’ ages and time constraints). We also examine students’ attitudes toward bribery
and unofficial payments; finally, we study students’ views on efficiency versus equity tradeoffs.
      Finally, several sections of the survey are not relevant outcomes in our current analysis of the
impact of the new curriculum on students’ political attitudes: we asked students about their career
preferences; their risk preferences; their approach to investing; their views on the determinants of
success in contemporary China; their beliefs about the economic returns to schooling; a Big Five
   15 A final question regards the external validity of our internally-valid estimate. If the new curriculum has heterogeneous

treatment effects, then the causal effect we estimate may be local to those individuals who selected into our survey.
However, it is not obvious why selection into a survey would be a function not just of attitudes, but of susceptibility to
attitude change. We thus believe that our results may be quite externally valid, at least within the population of Peking
University students (external validity beyond this setting is discussed further below).



                                                              9
traits survey; a question about students’ values; and an incentivized risk preference elicitation.

3.3     Interpreting the survey responses
Many of our outcome variables are self-reported responses to direct survey questions. It is natural
to wonder what exactly is captured by variation in these responses. Here we discuss several con-
cerns with using students’ responses to direct survey questions to evaluate the impact of the new
curriculum.

Do students try to respond “correctly” to exam-style questions?            An important concern is that
students who study under different curricula may all have the same private attitudes, but they simply
wish to provide “correct” answers to questions that are similar in structure or content to exam ques-
tions. If the correct answer differed across curricula, then responses to exam-style questions might
differ even if attitudes do not. To address this concern, we took care to ask our questions of interest
in a manner that did not look like the questions students would have seen in the gaokao or any other
exam. Indeed, in addition to asking some factual questions related to the new curriculum, the major-
ity of questions explicitly asked about students’ own opinions; we also included questions that were
important extensions of the classroom material (e.g., from classroom discussions of the rule of law
to greater trust in government officials).
      One can see evidence in students’ responses that our attempts to write questions that were ex-
plicitly about students’ opinions were successful. Responses were not concentrated around a single
“correct” answer. When we ask about views on Chinese democracy, we find a standard deviation
of over 1.5 on a 1 to 10 scale, with a mean close to 5; when we ask about trust in various govern-
ment institutions, the standard deviation is over 0.75, on a 1 to 5 scale, with means between 3 and
4; when we ask about students’ views on the market economy, the standard deviation is over 0.45,
for a dummy variable outcome (all of these statements are true whether examining all students, or
examining only responses among students who studied under the new curriculum). We also compare
responses in our survey regarding trust in government officials to responses to the same questions
in the AsiaBarometer survey, from a broader sample of Chinese adults. We find that if anything,
students in our survey are less likely to respond in a manner that corresponds to the government’s
desired views, suggesting that these views were not internalized as a “correct” answer even among
our sample of elite university students.

Do students try to express socially-acceptable or politically correct views?        A second concern is
that students who study under the new curriculum may not have their attitudes changed, but respond
to survey questions differently after learning about a different set of constraints on the views that they
ought to express. While there is always a concern that students will be afraid to reveal stigmatized
or politically incorrect beliefs, there are several reasons to take students’ responses in our survey


                                                   10
at face value.16 First, none of our questions touched on topics that are taboo in China, such as
multi-party elections, views of the Communist Party per se, or direct criticism of the leadership of
China. All of the questions asked, indeed, were based on topics that were discussed in Chinese high
school curricula, and all of our questions were vetted by our mainland Chinese co-author (Chen); by
a variety of China scholars; and, by high school teachers with whom we spoke.
    Second, the survey was conducted privately, online, so there would have been no direct so-
cial stigma attached to particular responses. We also emphasized the confidentiality of students’
responses in the online consent forms read prior to the survey (approved by the UC Berkeley Institu-
tional Review Board). In addition, we find that the more risk averse respondents in the study do not
show significantly different effects of the new curriculum.
    Third, as noted above, it is clear from the range of responses received in the survey that responses
were not concentrated around a single “acceptable” response. Our questions regarding trust in various
government officials and government bodies are perhaps the most politically-sensitive of our survey
questions. We asked students to indicate their level of trust in various government institutions, on
a 1–5 scale, with 1 indicating complete distrust, and 5 indicating complete trust. Interestingly, we
find that 20% of individuals rate the central government at a 3 or below; for the provincial and local
governments, this number is 38% and 65%, respectively; for courts, the army, and police, we see
responses of 3 or below from 37%, 31%, and 47% of students. Clearly, some students were willing
to give less than stellar marks to a range of government institutions.
    Indeed, the fact that our study was run in Peking University makes it less likely that students
would self-censor their beliefs out of fear of government (or peer) reprisals for expressing critical
attitudes.17 Peking University is known to be a setting in which liberal views can expressed, even
contrary to government aims. Indeed, the University posted an article from the Atlantic magazine on
its website stating the following:


       Peking University is known for its politically liberal professors. It was there that many of the
       student leaders in the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy protests originated, and it’s an open
       secret that teachers at the school and neighboring Tsinghua University often broach topics critical
       of the government in the classroom. Earlier this year, a leaked Communist Party memo warned
       universities that seven topics, including freedom of press and universal values, were banned from
       class discussions. But even still, the students currently at Peking University said these directives
       appear to have had little actual effect in the classroom.18

A student quoted in the article stated, “We Peking University students are very open; some of the
most outstanding students in the country. Most of us are very liberal minded, so it’s ok to talk
  16 The  state’s ability to shape what individuals see as acceptable expression by changing the curriculum may itself be of
interest, and may have important consequences for political debate, coordination, and thus political behavior.
   17 Peking University students are not representative of the Chinese high school graduates. We discuss the virtues and

drawbacks of our subject pool, and the external validity of our results, in Section 5.3, below.
   18 The article can be found at http://english.pku.edu.cn/News_Events/News/Outlook/10590.htm, last ac-

cessed on January 26, 2014.


                                                            11
about sensitive political things.” Thus, especially given the care we took to ensure that students
could complete the survey privately, and the emphasis we placed on protecting the confidentiality of
students’ responses, we do not believe they would have been afraid to respond honestly.

Stated preferences versus revealed preferences As a final check that the survey responses were
meaningful, we can compare students’ responses to direct questions about risk preferences to their
choices in an incentivized game eliciting risk preferences, which took place after the survey. While
questions about risk preferences are not likely to be associated with stigmatized attitudes, this re-
mains a useful check that responses to direct questions correspond to respondents’ revealed prefer-
ences.
      We asked students directly about their risk preferences on a 0 (risk averse) to 10 (risk seeking)
scale, and also elicited students’ risk preferences using an incentivized game, which allowed us
calculate their certainty equivalents based on a series of gambles. We find a highly statistically
significant relationship between self-reported risk and the certainty equivalents from the incentivized
game (p<0.001), which reinforces our expectations that students’ responses to our survey questions
are consistent with their revealed preferences.


4      Empirical analysis

4.1     Empirical model
Using our survey data, we estimate a generalized difference in differences model, which controls for
cohort and province fixed effects, and examines the effects of exposure to the new curriculum. Our
baseline specification is the following:


                              yicp = ∑ γc + ∑ δ p + β NewCurriculumcp + εicp ,                                        (1)
                                        c        p

where yicp is an outcome measure from our survey instrument (i indexes the individual, c the high
school graduation cohort, and p the province of high school attendance); γc and δ p are full sets of
cohort and province fixed effects; and β is the coefficient of interest, capturing the effect of the new
curriculum, conditional on fixed differences across cohorts and fixed differences across provinces.
In our main estimates, we allow idiosyncratic differences, εicp , to be correlated across individuals
within a province×cohort (the level at which the curriculum varies).19 In addition to this baseline
specification, we will estimate additional specifications below that include individual-level controls,
province×cohort-level controls, and a full set of province-specific, cross-cohort trends (in addition
to the province and cohort fixed effects).
    19 We
        will also show standard errors clustered at the province level, and two-way clustered standard errors (by province
and by cohort) below, and our inferences are very similar.



                                                           12
    Our baseline model allows us to address a variety of concerns about our ability to identify the
causal effect of the new curriculum. First, one may be concerned that province-level differences in
openness, income levels, and policies may be correlated with attitudes; because the introduction of
the new curriculum was not randomized across provinces (coastal provinces introduced the curricu-
lum earlier, for example), exposure to the new curriculum is correlated with province characteristics
that may shape attitudes. However, fixed differences across provinces cannot drive our estimated
effects of the new curriculum, because we control for province fixed effects and exploit cross-cohort
variation within provinces to identify the effects of the new curriculum. Similarly, one might worry
about the evolution of attitudes across cohorts even in the absence of a change in the curriculum; by
including cohort fixed effects, we are able to difference out cross-cohort changes that occur even in
the absence of a change in the curriculum.
    One might still be concerned about time-varying factors that affect different provinces in differ-
ent years. For example, one may worry about differences in economic growth rates across provinces
or about shocks, such as the Sichuan earthquake of 2008, which might differentially affect differ-
ent provinces. It is important to emphasize, however, that province×time varying shocks are not
necessarily province×cohort varying shocks: a confounding factor would need to differentially af-
fect different high school graduation cohorts within a province to threaten our identification strategy.
While some province×time varying shocks certainly may affect different cohorts differently, it is
worth emphasizing that the cross-cohort variation we exploit is extremely sharp: individuals enter-
ing high school just one year apart studied entirely different curricula around the introduction of
the new curriculum. This method of introducing the new curriculum considerably reduces concerns
about omitted variables, as many time-varying, province-specific shocks seem unlikely to have very
different effects across adjacent cohorts of students, and so will be absorbed by the province fixed ef-
fects.20 Economic growth rates may differ between two provinces, but the impact of different growth
rates on cohorts entering high school just a year apart (or even two or three) are likely to be quite
similar; the Sichuan earthquake may have had differential effects across age groups, but it seems
likely that 14-, 15-, and 16-year olds would have been very similarly affected.
    Finally, even unobserved factors that do vary at the province×cohort level will often affect ad-
jacent cohorts within the same province smoothly, rather than sharply. Our specification that in-
cludes controls for province-specific, cross-cohort trends is able to capture smooth, province-specific
changes in attitudes across cohorts. This specification is especially demanding (and indeed may be
“over-controlling”), as it attributes to the new curriculum only the “jump” in attitudes relative to the
   20 It is worth mentioning that while students in different school cohorts may interact, in Chinese high schools, the vast

majority of a student’s time is spent with other students in the same cohort; thus, there is somewhat less potential for
“contamination” of the old curriculum students by those treated by the new curriculum. This suggests that there may,
indeed, be observable treatment effects despite the fact that such contamination (both in high school and later in college)
would tend to bias estimated effects toward zero. To the extent that students in college sort into social networks according
to the curriculum under which they studied, and so reinforce their attitudes, this may generate persistence of any change in
beliefs caused by the new curriculum. We leave the study of mechanisms of persistence to other work.



                                                            13
cross-cohort trend—in fact, because we only study four cohorts of students, the “trend” estimate may
capture the effects of the curriculum change (we thus view this estimate as a robustness specification,
rather than use it as our baseline model). Thus, although the introduction of the new curriculum was
not random across time and space, many differences across provinces and across cohorts—other than
the curriculum change—are likely to be absorbed by our control variables, leaving us more confident
that we are able to identify the causal effect of the new curriculum.

4.2     Balance of student characteristics
We limit our sample to completed surveys from individuals who entered high school between 2006
and 2009, and are current undergraduate students at Peking University.21 We present summary
statistics describing the demographic characteristics of the students who completed the survey in
Table 2, columns 1–2, and show the mean characteristics of students by curriculum (old, then new)
in columns 3–4.
      We next check for balance of observable characteristics among survey respondents across new
and old curricula. As discussed above, lack of balance could arise from differential selection into
the survey sample; for example, because the new curriculum has an effect on attitudes (e.g., to-
wards foreigners, towards opinion surveys, etc.). In addition, a lack of balance might arise from
shifts in matriculation into Peking University as a result of the curriculum change (or some other
province×cohort-specific shock).
      In Table 2, columns 5 and 6, we present the raw differences, and the p-values testing for the
statistical significance of these differences in characteristics of students who studied under the old
and new curricula in our sample. One can see in the table that there are significant differences across
the two groups. However, it is worth emphasizing: this unconditional imbalance is to be expected.
Students who studied under the new curriculum on average are younger (the new curriculum was
introduced later in time), and come from provinces where the curriculum was introduced earlier—
and there was no random assignment of introduction years across provinces, so differences across
students from different provinces appear as well (for example in the fraction of Han Chinese).
      In Table 2, columns 7 and 8, we show differences between students in the new and old curricula,
conditional on province and cohort fixed effects, and the p-values testing for the statistical signif-
icance of these conditional differences. One can see that accounting for average characteristics in
the province of origin, and accounting for average characteristics of a cohort, those individuals in
our sample who studied under the new curriculum look nearly identical on observable characteristics
to those who studied under the old curriculum. This suggests that our difference in differences de-
sign, by exploiting the variation in curriculum conditional on province and cohort fixed effects, will
  21 Including incomplete surveys or individuals who did not follow the standard, direct route from high school to college

does not change our results (available from the authors upon request).




                                                           14
compare outcomes across individuals whose observable characteristics look identical.22

4.3     Baseline results
Here we present baseline estimates of the effects of the new curriculum on our full set of outcomes.
We estimate equation 1 and present standard errors clustered at the province×cohort level. In sec-
tion 5.1, we show a broad range of additional specifications.
      We present results for five categories of outcomes: (i) views on political participation and democ-
racy; (ii) trust in government officials; (iii) views on who should influence policy (“Three Repre-
sents”); (iv) views of minorities; (v) views on unconstrained markets; and (vi) views on the environ-
ment. The shaping of each category of attitudes was explicitly mentioned in government documents
describing the objectives of the reform (for a detailed discussion of each category, see Appendix D).
It is worth noting again that this is not an exhaustive examination of our survey outcomes, nor is
it an exhaustive analysis of the changes in the textbooks. Rather, it is a comprehensive analysis of
changes in students’ attitudes in response to curriculum changes that matched the political aims of
the government in designing the reformed curriculum.
      For each category, we present our findings one outcome (that is, one survey question) at a time.
We also construct an index of the various outcomes within a category following Anderson (2008),
which both captures broad attitude changes that are only imperfectly captured by any single out-
come and also helps address concerns about multiple hypothesis testing by reducing the number of
hypotheses we test (this is especially important given the range of robustness specifications we ex-
amine, below). Because our analysis involves testing multiple hypotheses, an important question is
how to make appropriate statistical inferences in face of the greater likelihood of Type I error. In
addition to examining the effects of the new curriculum on broad indices, we present for each of
our individual outcomes p-values which are adjusted using the false discovery rate (FDR) procedure
(Benjamini et al., 2006; Anderson, 2008), in addition to standard p-values calculated using clustered
standard errors.23

4.3.1    Outcome category 1: Views on political participation and democracy

The first set of attitudes we examine is views on political participation and democracy, the shaping of
which was a high priority for the Chinese government. Reflecting this, the new Political Life textbook
includes entirely new sections on political participation and electoral institutions. Importantly, the
new curriculum did not simply advocate unfettered political expression and action—it highlights the
institutions allowing for political participation in China, while drawing a clear distinction between
  22 Because   these variables are nearly all pre-determined, one can think of Table 2, columns 7 and 8, as providing a set of
falsification tests for our difference in differences design, all of which are passed.
   23 There are still other, even more conservative, methods (e.g., the Bonferroni correction) that could be used to adjust our

statistical inference. Given the size of our sample and the estimated treatment effect sizes, we believe that our approach
appropriately balances concerns about Type I and Type II errors.


                                                             15
orderly and disorderly civil participation. The new Political Life textbook specifically discusses civic
participation at the local and township levels, discussing local elections, and the supervision of the
local government. For example, the Political Life textbook, pp. 17–18, includes a new section titled,
“Cherish your voting rights,” which states:


      Voters’ attitudes and abilities with respect to elections are the key factors that influence the im-
      pact of elections. Citizens have to continue improving themselves in participating in democratic
      elections, so that they can exercise their voting rights well. Only then can citizens be able to
      better manage China’s national and social affairs, as well as its economic and cultural matters.
      [. . . ] Whether one actively participates in elections is a critical measurement of a citizen’s sense
      of participation and responsibility.

    The new sections in the textbook are reflected in the gaokao framework for the new curricu-
lum, as well. The framework includes the following new modules in the Political Life component:
“Channels for Chinese citizens’ participation in political life”; “Multiple ways for citizens to partic-
ipate in democratic decision-making”; “The meaning and significance of China’s villages and urban
dwellers governing themselves”; and, “Citizens needs to realize their democratic supervising rights
responsibly”.
    Based on the curriculum changes, we asked students a broad range of survey questions related
to democracy and political participation to determine whether their knowledge of, and views on,
Chinese political institutions were affected. Some of these were explicitly factual in nature, to allow
us to observe whether details of China’s political system were differentially known by individuals
who studied under the new curriculum (questions 3.1 and 3.2). We also asked students for their own
opinions about Chinese political institutions (questions 3.3 and 3.4). We next asked about students’
views on the meaning of “democracy”: did more students believe that the concept implied the peo-
ple’s participation in the political process (question 3.5)? Finally, we asked students about their own
anticipated political actions (question 3.6). Note that, throughout the paper, we code all variables
such that the expected effect of the new curriculum is positive.

    3.1   Were you aware that the village head is elected by ordinary people through voting (one-man
          one-vote)?
    3.2   Were you aware that one can participate in the voting for local (county or district) People’s
          Congress representatives?
    3.3   In reality, ordinary people are able to influence who becomes the village head. (1= totally
          disagree; 5=fully agree)
    3.4   Where would you place our country under the present government? (1 = completely undemo-
          cratic; 10 = completely democratic)
    3.5   Which of the following do you think are characteristics of a democracy? (1 = “People’s
          participation in the political process” listed first; 0 = otherwise)
    3.6   I plan to vote for local (county or district) People’s Congress representatives.


                                                       16
Results     As discussed above, we begin by presenting our findings one outcome at a time; then, be-
cause we are testing multiple hypotheses throughout our work, we also collapse the various groups
of questions into an index for that group, and test for the curriculum’s effect on the index. In Table 3,
columns 1 and 2, we examine the impact of the new curriculum on factual knowledge regarding
Chinese political institutions. We expect, given the additional content on elections in the new cur-
riculum, that students who studied under the new curriculum would be more likely to report being
aware of village level and People’s Congress representatives’ elections. Indeed, one can see that for
both of these outcomes, study under the new curriculum is associated with greater reported knowl-
edge of Chinese elections. Note that for each outcome, in addition to showing the coefficient estimate
and clustered standard error, we also show the p-value associated with our estimate and the adjusted
p-value that takes into account the multiple hypotheses being tested in a particular category of out-
comes, following Anderson (2008).
    In columns 3 and 4, one can see that studying under the new curriculum leaves students more
likely to believe that ordinary people have influence over who become village heads, and that China
is more democratic (both results are statistically significant at 5% or less using standard p-values, and
at 10% using the FDR-adjusted p-value). In Table 3, column 5, one can see that students who studied
under the new curriculum more commonly choose “People’s participation in the political process” as
the defining characteristic of a democracy, though this shift is not statistically significant. In Table 3,
column 6, we turn to students’ planned political actions, and find very little effect.
    In Table 3, column 7, we present the results using an index constructed from the six outcomes
related to students’ views on political participation and democracy.24 To construct the index, we
standardize each component and sum individuals’ standardized outcomes, weighting each outcome
by the inverse of the covariance matrix of the standardized outcomes, following Anderson (2008).25
The rationale for this procedure is twofold. First, one avoids the pitfalls of “overtesting” that occur
when many single hypothesis tests are conducted. Second, the index provides a test of whether
the new curriculum has an effect on a set of related outcomes, which might all be caused by one
underlying latent variable.26 The results from a regression using this z-score index point to a strong
and highly significant effect of the curriculum in the expected direction, resulting in a change in the
dependent variable of about one quarter of a standard deviation.27
   24 To focus only on changes in beliefs and planned actions, rather than changes in factual knowledge, one can also

construct an index using only the non-factual questions (those presented in columns 3–6). This index yields nearly identical
results (available from the authors upon request).
   25 We also standardize the z-score to allow for easier interpretation. Other methods used to construct a single variable

that summarizes a set of related outcomes, for example, an equally-weighted average of the standardized outcomes, or the
first principal component of the set of outcome variables, generate very similar results (we present a broad set of results
using first principal components in Appendix F).
   26 Such index variables have been used elsewhere to evaluate the effectiveness of policy interventions on a set of related

outcomes; see, for example, Kling et al. (2007).
   27 We do not find significant effects of the new curriculum on students’ reported voting or protesting behavior (see Ap-

pendix F). This is perhaps not surprising given that Chinese students have very little time or opportunity to engage in
such political acts. We do find positive effects that are statistically significant (p<0.10) on joining non-CCP political


                                                            17
    Relative to students’ observable characteristics, the new curriculum has a large effect: when we
add a set of individual controls to our baseline model, we find that having parents in the CCP moves
beliefs in the desired direction by 10% of a standard deviation; membership in the Communist Youth
shifts beliefs in the desired direction by 4% of a standard deviation; strikingly, studying under the
new curriculum moves beliefs in the desired direction by over 25% of a standard deviation. We
discuss the magnitudes of our estimated effects in terms of persuasion rates in Section 5.2.

4.3.2     Outcome category 2: Trust in government bodies

It is clear from the government documents on curriculum reform that a high priority was to teach
students about institutions that legitimated the Chinese government and its officials, especially ad-
herence to rule of law. The new curriculum’s Political Life textbook includes a new section titled,
“Where does government’s authority come from?” which states (p. 49):


        Where does the Chinese government’s authority manifest itself? A government with authority
        must be a government under the rule of law. It guards the ultimate authority of the constitution
        and the legal system, and hence protects people’s fundamental rights and benefits.

    The new curriculum’s gaokao framework reflects the changes to the textbook, with added sec-
tions in the Political Life module on the functions and duty of Chinese government, the principles of
the Chinese government, and the significance and necessity of rule of law. Thus, the second set of
attitudes we examine is trust in government officials and in a range of government bodies—a natural
outcome of viewing government institutions as more legitimate. To gauge students’ trust in a range
of government bodies, we asked students:

    4.1–6     Describe your level of trust in the following institutions: (1) Central government; (2) Provin-
              cial government; (3) Local government; (4) Courts; (5) Armed forces; (6) Police. (1=complete
              distrust; 5=complete trust)
    4.7       Village heads put their own interest before those of people. (1= totally agree; 5=fully disagree)
    4.8       Village heads care primarily about the powerful and rich people, and neglect the interests of
              ordinary people. (1= totally agree; 5=fully disagree)



Results     We will again present our results for one survey outcome at a time, then show results
for a weighted index of the standardized outcomes. One can see in Table 4, columns 1–6, that
each category of government official or institution is more trusted by students exposed to the new
curriculum. In addition, in Table 4, columns 7–8, one sees that students who studied under the new
curriculum view village heads as less driven by their own interests or by the interests of the rich and
organizations, and we discuss the relationship between stated attitudes and political behavior in more detail below.



                                                            18
powerful. When we estimate the effect of the new curriculum on an index variable constructed from
the eight individual components, we find a positive, highly significant effect as well, amounting to
about one fourth of a standard deviation of the outcome.28
    These results suggest a causal effect of the new curriculum on how students view government
officials and government bodies. A natural question that arises in interpreting the results on trust in
government officials, and putting them in context, is whether the new curriculum also changed trust
more broadly, beyond government officials. We thus asked students about their trust in a variety of
non-governmental entities (NGOs, banks, foreign investors) and about their trust in people in general.
An aggregate index of trust in these non-governmental entities and individuals is not affected by the
introduction of the new curriculum (the point estimate close to zero and not significant—see Table 4,
column 10), reinforcing our prior that the new textbooks would only increase trust in government
officials and their authority.

4.3.3     Outcome category 3: The “Three Represents”

An important development in Chinese Communist Party doctrine since the year 2000 was the “Three
Represents” ideology expounded by former President Jiang Zemin. According to this ideology,
political influence in China should be extended to individuals who were de facto important to China’s
socioeconomic success, but who were traditionally excluded from power in Communist China—for
example, managers and employees working for private businesses. In outlining the aims of the
curriculum reform, the State Council explicitly wrote that “youths’ moral construction should be
guided by the ‘Three Represents’ principles.”
    The new Political Life textbook incorporates this new component of official Chinese Communist
ideology into its subsection titled, “Theoretical framework of socialism with Chinese characteristics.”
Again, the gaokao framework reflects the additions to the textbook, with a change in the section titled
“The characteristics, core, and guiding principles of the CCP”; under the old curriculum, this section
included only Marxism, Leninism, Maoism, and Deng Xiaoping Theory. Under the new curriculum’s
gaokao framework, Jiang’s Three Represents is added to this list.
    To determine whether the new curriculum affected students’ views on who should play a role in
shaping Chinese government policy, we directly asked students about various potential segments of
society. Specifically, we asked the following survey question:

     5.1    Which of the following groups and their interests should influence government policy? (Please
            rank the top three)


  28 We  also asked students about their views on the prevalence and efficacy of unofficial payments; these attitudes are
extremely important in the Chinese context. As we discuss in Appendix F, we find that students view unofficial payments
as less effective and less prevalent if they studied under the new curriculum, consistent with the goals of the curriculum
change.



                                                           19
    We gave students a broad range of choices (fifteen in total), including “Farmers and peasants,”
“Intellectuals,” “CCP members,” and “Employees at foreign firms.” We construct a dummy variable
that equals 1 if students did not select “CCP members” among their top three groups. This variable
roughly captures an attitude in favor of broadening political representation.

Results      In Table 5, one can see that studying under the new curriculum is associated with signifi-
cantly more students including segments of society other than CCP members in their list of the top
three groups who should influence policy (an examination of items one-by-one indicates that stu-
dents under the new curriculum are significantly more likely to include intellectuals and employees
at foreign firms in their “top 3” lists). This is consistent with the teaching of the Three Represents
ideology broadening students’ views of who should contribute to the shaping of government policy.

4.3.4     Outcome category 4: Views on minorities (Han students/Minority students)

The Chinese government made it a high priority to cultivate a traditional national spirit; the govern-
ment’s aim was to teach (majority) Han Chinese students that minority groups within China share
with them a Chinese ethnic heritage, and to increase minorities’ identification with being “Chinese.”
Our fourth set of outcomes examines the effects of the new curriculum on Han students’ views on
minorities, as well as minorities’ views on their own identity. The new Political Life textbook adds
(p. 72) an entire section titled “Principles of dealing with relationships among ethnic groups: equal-
ity, unity, all prosperous together.” The new Cultural Life textbook adds two sections (pp. 71–81)
titled: “The Eternal Chinese Ethnic Spirit” and “Promoting the Chinese Ethnic Spirit.” The main
argument in these sections is that multi-ethnic unity is the core of Chinese culture. The emphasis
on ethnic and national “unity” in the new curriculum is striking: the new curriculum’s Political Life
textbook (p. 75) states:


        It is every Chinese citizen’s responsibility to abide by the Constitutional duty that one has to
        guard national and ethnic unity and harmony. As a youth in China today, we need to put our
        responsibility to develop Socialist multi-ethnic harmony into action.

    The new curriculum’s gaokao framework also added new sections regarding Chinese ethnic
unity: “promote Chinese ethnic spirit” and, “the core of Chinese ethnic spirit.” We evaluate the
impact of the new curriculum on both Han Chinese students’ views on minorities, and also on the
views of minority students toward their own identities. We asked students the following questions29 :

    6.1      Generally speaking, would you say that people in minority groups can be trusted, or that
             you cannot be too careful in dealing with them? (1=cannot be too careful; 5=completely
             trustworthy)
  29 Table 6 is divided into Han Chinese responses (columns 1–4) and minority responses (columns 5–8); some questions
appear in both sections of the table.


                                                         20
    6.2/6    China is a country made up of multiple ethnic groups. Which one of the following statements
             regarding ethnic minority groups do you agree with more? (a) Comparing to Han Chinese,
             ethnic minority groups are relatively independent groups (0) (b) Ethnic minority groups are
             the same as Han Chinese, and they are all Chinese people (1).
    6.3/7    China is a country made up of multiple ethnic groups. Which one of the following statements
             regarding ethnic minority groups do you agree with more? (a) Ethnic minority groups share
             the same historic heritage and cultural traditions as the Han Chinese (1). (b) Ethnic minority
             groups have different historic heritage and cultural traditions from the Han Chinese (0).
    6.4/8    Can you imagine yourself marrying a member of a different ethnic group in the future?
    6.9      Where would you place your identity on a spectrum, with being Chinese on one end (5) and
             being a world citizen on the other end (1)?


Results     We begin by studying the new curriculum’s effects on Han Chinese students. We consider
Han students’ trust in minority individuals; Han students’ views on whether minorities are similar to
and share their ethnic heritage with the majority; and Han students’ willingness to marry someone
from a different ethnic group. In Table 6, column 1, one can see that Han Chinese who studied under
the new curriculum are slightly less likely to declare that they trust individuals from minority groups.
With regard to their view of minorities’ identity relative to the dominant Han ethnicity, columns 2
and 3 show that the new curriculum induces Han students to think of minorities as more similar
(also in terms of heritage) to Han Chinese (though effects are not statistically significant). Finally,
Han students exposed to the new curriculum are significantly more likely to declare that they would
conceivably marry someone from a different ethnic group (column 4). The index combining these
four individual outcomes shows no significant overall effect of the new curriculum in the intended
direction (Table 6, column 5).
    We next examine the new curriculum’s effects on minority Chinese students. We consider mi-
nority students’ views on whether minorities share the same identity and ethnic heritage with the
majority Han (columns 6 and 7); the new curriculum does not appear to have had a clear effect on
these outcomes, nor on the willingness to marry outside their ethnic group (column 8). However,
the new curriculum did substantially and significantly strengthen minority students’ sense of Chi-
nese identity, relative to having an international identity (column 9).30 Overall, the index combining
these four individual outcomes shows an increase as well, although not statistically significant at
conventional levels (Table 6, column 10).

4.3.5    Outcome category 5: Views on markets

Government documents shaping the new curriculum emphasized the importance of the “socialist
market economy” for economic and social development. We next consider the impact of the new
  30 Note that we do not include in Table 6 the estimated effect of the new curriculum on Han Chinese students’ degree of

Chinese identity, as we did not expect this to be affected by the new curriculum.



                                                          21
curriculum on students’ views on the free-market economic system. In the new Economic Life text-
book, many sections emphasize the “socialist market economy,” in which markets are complemented
or corrected by state or socialist institutions. For example, the important role of state-owned enter-
prises is made clear in the new curriculum’s Economic Life textbook (p. 31):


       Just like the pillars that support skyscrapers, state-owned-enterprises (SOEs) are the backbone
       of China’s domestic economy. They control the life vessels of the economic system, and play a
       vital and leading role in the system. To develop, expand and strengthen the SOEs is of critical
       importance, to demonstrate the superiority of socialist system, to strengthen China’s economic
       power, national defense power, as well as ethnic unity. They can also elevate the international
       position of China.

    Social inequality—a major threat to Chinese political and social stability—is explicitly linked to
market institutions. The new Economic Life textbook (p. 81) states:


       [A]llowing market alone to allocate resources will lead to inefficiency and waste, as well as
       socioeconomic instability. Market functioning alone can also result in economic fluctuations
       and chaos, unfair redistribution, widening income gaps, and even cause severe polarization.

    In addition, the new curriculum cut out an entire section on the market economy that emphasized
its virtues. The old curriculum’s section titled “General characteristics of a market economy” de-
scribed markets as “equal (or just),” “competitive,” “under rule of law,” and “open.” This material
was removed from the new curriculum. Many changes in the gaokao framework also emphasize
the important role of the state in the economic system. In the Economic Life section of the frame-
work, new sections include “sustainable and balanced economic development;” “public-ownership
structure should play a major role;” and, “multiple ownership structures develop simultaneously.”
    To test whether exposure to the new curriculum shaped students’ views on economic institutions,
we asked the following survey question:

     7.1    From the following statements on a market economy, choose one that you agree with the most:
            (a) A market economy is preferable to any other form of economic system.
            (b) For people like me, it does not matter whether the economic system is organized as a
            market economy or as a planned economy.
            (c) Under some circumstances, a planned economy may be preferable to a market economy.


    We convert students’ responses into a dummy variable indicating skepticism of the market econ-
omy, equal to 1 if individuals did not select the “market economy preferable” response.31
   31 Coding the survey responses in other ways—for example, a dummy variable indicating support for a planned economy

or running a multinomial logit—yields very similar results (available from the authors upon request).




                                                         22
Results    In Table 7, we show the estimated effect of the new curriculum on students’ skepticism of
the market economy. One can see that significantly more students who study under the new curricu-
lum reject the view that a market economy is preferable to any other economic system (statistically
significant at 5%).

4.3.6    Outcome category 6: Views on the environment

Government documents structuring the curriculum reform mention consciousness of the environment
as a value that ought to be instilled in Chinese students. While not a prominent element of these doc-
uments, environmental issues were highlighted by former President Hu Jintao; also, attitudes toward
the environment will shape public policy on a critical domestic and global issue, so in designing our
survey, we felt that they were of special interest. The new curriculum, indeed, includes additional
content discussing environmental issues, in the Economic Life textbook (pp. 87–90). The new cur-
riculum’s gaokao framework includes new sections in the Economic Life module titled “scientific
outlook on development” and “sustainable and balanced economic development”, which include dis-
cussions of environmental issues.
    To gauge how students prioritize environmental concerns, we included the following survey
items:

    8.1    Would you be willing to give part of your income or pay more taxes, if you were sure that the
           extra money was used to protect the environment?
    8.2    People often talk about what the goals of this country should be for the next ten years. Listed
           below are some common goals for a nation. Please pick the one that you consider as pri-
           mary for a nation. (a) A high level of economic growth; (b) Maintaining economic stability;
           (c) Maintaining order in the nation; (d) Giving people more say in important government
           decisions; (e) Protecting the environment.
    8.3    Here are two statements people sometimes make when discussing the environment and eco-
           nomic growth. Which of them comes closer to your own point of view? (a) Protecting the
           environment should be given priority, even if it causes slower economic growth and some
           loss of jobs. (b) Economic growth and creating jobs should be the top priority, even if the
           environment suffers to some extent.


Results    In Table 8, columns 1–3, we show the estimated effect of the new curriculum on the survey
questions. As dependent variables, we use a dummy indicating whether the response was “yes” in
the first question; a dummy indicating whether option (e) was chosen in the second question; and,
a dummy indicating whether option (a) was chosen in the third question. In no case do we find a
significant effect—if anything, preferences are slightly less “pro-environment” among students who
studied under the new curriculum across all three questions. The aggregate z-score index (column 4)
shows a negative, marginally insignificant effect of about one sixth of a standard deviation.


                                                     23
5      Discussion

5.1      Robustness checks and ruling out alternative hypotheses
We next explore the robustness of the results seen above for all six of the categories examined (note
that one category—views on minorities—has two components: Han students’ views and minority
students’ views), and also try to rule out alternatives to our interpretation of our estimates as the
causal effects of the curriculum change. Rather than present every robustness specification for each
individual outcome in all categories, we show robustness specifications only for the z-score indices
constructed to summarize each category’s outcomes.32

Clustering of standard errors We first consider alternative standard error calculations. In our
baseline estimates (reproduced in Table 9, Panel A), we chose to cluster our standard error estimates
at the province×cohort level both because the variation in the explanatory variable of interest—
the curriculum—occurs at this level, and because we have a relatively small number of provinces
(only 29). A concern with our baseline analysis is that while we allow error terms to be correlated
across individuals belonging to the same province and the same high school cohort, one might believe
that error terms might be correlated across individuals from the same province, but belonging to
different cohorts. We thus estimate standard errors clustered at the province level; we find that our
statistical inferences are not greatly affected by this change (see Table 9, Panel B). We also estimate
standard errors allowing for two-way clustering by province and by cohort; again, our inferences are
not much affected (see Table 9, Panel C).

Including control variables            We next include student-level controls for the individual characteris-
tics reported in Table 2. In Table 9, Panel D, one can see that including these individual-level controls
does not qualitatively affect our findings. We are also able to control for provincial spending on sec-
ondary education at the province×cohort level (we use a province’s average level of spending during
the three years of senior high school for each cohort).33 Adding controls for these time-varying
and cohort-varying province characteristics to equation 1 generally does not greatly affect the point
estimates, as seen in Table 9, Panel E.

Including province-specific cross-cohort trends One important concern when interpreting our
results is that differences across curricula, within provinces, may arise from different trends in atti-
tudes across cohorts in different provinces. For example, it may be the case that views on markets
    32 For
         the single outcome relating to the “Three Represents” ideology, and the single outcome relating to views on
the market economy, we use the question asked (rather than an index) for all the robustness specifications. Results from
estimating robustness specifications for each individual outcome variable for other categories are available from the authors
upon request.
  33 Data are taken from the China Educational Finance Statistical Yearbook, published by the Finance Department,

Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China (2004–2012).


                                                            24
follow different trends in different provinces, and that these trends show up as effects of the new cur-
riculum. To address concerns about differences in cross-cohort trends in attitudes driving our results,
we estimate equation 1, but include a full set of province fixed effects interacted with cohort-level
trends. That is, we allow each province to have its own (linear) trend in attitudes across cohorts, and
we identify the effect of the new curriculum as a deviation from the trend.34
    In Table 9, Panel F, one can see that controlling for province-specific cross-cohort trends does
not qualitatively affect any of our estimates of the effects of the new curriculum; and, we continue
to see that the new curriculum is associated with statistically significantly different levels of trust
in government officials, different attitudes toward the broadening of political influence, and toward
markets.

Estimation using a “short panel” One might also be concerned about the effects of our sample’s
composition on the estimated treatment effects. Specifically, one might not want to include students
who studied under the old curriculum in provinces from which we have no students in our sample
who studied under the new curriculum; similarly, one might not want to include new curriculum
students from provinces from which we observe no students who studied under the old curriculum.
We thus estimate the effect of the new curriculum using a “short panel” that includes only students
from the last cohort under the old curriculum and the first cohort of the new curriculum, from the 13
provinces for which we observe students from both of these cohorts in our sample. We present the
results in Table 10: one can see that using this alternative dataset, our results are very similar to using
the entire set of province×cohort cells.

Testing for pre-treatment trends in outcomes                    We find that our sample of students is balanced
(conditional on province and cohort fixed effects) across curricula, and that our results are quite
robust to the inclusion of province-specific cross-cohort trends. Still, one might be concerned about
pre-curriculum changes in trends affecting our results. Thus, we estimate the model in equation 1,
but rather than pool the students who studied under the old curriculum into a single category, we
allow students to have different views depending on the distance between their cohort and the first
cohort that studies under the new curriculum in their province to try to tease out any evidence of a
pre-treatment change in outcomes. We treat the last cohort studying under the old curriculum in a
particular province as the omitted category, and estimate the new curriculum’s effect relative to that
omitted group. At the same time, we estimate the (placebo) treatment effect of being two cohorts
ahead of the introduction of the new curriculum, and of being 3 or more cohorts ahead.
    We present the results in Table 11, columns 1–7. One can see that across categories, there are
very few significant estimates of placebo treatment effects for cohorts earlier than the first treated
   34 Note that this may be “over-controlling”, given that we only have 4 cohorts per province, and limited variation in the

timing of the new curriculum’s introduction across provinces. It is likely that the province-specific trend will pick up some
part of the variation actually due to the (sharp) introduction of the curriculum.


                                                            25
cohort (one coefficient significant at 10% and one at 5%). The estimates of pre-treatment coefficients
are nearly always much smaller than the actual effect of the new curriculum, especially for those
outcomes for which we observe a significant treatment effect. Using this empirical specification, our
results are qualitatively similar to those in our baseline, and we continue to find significant treatment
effects for several of our outcomes of interest for the new curriculum cohorts, whether compared to
the last cohort under the old curriculum, or to the earlier cohorts.

Falsification exercises using placebo treatments        We next make our statistical inferences in an
alternative manner, by comparing the treatment effect we estimate for each index outcome to the
distribution of placebo treatment effects we estimate when randomly assigning new curriculum in-
troduction dates to provinces. To be precise, we randomly assign new curriculum introduction dates
to provinces, with the dates drawn from the actual set of introduction dates of the new curriculum,
without replacement (so in a given year, the same number of provinces have the placebo new curricu-
lum introduced as had the actual new curriculum introduced, but the placebo assignment will be to
a random selection of provinces). We randomly draw 10,000 sets of placebo treatment assignments,
and estimate equation 1, with the seven summary measures as the outcomes.
    We plot the distribution of t-statistics from the 10,000 estimated placebo treatment effects for
each outcome, in Figure 2, and mark in the figure the location of the t-statistic of the actual treatment
effect within the placebo treatment effect distribution. We also report the share of the placebo t-
statistics that is larger than the actual statistic, in absolute value. One can view this measure as
analogous to a p-value in this placebo exercise. Across the seven outcomes considered, one can
see that the inferences drawn are similar to the standard regressions: under the null of no effect of
the curriculum change, random variation in attitudes across provinces and cohorts would very rarely
produce t-statistics as large as the ones we find resulting from the actual curriculum change.

The impact of changes in instructional methods In addition to changing the content of textbooks,
the curriculum reform intended to shift teaching practice: for example, class discussions were to be
encouraged, and there was to be a reduced emphasis on the rote memorization of material by students.
One might be concerned that shifts in teaching practice may have directly affected students’ attitudes,
or affected students’ willingness to think independently or to express certain opinions, thus affecting
responses to our survey (see, e.g., Algan et al., 2013, on the importance of teaching practices in
shaping students beliefs and attitudes). However, as noted above, there is a widespread perception
that teaching practices did not change as a result of the reform: teachers’ and students’ incentives
were still strongly directed toward the memorization of textbook content in order to succeed in the
gaokao college entrance exam.
    To determine whether students’ perceptions of their teachers’ methods differed across curricula,
we asked several survey questions relating to teaching practices that the reforms may have changed:



                                                   26
we asked whether teachers encouraged class participation; whether students explored answers on
their own (as opposed to being told correct answers up front); and, whether memorizing material
was important to doing well in school. From these individual questions, we constructed an index
of standardized outcomes that captures changes in students’ perceptions of teaching practices (the
components of the index were all coded such that a positive change in the index indicated change in
the direction desired by reformers). In addition to this index, we also directly asked students, “how
much do you think class/lecture or teaching activity is centered on gaokao preparation?” In Table 12,
we present the estimated effects of the new curriculum on the teaching practices index (column 1),
and on students’ perceptions of the focus of teaching on gaokao preparation (column 2). One can
see that the new curriculum had no effect on the teaching methods index or on students’ perceptions
of teachers’ focus on gaokao preparation.35 Thus, we do not believe that changed teaching practices
concurrent with the textbook reform explain our findings.

5.2     Benchmarking the effect sizes
Persuasion rates         In order to quantify the magnitude of the effect of the new curriculum, we com-
pute persuasion rates (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010): the estimated percentage of individuals
who did not initially hold the view that the new curriculum aimed to instill (the “desired belief”), but
who did hold the belief if they were exposed to the new curriculum. We calculate it as the estimated
treatment effect of the new curriculum divided by the share of students who do not hold the desired
belief in the entire sample; we call this the “unconditional” persuasion rate.36
      A more correct definition of the persuasion rate would require us to divide the effect by the
share of students without the desired belief among individuals who studied under the old curriculum;
however, the compositional differences (by province and cohort) in the sample between old and new
curriculum students would bias the results. As an alternative, we estimate the fraction of individuals
who would hold the desired belief in the absence of the new curriculum. To do so, we predict
students’ beliefs using our baseline regression model, but for students who studied under the new
curriculum, we subtract the treatment effect of the new curriculum. We then average the predicted
outcomes for those who studied under the new curriculum and the old curriculum, and use this to
calculate the fraction of the sample who would not hold the desired view in the absence of the new
curriculum. We then use this share to compute the “conditional” persuasion rate.
      Throughout the regression results in Tables 3–7, we present estimates of the implied uncondi-
tional and conditional persuasion rates. The persuasion rates we estimate are substantial: across all
  35 The  teaching methods index shows an increase in reported exploration for answers, but an increase in reported mem-
orization as well; the net effect on the index is almost no difference across curricula.
   36 For a binary outcome variable, this is straightforward; for questions that do not have a binary outcome we calculate

the persuasion rate based on a transformed dependent variable, which equals one if the outcome is greater or equal to the
median answer. In our tables, we always present the the main regression results, i.e., the estimate of the treatment effect of
the new curriculum, based on the original data (for example, on a scale from 1 to 10), while the persuasion rates reported
at the bottom of the table are calculated with the binary analog.


                                                             27
outcomes (including those for which the effects did not go in the desired direction), the median un-
conditional persuasion rate was 22.8% and the median conditional persuasion rate was 19.7%. These
numbers are high relative to estimates of persuasion rates found for various media in prior work; for
example, DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) find a persuasion rate from Fox News of approximately 3–
8%, and DellaVigna et al. (forthcoming) find a persuasion rate of 4–5% for Serbian radio in Croatia.
Our estimated persuasion rates are novel in that they come from a type of oblique belief transmission
different from mass media. It is plausible that persuasion rates for educational content are consider-
ably larger than those for media—owing, for example, to the intensity of exposure, and perhaps to
the greater pliability of youths’ views.37

Stated preferences and behavior              Many of the views elicited in our survey are on topics that are of
great political, economic, and social importance, and understanding how educational content shapes
these views is of interest per se. It is also interesting to consider how differences in political attitudes
correspond to differences in political behavior. While the students in our Peking University survey
have had little opportunity to engage in many political activities of interest—because of their status
as Peking University students, because of their workloads, because of their ages, and because they
live far from home—we can examine the association between political attitudes and reported political
behavior using data from the AsiaBarometer social survey.
    The AsiaBarometer survey asks respondents about their trust in various government officials—
central government, local government, courts, armed forces, and police—just as we asked the stu-
dents in our sample. Based on this, we can construct an index of trust in government officials,
analogous our analysis above. We then examine the association between reported levels of trust in
government officials and reported political actions. Levels of trust are now our explanatory variable
of interest, rather than an outcome, and we examine whether reported levels of trust are significantly
associated with reported political activities. Specifically, the AsiaBarometer survey asks respondents
in China whether they have attended a a demonstration or protest march at least once during the past
three years, or whether they have refused to pay taxes or fees to the government during the same time
period.
    Our regressions indicate that increasing the summary trust index by one standard deviation makes
an individual in the AsiaBarometer survey 13.5 percentage points less likely to attend a demonstra-
tion, or 5 percentage points less likely to refuse to pay taxes or fees.38 The effect of the new cur-
riculum in our sample, as estimated in Table 4, column 7, is to increase the summary trust index by
around one quarter of a standard deviation. Under the assumption that the relationship between an in-
dividual’s trust in officials and their political action is similar for students in our survey to that for the
broader set of individuals in the AsiaBarometer sample, we estimate that the new curriculum made
  37 See   Gentzkow and Shapiro (2004) for a discussion of the influence of media and education on ideology.
  38 The   full set of results can be found in Appendix F, Table A.3.



                                                            28
students around 3 percentage points less likely to attend a demonstration, and around 1 percentage
point less likely to refuse to pay taxes and fees.

5.3     External validity
As with any study that relies on quasi-experimental variation, our estimated effects are “local” to our
particular context. We believe this context is of special interest: not only do we study a naturally-
occurring policy change, but we also study a group of students whose views are most likely to
shape Chinese political discourse—China’s educated elite. In addition, we study the impact of a
change in educational content during students’ critical years (Krosnick and Alwin, 1989; Giuliano
and Spilimbergo, 2013), with a lag of several years. This is of some interest—beliefs shaped by the
curriculum would need to be persistent in order to be observed in our survey, and beliefs formed
in students’ late teens and early twenties may be most likely to persist into adulthood. Of course,
one should use caution when considering whether our results are representative of the effect of the
curriculum change on other Chinese students exposed to it, the effects of educational content on
the beliefs of students in other societies, the effects of curriculum changes at other stages of life, or
effects observed after more time has elapsed.
      Peking University students uniformly excelled in their high school studies, and so are more likely
than other students to have learned the material in the high school curriculum. This might lead our
estimated effects to be larger than for other samples of Chinese high school graduates (let alone for
non-graduates). However, it is worth emphasizing, as discussed above, that our survey questions did
not look like exam questions, but rather gauged students’ opinions. Moreover, there is good reason
to think that our estimates may actually be lower bounds of the curriculum change’s effects on other
Chinese students: students who choose to enter Peking University are seen as China’s most liberal,
and critical of government.39


6      Conclusion
The Chinese government laid out a set of ambitious goals for curriculum reform in the early 2000s:
the government wanted to shape students’ views on political participation and democracy in China;
the legitimacy of the Chinese government; the segments of society that should influence policy; and,
the role of the state in the economy. In all of these aims, we find evidence that the government
successfully changed students’ views of fundamental aspects of the society in which they lived. The
magnitudes of the effects were both statistically significant and quite large: persuasion rates for a
variety of important political and economic issues are estimated to be larger than those estimated in
other settings, from other sources of information, such as television. The government also indicated
  39 An Atlantic article posted on the Peking University website (quoted above) makes this point very explicitly

(http://english.pku.edu.cn/News Events/News/Outlook/10590.htm).



                                                      29
a desire to shape students’ identities, uniting the Han majority and minorities within a traditional
Chinese ethnic spirit. In this they were less successful. They also did not succeed in making students
more environmentally conscious, perhaps because of a perceived policy tradeoff between priorities
of economic development and environmental protection. These results are robust to a variety of
specification checks and corrections for testing multiple hypotheses, and are striking compared to
distributions of “placebo” treatment effects.
    Our findings provide support for three broad theories of the roles played by school curricula in
shaping political attitudes. First, and most broadly, they suggest that the state can effectively indoc-
trinate students. Chinese students who studied under the new curriculum viewed Chinese political
institutions as more democratic; trusted a broad range of government officials more; believed in ex-
tending influence over government policy to a broader group of (educated) people; and, were more
skeptical of free markets. These are precisely the sorts of outcomes that scholars suspicious of elite
control of educational institutions would fear (for example, Freire, 1970; Bowles and Gintis, 1976;
Lott, Jr., 1999).
    But there is also a brighter side to our findings: scholars who have argued that education can be
crucial to the development of a functional democracy (e.g. Dewey, 1916; Lipset, 1959; Glaeser et
al., 2007) also find support in our results, which suggest that educational content can shape students’
views of political institutions. Finally, our results provide weaker support a range of historical work
arguing that education can play a crucial role in forming national identities (Weber, 1976; Clots-
Figueras and Masella, 2013; Alesina and Reich, 2013): the new curriculum strengthened minority
students’ views of themselves as “Chinese” (though not always statistically significantly so).
    While we find causal effects of school curricula on students’ ideology, the social welfare con-
sequences of these effects depend on the political economy of curriculum choice: to the extent that
educational content is selected to shape ideology, rather than to produce human capital, there is obvi-
ously a cost of using the education system to indoctrinate—certainly to students being educated, and
perhaps to elites as well, if they benefit from more productive workers. On the other hand, the beliefs
shaped by the schooling system might be extremely beneficial, as they may reduce social friction,
improve coordination in a variety of settings, and establish socially-valuable norms. Of course, the
norms instilled in school may be disproportionately beneficial to the seated elite, who have the ability
to shape what is taught.
    These results thus suggest an analysis of the political economy nexus when thinking about the
government’s incentives to provide education. Cantoni and Yuchtman (2013) examine elites’ choices
of whether to introduce particular educational content in important historical settings, but political
choices are made regarding educational content around the world shaping political outcomes as well
as human capital accumulation. We believe that the choices that elites make regarding educational
content deserve further study.




                                                  30
References
Alesina, Alberto and Bryony Reich, “Nation-building,” August 2013. Unpublished, Harvard Uni-
  versity.

  and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, “Good-bye Lenin (or not?): The effect of communism on people’s
  preferences,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4), 1507–1528.

Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer, “Teaching Practices and Social Capital,” Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2013, 5 (3), 189–210.

Anderson, Michael L, “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Interven-
  tion: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects,” Journal
 of the American Statistical Association, December 2008, 103 (484), 1481–1495.

Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli, “Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures
  That Control the False Discovery Rate,” Biometrika, 2006, 93, 491–507.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, “The economics of cultural transmission and the dynamics of
  preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2001, 97 (2), 298–319.

Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis, Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform and the
  Contradictions of Economic Life, Routledge, January 1976.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Davide Cantoni, “A Tear in the Iron Curtain: The Impact of Western
  Television on Consumption Behavior,” Munich Discussion Paper, 2012, p. 45.

Campante, Filipe and Davin Chor, “Schooling, Political Participation, and the Economy,” Review
  of Economics and Statistics, November 2012, 94 (4), 841–859.

Cantoni, Davide and Noam Yuchtman, “The Political Economy of Educational Content and De-
  velopment: Lessons from History,” Journal of Development Economics, September 2013, 104,
  233–244.

Carnoy, Martin, Prashant Loyalka, Maria Dobryakova, Rafiq Dossani, Isak Froumin, Kather-
  ine Kuhns, Jandhyala Tilak, and Rong Wang, University Expansion in a Changing Global
  Economy: Triumph of the BRICs?, Stanford University Press, July 2013.

Clots-Figueras, Irma and Paolo Masella, “Education, Language and Identity,” Economic Journal,
  September 2013, 123 (570), F332–F357.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan, “The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1187–1234.

   and Matthew A. Gentzkow, “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence,” Annual Review of Economics,
  September 2010, 2 (1), 643–669.

  , Ruben Enikolopov, Vera Mironova, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Cross-
  border media and nationalism: Evidence from Serbian radio in Croatia,” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.


                                               31
Dewey, John, Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education, New
  York, N.Y.: Macmillan, 1916.

Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiant, and Ernesto Schargrodsky, “The formation of beliefs: evi-
  dence from the allocation of land titles to squatters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122
  (1), 209–241.

Fisman, Raymond, Shachar Kariv, and Daniel Markovits, “Exposure to Ideology and Distribu-
  tional Preferences,” July 2009. Unpublished, Columbia University.

Freire, Paulo, Pedagogy of the Oppressed, New York, N.Y.: Continuum, 1970.

Friedman, Willa, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton, “Education as Lib-
  eration?,” NBER Working Paper, April 2011, 16939.

Gentzkow, Matthew A. and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Media, Education and Anti-Americanism in the
  Muslim World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2004, 18 (3), 117–133.

Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo, “Growing Up in a Recession,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2013.

Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer, “Why Does Democracy Need
  Education?,” Journal of Economic Growth, May 2007, 12 (2), 77–99.

Guo, Hua, “New curriculum and ’wearing new shoes to walk on the old path’,” Curriculum, Teach-
 ing Material, and Method, 2010, 30 (1).

Kaplowitz, Michael D., Timothy D. Hadlock, and Ralph Levine, “A comparison of web and mail
 survey response rates,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 2004, 68, (1), 94–101.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neigh-
  borhood Effects,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (1), 83–119.

Kremer, Michael and Andrei Sarychev, “Why Do Governments Operate Schools?,” Working Pa-
  per, 1998.

Krosnick, Jon A. and Duane F. Alwin, “Aging and Susceptibility to Attitude Change,” Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology, 1989, 57, 416–425.

Lipset, Seymour Martin, “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and
  Political Legitimacy,” The American Political Science Review, 1959, 53 (1), 69–105.

Lorentzen, Peter, “Regularizing Rioting: Permitting Public Protest in an Authoritarian Regime,”
  Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 2013, 8 (2), 127–158.

Lott, Jr., John R., “Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism,” Journal of Political
  Economy, December 1999, 107 (S6), S127–S157.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Af-
 fect Risk Taking?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, April 2011, 126 (1), 373–416.


                                                32
Manfreda, Katja Lozar, Michael Bosnjak, Jernej Berzelak, Iris Haas, and Vasja Vehovar, “Web
 surveys versus other survey modes,” International Journal of Market Research, 2008, 50 (1), 79–
 104.

Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Gerard Padro i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao, “Do Local Elec-
 tions in Non-Democracies Increase Accountability? Evidence from Rural China,” NBER Working
 Paper, 2011.

Rao, Gautam, “Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Generosity, Discrimination and Diversity in
  Delhi Schools,” December 2013. Unpublished, UC Berkeley.

Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer effects with random assignment: Results for Dartmouth roommates,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (2), 681–704.

  , “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are They and How Much Do We
  Know Thus Far?,” in Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Handbook
  of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011, chapter 4, pp. 249–277.

Shih, Tse-Hua and Xitao Fan, “Comparing response rates from web and mail surveys: A meta-
  analysis,” Field Methods, 2008, 20 (3), 249–271.

Spilimbergo, Antonio, “Democracy and Foreign Education,” American Economic Review, February
  2009, 99 (1), 528–543.

Weber, Eugen, Peasants Into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870–1914, Stan-
 ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1976.

Yanagizawa-Drott, David, “Propaganda and Conflict: Theory and Evidence from the Rwandan
  Genocide,” 2012. Unpublished, Harvard University.




                                              33
Figures and Tables




                                                                                Legend
                                                                                    2004
                                                                                    2005
                                                                                    2006
                                                                                    2007
                                                                                    2008
                                                                                    2009
        0   250   500    1,000   1,500   2,000
                                            Kilometers                              2010




                  Figure 1: Years of introduction of the new curriculum textbooks




                                                         34
              p=.0154                                     p=.006                                    p=.0484
      .4




                                                  .4




                                                                                            .4
    .2 .3




                                                .2 .3




                                                                                          .2 .3
   Density




                                               Density




                                                                                         Density
      .1




                                                  .1




                                                                                            .1
      0




                                                  0




                                                                                            0
             −5             0         5                  −5             0           5              −5             0           5
                   t−stat (Democracy)                              t−stat (Trust)                       t−stat (3 Represents)


              p=.3834                                     p=.1739                                   p=.0727
      .4




                                                  .4




                                                                                            .4
    .2 .3




                                                .2 .3




                                                                                          .2 .3
   Density




                                               Density




                                                                                         Density
      .1




                                                  .1




                                                                                            .1
      0




                                                  0




             −5             0              5             −5            0            5       0      −5            0           5
                  t−stat (Minorities, Han)                t−stat (Minorities, non−Han)                    t−stat (Markets)


              p=.1864
      .4
    .2 .3
   Density
      .1
      0




             −5             0           5
                   t−stat (Environment)




Figure 2: Distribution of t-statistics resulting from 10,000 random assignments of provinces to treat-
ment status (see text for details)




                                                                    35
                            Table 1: Timeline – China’s 8th Textbook Reform
            Date of introduction     Provinces

            2004 (class of 2007):    Shandong, Ningxia, Hainan, Guangdong
            2005 (class of 2008):    Jiangsu
            2006 (class of 2009):    Anhui, Tianjin, Zhejiang, Fujian, Liaoning
            2007 (class of 2010):    Beijing, Hunan, Heilongjiang, Jilin, Shaanxi
            2008 (class of 2011):    Henan, Xinjiang, Jiangxi, Shanxi
            2009 (class of 2012):    Hubei, Yunnan, Inner Mongolia, Hebei
            2010 (class of 2013):    Guangxi, Sichuan, Guizhou, Qinghai, Tibet, Gansu, Chongqing




                                             Table 2: Summary statistics
                                 All              Old Curr.     New Curr.   Unconditional      Conditional
                          Mean      Std.Dev.       Mean           Mean      Diff.   p-value   Diff.   p-value
 Variable                  (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)      (5)       (6)     (7)       (8)
 Age                      20.5     1.4         21.1         20.1       -1.0     0.000      -0.1     0.228
 Height                  169.6     8.2        169.3        169.8        0.5     0.172       0.1     0.949
 Female                  0.459    0.498       0.441        0.467      0.026     0.277     -0.030    0.523
 # of siblings           0.402    0.812       0.473        0.369      -0.105    0.008     -0.022    0.727
 Urban                   0.782    0.413       0.772        0.787      0.015     0.453     0.022     0.533
 Father high edu.        0.787    0.410       0.779        0.790      0.012     0.561     0.041     0.195
 Mother high edu.        0.727    0.446       0.696        0.741      0.045     0.040     0.048     0.155
 Parents in CCP          0.543    0.498       0.544        0.542      -0.002    0.931     0.000     0.996
 Han                     0.916    0.277       0.901        0.923      0.021     0.113     0.006     0.791
 HS science track        0.697    0.460       0.691        0.700      0.009     0.718     0.011     0.768
 HS humanities track 0.308        0.462       0.314        0.304      -0.010    0.680     -0.020    0.583
 New curriculum          0.683    0.465         0            1           1        —         —         —
Columns 5 and 6 report raw (unconditional) differences in means across curricula, and the p-value for a t-test
of differences in means. Columns 7 and 8 report differences conditional on cohort and province fixed effects.
“Father high edu.” and “Mother high edu.” are dummy variables equal to 1 if fathers or mothers, respectively,
completed high school or above. Number of observations: 1954 (619 old curriculum, 1335 new curriculum).




                                                           36
                              Table 3: Democracy and political participation




                                                                                                            People’s participation




                                                                                                                                     local representatives
                                                                                        Chinese democracy
                                              Aware that able to



                                                                    People influence




                                                                                                                                     Plan to vote for
                                              vote local PCR




                                                                                                            of democracy




                                                                                                                                                              z-score index
                                                                                                            characteristic
                                                                    VH in reality




                                                                                                                                                              (Democracy)
                                  Aware VH




                                                                                        in reality
                                  elected




       Dependent variable:
                                   (1)           (2)                   (3)                 (4)                     (5)                   (6)                    (7)

          New Curriculum        0.079**       0.038                0.199**             0.246**                0.048                   0.006                  0.253***
                                [0.034]      [0.028]               [0.078]             [0.122]               [0.034]                 [0.051]                  [0.080]
                    p-value     (0.022)      (0.183)               (0.012)             (0.047)               (0.155)                 (0.906)                  (0.002)
               adj. p-value     (0.071)      (0.124)               (0.071)             (0.071)               (0.124)                 (0.282)                     ·
               Observations     1754       1755       1753        1724       1724      1755       1724
                   Mean DV      0.765      0.871     3.202       5.180       0.392     0.489        0
                Std.Dev. DV     0.424      0.335     0.976       1.686       0.488     0.500        1
  Persuasion rate (uncond.)     0.345      0.291     0.345       0.199       0.080     0.012         ·
     Persuasion rate (cond.)    0.279      0.243     0.279       0.175       0.076     0.012         ·
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of province and cohort fixed
effects (not reported). Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level. The z-
score index in column 7 (weighting by the inverse covariance of the standardizes outcomes) and the adjusted
p-values are computed following Anderson (2008). The persuasion rates computed for columns 3 and 4 are
based on the binary analogue of the dependent variable (a dummy taking the value 1 for outcomes above
the median value). Number of clusters: 116.




                                                                   37
                                                                        Table 4: Trust in government institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                               Placebo




                                     Trust central
                                     government
                                                     Trust provincial
                                                     government
                                                                             Trust local
                                                                             government
                                                                                             Trust courts
                                                                                                             Trust armed
                                                                                                             forces
                                                                                                                           Trust
                                                                                                                           police
                                                                                                                                     VH self-interested
                                                                                                                                     (disagree)
                                                                                                                                                           VH serves rich
                                                                                                                                                           (disagree)
                                                                                                                                                                             z-score index
                                                                                                                                                                             (Trust in gov.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                z-score index
                                                                                                                                                                                                (General trust)




            Dependent variable:
                                       (1)              (2)                    (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)        (7)                   (8)               (9)              (10)

               New Curriculum      0.127**           0.126*                0.229***         0.078           0.172***       0.122*     0.095               0.147***          0.253***            -0.001
                                   [0.054]           [0.075]                [0.069]        [0.055]           [0.064]       [0.070]   [0.061]               [0.053]           [0.074]           [0.093]
                         p-value   (0.022)           (0.093)                (0.001)        (0.154)           (0.009)       (0.085)   (0.125)               (0.006)           (0.001)           (0.992)
                    adj. p-value   (0.029)           (0.066)                (0.009)        (0.084)           (0.022)       (0.067)   (0.077)               (0.022)              ·                  ·
                    Observations       1,767     1,766      1,766      1,767      1,766      1,767      1,753       1,755        1,753      1,767




38
                        Mean DV        3.981     3.619      3.169      3.630      3.816      3.486      3.112       3.457          0           0
                     Std.Dev. DV       0.748     0.770      0.819      0.755      0.838      0.799      0.875       0.900          1           1
       Persuasion rate (uncond.)       0.520     0.228      0.683      0.145      0.241       0.107     0.114       0.384          ·           ·
          Persuasion rate (cond.)      0.384     0.197      0.466      0.132      0.207      0.0994     0.106       0.304          ·           ·
     *: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of province and cohort fixed effects (not reported). Robust standard
     errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level. The z-score index in columns 9 and 10 (weighting by the inverse covariance of the
     standardizes outcomes) and the adjusted p-values are computed following Anderson (2008). Persuasion rates are based on the binary analogue
     of the dependent variable (a dummy taking the value 1 for outcomes above the median value). Number of clusters: 116.
     Table 5: Three Represents




                                influence beyond
                                CCP members
                                Expand policy
       Dependent variable:
                                    (1)

           New Curriculum      0.077**
                               [0.032]
                     p-value   (0.018)
                Observations     1,715
                    Mean DV      0.838
                Std.Dev. DV      0.369
   Persuasion rate (uncond.)     0.476
     Persuasion rate (cond.)     0.359
**: Significant at 5%. Regression in-
cludes a full set of province and cohort
fixed effects (not reported). Robust stan-
dard errors in brackets, clustered at the
province×cohort level. Number of clus-
ters: 116.




                   39
                                                                                     Table 6: Minorities
                                                       Views from Han Chinese                                                                                   Views from minorities




                                    Minorities
                                    can be trusted
                                                      Minorities same
                                                      as Han Chinese
                                                                        Minorities share
                                                                        heritage with Han
                                                                                             Willing to marry
                                                                                             other ethnic group
                                                                                                                   z-score index
                                                                                                                   (Minorities, Han)
                                                                                                                                        Minorities same
                                                                                                                                        as Han Chinese
                                                                                                                                                          Minorities share
                                                                                                                                                          heritage with Han
                                                                                                                                                                              Willing to marry
                                                                                                                                                                              other ethnic group
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feel
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chinese
                                                                                                                                                                                                               z-score index
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Minorities, non-Han)




            Dependent variable:
                                      (1)               (2)                (3)                  (4)                   (5)                 (6)                (7)                 (8)                 (9)        (10)

               New Curriculum      -0.090             0.058              0.007              0.064**                0.089                0.064              -0.010              -0.046              0.554**     0.493
                                   [0.055]           [0.042]            [0.031]             [0.028]               [0.079]              [0.106]            [0.146]             [0.065]              [0.267]    [0.311]
                         p-value   (0.107)           (0.172)            (0.816)             (0.022)               (0.263)              (0.549)            (0.945)             (0.484)              (0.042)    (0.118)
                    adj. p-value   (0.192)           (0.208)            (0.298)             (0.097)                  ·                 (1.000)            (1.000)             (1.000)              (0.202)       ·




40
                    Observations      1,654      1,654     1,654     1,654      1,654      149        149      149        141        141
                        Mean DV       3.553      0.780     0.177     0.840        0       0.826      0.262    0.926      3.546        0
                     Std.Dev. DV      0.737      0.414     0.382     0.367        1       0.381      0.441    0.262      0.760        1
       Persuasion rate (uncond.)       n/a       0.268     0.009     0.405        ·       0.366       n/a      n/a       0.339        ·
          Persuasion rate (cond.)      n/a       0.226     0.009     0.317        ·       0.298       n/a      n/a       0.280        ·
     *: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of province and cohort fixed effects (not reported). Robust
     standard errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level. The z-score indices in columns 5 and 10 (weighting by the inverse
     covariance of the standardizes outcomes) and the adjusted p-values are computed following Anderson (2008). The persuasion rate
     computed for column 9 is based on the binary analogue of the dependent variable (a dummy taking the value 1 for outcomes above
     the median value). No persuasion rates are computed where the point estimates indicate an effect opposite to the one intended by the
     curriculum reform. Number of clusters: 115 (cols. 1–5), 64 (cols. 6–10).
           Table 7: Markets




                                 market economy
                                 Skeptical of
       Dependent variable:
                                    (1)

           New Curriculum      0.087**
                               [0.041]
                     p-value    0.034
                Observations     1,625
                    Mean DV      0.698
                Std.Dev. DV      0.459
   Persuasion rate (uncond.)     0.288
     Persuasion rate (cond.)     0.240
**: Significant at 5%. Regression in-
cludes a full set of province and cohort
fixed effects (not reported). Robust stan-
dard errors in brackets, clustered at the
province×cohort level. Number of clus-
ters: 116.




                   41
                     Table 8: Environment


                           protect environment




                                                                Environment over
                                                                economic growth
                           Willing to pay to




                                                                                    (Environment)
                                                                                    z-score index
                                                 Environment
                                                 primary goal
  Dependent variable:
                               (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)

     New Curriculum       -0.033                 -0.034         -0.034             -0.162
                          [0.021]                [0.028]        [0.044]            [0.099]
               p-value    (0.108)                (0.219)        (0.446)            (0.104)
          adj. p-value    (0.480)                (0.480)        (0.480)               ·
           Observations    1,791      1,708      1,708     1,708
              Mean DV      0.933      0.113      0.694       1
           Std.Dev. DV     0.250      0.317      0.461       1
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include
a full set of province and cohort fixed effects (not reported). Ro-
bust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort
level. No persuasion rates are computed because the point esti-
mates indicate effects opposite to those intended by the curricu-
lum reform. Number of clusters: 116.




                                            42
                                             Table 9: Robustness




                                                                                                       (Minorities, non-Han)
                                                                                  (Minorities, Han)
                                                              influence beyond




                                                                                                                                market economy



                                                                                                                                                  (Environment)
                                                              CCP members
                                                              Expand policy
                                            (Trust in gov.)
                           z-score index



                                            z-score index




                                                                                  z-score index



                                                                                                       z-score index




                                                                                                                                                  z-score index
                           (Democracy)




                                                                                                                                Skeptical of
  Dependent variable:
                             (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)                   (5)                     (6)              (7)

  Panel A: Baseline
     New Curriculum      0.253***          0.253***           0.077**             0.089                0.493                   0.087**           -0.162
                          [0.080]           [0.074]           [0.032]            [0.079]              [0.311]                  [0.041]           [0.099]
  Panel B: Province-level clustering
     New Curriculum       0.253**          0.253**            0.077**             0.089                0.493                   0.087*            -0.162
                          [0.098]          [0.103]            [0.034]            [0.109]              [0.377]                  [0.049]           [0.114]
  Panel C: Two-way clustering (province and cohort)
     New Curriculum       0.253**          0.253***            0.077              0.089                0.493                   0.087**           -0.162
                          [0.101]           [0.088]           [0.054]            [0.097]              [0.490]                  [0.034]           [0.116]
  Panel D: With individual-level controls
     New Curriculum      0.345***          0.321***           0.064*              0.125                0.450                    0.051            -0.057
                          [0.082]           [0.078]           [0.034]            [0.094]              [0.287]                  [0.044]           [0.098]
  Panel E: With province×cohort-level controls
     New Curriculum      0.251***          0.255***           0.079**             0.087                0.518                   0.085**           -0.160
                          [0.081]           [0.073]           [0.031]            [0.079]              [0.328]                  [0.039]           [0.098]
  Panel F: Province-specific cohort trends
     New Curriculum        0.134           0.148*             0.100***            0.049                0.416                   0.090*            -0.114
                          [0.084]          [0.077]             [0.038]           [0.091]              [0.473]                  [0.050]           [0.115]
          Observations      1,724       1,753        1,715      1,654       141       1,625    1,708
             Mean DV          0           0          0.838         0          0       0.698       0
          Std.Dev. DV         1           1          0.369         1          1       0.459       1
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of province and cohort
fixed effects (not reported). Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level
(Panel B: province level). Number of clusters: 116; 64 (column 5); 29 (Panel B); 26 (Panel B, col-
umn 5); 29×4 (Panel C); 26×4 (Panel B, column 5).




                                                              43
                                                            Table 10: Short Panel




                                                                                                                                                    (Minorities, non-Han)
                                                                                                                   (Minorities, Han)
                                                                                            influence beyond




                                                                                                                                                                                              market economy



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Environment)
                                                                                            CCP members
                                                                                            Expand policy
                                                            (Trust in gov.)
                                z-score index



                                                            z-score index




                                                                                                                   z-score index



                                                                                                                                                    z-score index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            z-score index
                                (Democracy)




                                                                                                                                                                                              Skeptical of
      Dependent variable:
                                  (1)                          (2)                              (3)                    (4)                              (5)                                      (6)                          (7)

         New Curriculum       0.181***                  0.291***                        0.089***                  0.102                          0.149                                  0.069*                         -0.009
                               [0.057]                   [0.066]                         [0.027]                 [0.075]                        [0.246]                                 [0.034]                       [0.081]
             Observations        440         447          435         415         40       414      430
                Mean DV           0           0          0.838         0           0      0.698      0
             Std.Dev. DV          1           1          0.369         1           1      0.459      1
   *: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of province and cohort
   fixed effects (not reported). Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level.
   Number of clusters: 26; 17 (column 5).



                                                             Table 11: Pretrends


                                                                                                                                                                      (Minorities, non-Han)
                                                                                                                                (Minorities, Han)
                                                                                                    influence beyond




                                                                                                                                                                                                           market economy



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Environment)
                                                                                                    CCP members
                                                                                                    Expand policy
                                                                          (Trust in gov.)
                                            z-score index



                                                                          z-score index




                                                                                                                                z-score index



                                                                                                                                                                      z-score index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            z-score index
                                            (Democracy)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Skeptical of


           Dependent variable:
                                                (1)                           (2)                        (3)                           (4)                                  (5)                                (6)                            (7)

  ≥3 years before introduction           -0.032                       -0.088                         0.031                 0.255**                                 0.205                                0.030                           -0.113
                                        [0.103]                      [0.107]                        [0.040]                [0.116]                                [0.331]                              [0.054]                         [0.157]
    2 years before introduction          -0.099                      -0.141*                         0.048                  -0.140                                 0.171                                0.066                           -0.121
                                        [0.080]                      [0.080]                        [0.031]                [0.091]                                [0.225]                              [0.047]                         [0.119]
              New Curriculum           0.229***                     0.226***                        0.086**                 0.013                                  0.506                               0.102**                         -0.181*
                                        [0.081]                      [0.072]                        [0.034]                [0.075]                                [0.332]                              [0.040]                         [0.103]
                   Observations     1,724        1,753        1,715      1,654       141       1,625       1,708
                       Mean DV        0            0          0.838         0          0       0.698         0
                    Std.Dev. DV       1            1          0.369         1          1       0.459         1
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of province and cohort fixed effects (not
reported). Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level. Number of clusters: 116;
64 (column 5). Reported coefficients are estimated relative to the final cohort studying under the old curriculum
(1 year before introduction).



                                                                                       44
         Table 12: Teaching style




                                               Teaching focused
                           (Teaching style)
                           z-score index




                                               on gaokao
  Dependent variable:
                              (1)                 (2)

     New Curriculum       -0.005              -0.108
                          [0.058]             [0.069]
               p-value    (0.931)             (0.122)
          Observations      1,691      1,691
             Mean DV        0.000      4.043
          Std.Dev. DV       0.694      0.882
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All
regressions include a full set of province and
cohort fixed effects (not reported). Robust
standard errors in brackets, clustered at the
province×cohort level. Number of clusters:
116.




                     45
Appendix A                        The Chinese high school curriculum
All students in the first year of senior high school take the same courses in languages (Chinese and
English), math, science, and social studies (Politics, History, and Geography). Students then choose
to specialize in either the science track or the humanities track. The choice of track determines both
students’ coursework in the last two years of senior high school, and the content on which they will
be tested in the high-stakes National Higher Education Entrance Examination, known as the gaokao
(as seen in Figure A.1). In our empirical analysis below, we focus on changes to the tenth grade
Politics textbooks for senior high school students, before the track split. Importantly, all students
face a high-stakes test on the Politics curriculum: students in the science track are examined on the
content of the first year Politics textbook in the so-called “little gaokao” during eleventh grade, while
students in the humanities track are examined on this material in the gaokao exam at the end of senior
high school; both exams factor into a student’s college admissions prospects.


                                                                            Junior	  High	  (3	  years)	  
                                                                                         compulsory



                                               High	  School	  Entrance	  Exam                                         a.	  Secondary	  Specialized	  Schools	  	  中等专业学校

                                                                                                                          b.	  Secondary	  Vocational	  Schools	  	  中级职业学校

                                                                Senior	  High	  Year	  1	  (10th	  grade)	  
                                                                                             !
                                        -­‐-­‐	  {Chinese,	  Math,	  English}	  +	  {Physics,	  Chemistry,	  Biology}	  +	  	  
                                        	  	  	  	  {Politics,	  History,	  Geography}	  +	  I.T.	  +	  P.E.	  
                                        -­‐-­‐	  uniform	  curriculum	  for	  all	  tracks

                                                                                                                Students	  Choosing	  Tracks	  (End	  of	  9th	  Grade)

           Academic	  Assessment	  (“Little	  Gaokao”)	                                        Academic	  Assessment	  (“Little	  Gaokao”)	  
                         Science	  Track	                                                                     Humanities	  Track	  
                                                !
       -­‐-­‐	  At	  various	  points	  during	  11th	  grade	  
                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                             -­‐-­‐	  At	  various	  points	  during	  11th	  grade	  
       -­‐-­‐	  Test	  on	  Politics,	  History,	  and	  Geography                     -­‐-­‐	  Test	  on	  Physics,	  Chemistry	  and	  Biology	  



        Senior	  High	  Year	  2	  -­‐	  3	  (11th	  -­‐	  12th	  grade)	              Senior	  High	  Year	  2	  -­‐	  3	  (11th	  -­‐	  12th	  grade)	  
                            Science	  Track	                                                                   Humanities	  Track	  
                                               !
       -­‐-­‐	  Chinese,	  Math,	  English	                                              -­‐-­‐	  Chinese,	  Math,	  English	  
                                                                                                                                       !
       -­‐-­‐	  Physics,	  Chemistry,	  Biology                                           -­‐-­‐	  Politics,	  History,	  Geography



                                     Gaokao	  (Science	  Track)	                               Gaokao	  (Humanities	  Track)	  
                                                               !
                               -­‐-­‐	  Chinese,	  Math,	  English	  
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                             -­‐-­‐	  Chinese,	  Math,	  English	  
                               -­‐-­‐	  Physics,	  Chemistry,	  Biology                   -­‐-­‐	  History,	  Politics,	  Geography



                                        Figure A.1: The Chinese secondary education system




                                                                                             A.1
Appendix B          Government Documents
B.1   Summary of government documents consulted
1. “Decision on Deepening the Education Reform, and Comprehensively Promoting the ‘Quality-
oriented Education”’1
Issued by the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, in June 1999. This document marks
the beginning of the planning phase of the 8th Curriculum Reform. It emphasizes that education
is essential to China’s continuous growth during 21st century, and that its education policy needs
substantial reform. In particular, the document calls for a reform of the curriculum structure and
content.

2. “Framework for Basic Education Reform” 2
Issued by the Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, in June 2001. In this docu-
ment, the Ministry delineates the motivation and objectives for the coming curriculum reform. This
document also specifies that the corresponding “curriculum framework” would be set up to support
the implementation of these new educational objectives.

3. “Strengthening the Ideological and Moral Construction of the Youth” 3
Issued by the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, in February 2004. The memo speci-
fies the particular political and moral education objectives that should be achieved through the high
school “Politics” curriculum. Note that while the Ministry of Education’s “curriculum framework”
guided writing of the high school textbooks for all subjects, the “Politics” subject is unique in the
sense that it is guided by this additional memo issued by the State Council.

4. “Curriculum Framework for the Senior High School Politics Subject” 4
Issued by the Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, in March 2004. This docu-
ment describes the specific goals of the curriculum, as well as the key items that the curriculum would
cover. The document serves as the guiding framework for textbook authors, high school teachers,
exam preparation book publishers, as well as students.

B.2   Translated excerpts of relevant government documents
1. State Council’s “Decision on Deepening the Education Reform, and Comprehensively Pro-
moting the ‘Quality-oriented Education’” (1999)
      Education is at the fundamental position of a nation’s power accumulation process. Whether a
      nation is powerful or not increasingly depends on its labor force’s human capital – the number
   1 The original document can be found at http://www.moe.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/

moe_177/200407/2478.html.
   2 The original document can be found at http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2002/content_61386.htm.
   3 The original document can be found at http://www.people.com.cn/GB/jiaoyu/1053/2405224.html.
   4 The original document can be found at http://www.moe.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/

moe_711/201001/78375.html.



                                                   A.2
      and quality of various types of labor forces. This poses a more urgent demand for China to
      grow and train a new generation suitable for the 21st century. . . . During the 50 years since the
      founding of the PRC, especially since the “Reform and Opening-up” in 1978, China’s education
      reform and development have witnessed outstanding achievements. However, in this new era,
      due to various reasons, we are falling behind in terms of our education philosophy, education
      system and institutions, students’ training models, education content, and education methods.
      This negatively affects the overall development of youths, and is not suitable for the needs of
      enhancing our citizens’ characters and qualities.

2. Ministry of Education’s “Framework for Basic Education Reform” (2001)
In this document, the ministry delineates the motivation and the objectives for the future curricular
reforms. The previous basic educational curriculum, it is said, cannot satisfy the needs of develop-
ment in this new age. Thus, a new curriculum should meet the following objectives (in the order of
appearance in the original document): it should reflect the times, and make students patriotic, com-
munitarian, [and] love socialism. Students should inherit and carry forward the great traditions of
the Chinese nation and its revolution; and be equipped with an awareness of the legal system under
a socialist democracy. The new curriculum should promote compliance with national laws and with
societal ethics, and gradually form in students a correct worldview, a correct view of life, and a cor-
rect value system.

    A “National Curriculum Framework” was set up in order to support the implementation of the
new educational objectives. The June, 2001, document describes the Framework as the guideline
for the drafting of textbooks, for the development of learning activities, and for assessment and
examinations. It is the basis for centralized curriculum management and evaluation. Some of the
objectives of the education reforms are reaffirmed when describing the Framework; the document
indicates that

      the development of the curriculum framework should, according to the specific content of each
      subject area, strengthen ideological education with respect to its relevance, effectiveness, and
      ability to motivate; it should educate students in patriotism, communitarianism, and socialism;
      it should increase education in the great traditions of the Chinese nation; it should increase
      revolutionary and national defense education; it should strengthen thought quality and moral
      education; it should guide students to establish a correct worldview, a correct view on life, and a
      correct value system; it should advocate a scientific spirit and attitude, and the scientific method,
      guiding students toward innovation and practice.

3. State Council’s memo of “Strengthening the Ideological and Moral Construction of the
Youth” (2004)
      The main tasks and goals of the ideological and moral construction of our youths are:

         1. Beginning with strengthening the love of country, promote and foster patriotism as the core
            of our great national character. Thoroughly carry out the education of the fine traditions of
            the Chinese nation, the Chinese revolutionary traditions, and Chinese history, especially
            modern history. Guide the vast numbers of youths to recognize the history and traditions of
            the Chinese nation and to understand the grave national disasters and the heroic struggles
            of the Chinese people in modern times. Establish from a young age a sense of national
            self-esteem, confidence and pride.


                                                      A.3
       2. Beginning with the setting of broad aspirations for the youths, foster and cultivate in them
          correct ideals and beliefs. Carry out education on the history of China’s revolution, na-
          tion building, and “The Reform and Opening-up.” Guide the vast numbers of youths to
          correctly recognize the patterns of social development, to correctly recognize the nation’s
          future and destiny; integrating individual growth with the great cause of socialism with
          Chinese characteristics, and with the prosperity and power of the homeland. Prepare the
          youths for taking on the honorable mission of building China and revitalizing China.
       3. Beginning with the regulation of youths’ behavior and habits, develop in them good moral
          character and civil conduct. Intensely promote basic codes of ethics: “patriotism and
          respect for the law; civility and honesty; unity and friendship; diligence, frugality and
          self-reliance; and professional dedication.” Promote communitarianism and socialist hu-
          manitarianism. Guide the vast numbers of youths to firmly establish a place in their heart
          for the homeland, for the community, and for other people; to understand the basic prin-
          ciples of conduct; and to be equipped with the basic upbringing necessary for living a
          civilized life. Teach the youths how to handle interpersonal relationships, the relationship
          between the individual and society, and the relationship between the individual and the
          natural world.
       4. Beginning with improvements in the development of character, promote the overall devel-
          opment of young people. Strive to cultivate in youths a work ethic, creativity, efficiency,
          and environmental awareness; an enterprising spirit, a scientific mind, and an awareness
          of democracy and the rule of law. Enhance the development of young people’s practical
          skills, autonomy, and the ability to protect themselves; guide them so that they maintain
          their vitality, their exuberance, their high-spirited yearning for self-betterment; encourage
          them to study diligently, to implement boldly, and to dare to create; comprehensively im-
          prove their ideological and moral character, their scientific and cultural literacy, and their
          physical health.
          School is the primary channel for transmitting ideological and moral education to young
          people. We must follow the party’s education policy, and prioritize ideological and moral
          education among all general education goals, and throughout all aspects of education and
          teaching activities. We should place extremely high importance on the cultivation of a
          national spirit, incorporating this throughout the primary and secondary education experi-
          ence.

4. Ministry of Education’s “Curriculum Framework for Senior High School Politics Subject”
(2004)
     The goals of the Politics subject:

       1. Knowledge:
              • Know that the Chinese Communist Party has always represented the development
                trend of China’s advanced productive forces, the orientation of China’s advanced cul-
                ture, and the fundamental interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese peo-
                ple.
              • Understand the meaning of developing socialist market economy, the socialist democ-
                racy, and the socialist advanced culture.
              • Know the principles and the basic methodology of materialism and historical materi-
                alism.
              • Understand contemporary China’s basic needs for moral construction among its citi-
                zens, as well as the establishment of China’s rule of law.


                                                   A.4
      • Obtain the relevant knowledge in order to make the correct decisions regarding career
        development.
2. Abilities:
      • Enhance the ability to use Marxist principles and methodology to solve real issues.
        Be able to make the correct value judgment and behavior choices.
      • Enhance the ability to actively participate in economic, political, and cultural activi-
        ties.
      • Enhance the ability to correctly handle the relationship between competition and co-
        operation in the society.
      • Foster the ability to individually and voluntarily study, choose, and discover.
      • Enhance the ability to do everything in accordance to the law: constrain self conducts
        according to the law, and use law to protect own rights and interests.
      • Develop the ability to collect and filter societal information using multiple methods,
        especially the modern information technology.
3. Sentiments, Attitudes, and Values:
      • Love the Chinese Communist Party. Be persistent in the belief in the socialist devel-
        opment path with Chinese characteristics.
      • Love the nation, love its people. Pay close attention to the destiny of the nation.
        Enhance the self-esteem, self-confidence, and pride of the Chinese nation. Be willing
        to promote the Chinese ethnic spirit. Establish the ambition to strive for the revival
        of the Chinese nation.
      • Pay close attention to social development. Take initiative in participating in social
        activities. Be honest, faithful, and trustworthy. Enhance social responsibilities. Con-
        tinue to establish perspectives and concepts of democracy and the rule of law. Foster
        the idea of citizenship.
      • Love the community. Be devoted to the society. Care for others, and be willing to
        help others. Foster the spirits of cooperation and friendliness.
      • Love to study. Respect science. Chase after truth. Obtain the scientific attitudes and
        innovation spirits.
      • Love life. Take initiative to engage in healthy cultural activities. Maintain an upbeat
        spirit, and aim for higher moral goals.
      • Love peace. Respect for the diverse ethnic culture around the globe. Pay close atten-
        tion to the common interests of all mankind. Foster a global perspective.




                                            A.5
Appendix C         Textbooks
C.1   Textbook Covers
1. Old politics textbook
“Senior High School Politics (Module A)”, People’s Education Press.




2. New politics textbook
“Senior High School New Curriculum Standard Politics (Module 1): Economic Life”, People’s Ed-
ucation Press.




                                              A.6
C.2   A Few Words on the New Senior High School Politics Textbook, from the Text-
      book Author (2009)
In July 2009, the chair of the committee in charge of rewriting the Politics textbook, Tian Xinming,
who was appointed by the Ministry of Education, published an essay on his thoughts on the new
textbook.5 To our knowledge, this is the only example of the author of a Chinese textbook reflecting
on how he wrote the textbook. The following are translated excerpts:

      The new textbook features two prominent characteristics: First, it unequivocally upholds the
      correct political and ideological point of view, as well as Marxist education. Second, it reflects
      the basic concepts of the curriculum reform, focusing on guiding the learning process.
      ...
      We believe that high school students are at an age of rapid development and transformation of
      their own political ideology. Since the founding of the [People’s Republic of China], many years
      of experience has shown that the high school Politics curriculum may have a profound impact on
      the students’ entire lives. The Politics textbook is the spiritual material that the country provides
      for the students. Writing the Politics textbook is an act at the state level, rather than an academic
      activity of the individual author. Although the high school Politics textbook teaches very basic
      knowledge, it possesses extremely strong political, policy-oriented, and scientific characteristics.
      With a large readership, it will influence an entire generation of young people.
      ...
      The Education Ministry has explicitly indicated to us that the fundamental goal for the Politics
      curriculum is to educate students in morality and ideology. Similar to other subjects, it also
      teaches students knowledge and equips students with skills. However, its fundamental charac-
      teristic is that it is a curriculum designed for moral and ideological education. This is the major
      difference between the Politics curriculum and other subjects. Whether it is writing the textbook
      or teaching the material at school, we must tightly uphold this curriculum’s basic feature and
      fundamental goal. Otherwise, we will go in the wrong direction.
      ...
      [Regarding new material that needed to be covered in the textbook.] The CCP’s basic guiding
      principles, which are explicitly summarized and stated in the Party’s 15th congress: namely, the
      basic goals and policies of the construction of the Socialist economy, politics, and culture with
      Chinese characteristics. This is the expansion of the CCP’s basic roadmap, and the curriculum
      needs to accurately reflect this. After the Party’s 16th congress, the CCP introduced the strate-
      gic ideology of a harmonious society. These ideas must also be promptly reflected in the new
      curriculum, and become a part of the moral and ideological educational content.
      ...
      In order to write the textbook well, we must maintain a correct and clear understanding of the cur-
      rent ideological and political situation. The overall situation of China’s ideological theory field
      is good. The mainstream is positive and healthy. However, the ideological field is not peace-
      ful. There exist noises: ideological struggles and competition; foreign hostile forces’ attempts to
      westernize or separate China. This would be reflected in the textbook writing process.

   5 The original text in its entirety can be found at

http://www.pep.com.cn/sxzz/js/tbjx/kb/jsys/bx1/201008/t20100830 824446.htm.




                                                      A.7
Appendix D            Government’s Aims, Changes in the Curriculum, and Changes
                      in the Gaokao framework
D.1     Democracy and political participation
      • State Council (1999): mentions “(socialist) democracy” as a goal of moral education at school.

      • Ministry of Education (2001): Specifies that to equip students with the ideas of “socialist
        democracy” is one of the main objectives of the new curriculum.

      • State Council (2004): To establish the consciousness of “(socialist) democracy” is one of the
        main objectives of moral construction.

      • Ministry of Education (2004): a main goal of the curriculum is to make students understand
        the meaning of “socialist democracy.” Also, the curriculum is to “enhance students’ ability
        to actively participate in political life.” The framework also adds related sections such as
        “citizens’ participation in political life,” “rights and duty of political participation”, etc.

      • Added sections in the new curriculum:

           – “Main components of political life”
           – “How to participate in political life”
           – “The choice of election methods and its basis”
           – “Various ways of participating in democratic decision-making”
           – “The importance of citizens’ direct participation in democratic decision-making”
           – “The most comprehensive democratic practices in China”
           – “End-of-chapter research topic: ordered and disordered political participation”

      • Added items in the new Gaokao framework:

           – Basic principles and content of Chinese citizens participating in political life
           – Channels for Chinese citizens to participate in political life
           – China’s election system and method
           – Various ways for citizens to participate in democratic decision-making
           – The significance of citizens to directly participate in democratic decision-making
           – The meaning and significance of Chinese villages and urban dwellers to govern them-
             selves

D.2     Rule of law, supervision of government, and trust in government
      • State Council (1999): mentions “the rule of law” as main goals of moral education at school.

      • Ministry of Education (2001): the new curriculum should make students understand the prin-
        ciple of “the rule of law.”


                                                      A.8
• State Council (2004): emphasizes that “the rule of law” should be integrated into the school
  curriculum.

• Ministry of Education (2004): one of the main objectives of the curriculum is to make students
  understand the “basic requirement of legal system construction in contemporary China.” Also,
  the new curriculum shall establish students’ sentiment of “loving CCP and the nation.” The
  framework adds several sections related to the rule of law. For example, “government should
  exercise its power and duties according to law,” “government’s power shall be supervised,
  and government should not abuse its power.” The framework also adds sections related to
  supervision of the government, such as “citizens’ responsibility to participate in government
  supervision,” “government’s power shall be supervised, and government should not abuse its
  power.”

• Added sections in the new curriculum:

     – “Various methods of democratic supervision”
     – “Responsible exercise of the supervision right”
     – “A government that benefits its people”
     – “Ways to seek help; legal channels to voice complaints”
     – “The specific requirements for government to adhere to the rule of law”
     – “The significance of restricting and supervising government’s power”
     – “Cheers for the ‘Sunshine Project’ (local government operational transparency project)”
     – “End-of-chapter research topic: where does the government’s authority come from?”

• Added items in the new Gaokao framework:

     – Chinese citizens’ rights of democratic supervision
     – The legal channels to conduct democratic supervision
     – Citizens need to exercise the right of democratic supervision in a responsible manner
     – The duties of the Chinese government
     – The fundamental guidelines of the Chinese government; the basic principles of govern-
       ment operations
     – The significance and requirement of the rule of law
     – To improve the government’s ability to adhere to the rule of law
     – The significance of restricting and supervising government’s power
     – China’s administrative supervision system
     – The origin and establishment of the Chinese government’s authority




                                            A.9
D.3     The “Three Represents”
      • State Council (1999): “The Three Represents” is not mentioned. (Note: the concept of “The
        Three Represents” wasn’t officially introduced as a CCP guiding principle until 2001.)

      • Ministry of Education (2001): emphasizes that “the primary education reform should be cen-
        tered on the principles of Deng Xiaoping’s ‘Three Faces’ and Jiang Zemin’s ‘Three Repre-
        sents.’ ”

      • State Council (2004): “The Three Represents” is emphasized multiple times. For example,
        the document opens with a statement that “youths’ moral construction should be guided by the
        ‘Three Represents’ principle.”

      • Ministry of Education (2004): emphasizes multiple times that one of the guiding principles of
        the new curriculum is “The Three Represents.” The document also emphasizes multiple times
        that one of the primary goals of the curriculum is to make students understand the concept and
        application of “The Three Represents.” The framework also adds sections that introduce the
        concept and application of “The Three Represents” into the textbook.

      • Added or modified sections in the new curriculum:

           – “Core of political civilization”
           – “Theoretical frameworks of socialism with Chinese characteristics”
           – “End-of-chapter research topic: the characteristics of socialistic political civilization”

      • Added and modified items in the new Gaokao framework:

           – How to select representatives of the people
           – The basic characteristics, guiding principles and doctrines of the CCP
           – Continuous improvement and perfection of the manner in which the CCP rules and gov-
             erns
           – Political party system with Chinese characteristics
           – The theoretical framework of socialism with Chinese characteristics

D.4     Attitudes toward ethnic minorities
      • State Council (1999): specifies that the education of “multi-ethnic harmony” is a goal of moral
        education at school.

      • Ministry of Education (2001): the document mentions that one of the main objectives of the
        new curriculum is to make students become proud of their Chinese cultural heritage.

      • State Council (2004): the document mentions several times the importance of educating youth
        regarding Chinese cultural and ethnic heritage. It also states that moral education needs to
        establish the sentiment of Chinese ethnic pride among the youth.

      • Ministry of Education (2004): specifies Chinese ethnic pride as one of the main objectives of
        the new curriculum.

                                                   A.10
      • Added and modified sections in the new curriculum:
           – “Principles of dealing with relationships among ethnic groups: equality, unity, and all
             prosperous together”
           – “The eternal Chinese ethnic spirit”
           – “Promoting the Chinese ethnic spirit”
      • Added and modified items in the new Gaokao framework:
           – The basic principles of dealing with multi-ethnic relationships in China
           – The inclusiveness of the Chinese culture
           – Each ethnic group contributes to the Chinese culture
           – The core of the Chinese ethnic spirit
           – The contemporary characteristics of the Chinese ethnic spirit

D.5     State intervention in markets
      • State Council (1999): not mentioned.
      • Ministry of Education (2001): not mentioned.
      • State Council (2004): the document states that “the moral education of the youth should cor-
        respond to the reality of the socialist market economy.”
      • Ministry of Education (2004): the document specifies that one of main goals of the curriculum
        is to make students understand the meaning of “socialist market economy.” The framework
        also adds sections such as “the role government plays in market activities,” “one cannot con-
        struct socialist market economy without the state’s macro-adjustment and intervention.”
      • Added and modified sections in the new curriculum:
           – “Limitations of market allocation of resources”
           – “Basic characteristics of the socialist market economy”
           – “Strengthening the state’s macroeconomic regulations and controls”
           – “Functions of fiscal policies”
           – “How to correctly utilize fiscal policies”
           – “The concept of public goods”
      • Added and modified items in the new Gaokao framework:
           – Market adjustment and its limitations
           – Market allocation of resources
           – Basic characteristics of the socialist market economy
           – Public finance and infrastructure construction
           – Public finance and macroeconomic regulations and controls
           – Public finance and the guarantee of people’s living standard

                                                   A.11
D.6     Attitudes toward the environment
      • State Council (1999): not mentioned.

      • Ministry of Education (2001): specifies that equipping students with “basic consciousness of
        the environment” is one of the objectives of the new curriculum.

      • State Council (2004): one of the main goals of youths’ moral construction is to establish their
        “consciousness of the environment,” as well as “the basic ability to handle the relationship
        between men and nature.”

      • Ministry of Education (2004): the document does not explicitly mention environment in its
        main objectives section. However, the framework adds sections on topics such as “sustainable
        development path” into the new curriculum.

      • Added sections in the new curriculum:

           – “New demands of economic development”
           – “Scientific outlook on development”
           – “Sustainable and balanced economic development”

      • Added items in the new Gaokao framework:

           – Scientific outlook on development
           – Sustainable and balanced economic development




                                                 A.12
Appendix E           Survey
E.1     Recruitment Email for Peking University Online Survey (2013)
In English:

           Dear Students,

           Greetings! This is a research study about young people in China, consisting of
       online survey questions and some simple online economic games. It is distributed to
       all undergraduate students at Peking University. This survey is organized by Univer-
       sity of California at Berkeley, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and
       Guanghua School of Management at Peking University. We welcome your participation.

           Our survey aims to understand Chinese young people’s opinions on political institu-
       tions, social issues, economic activities, and so on. The information we collect will only
       be used for academic research. There is no right or wrong answer to these questions.
       Your honesty and patience in answering these questions will be extremely helpful to our
       academic study, which will foster the creation of human knowledge.

           The entire study (online survey & online economic games) will take about 30 min-
       utes to complete. Each student can only complete one survey. With your student ID,
       you will be rewarded with at least RMB 40 for your participation. Depending on your
       responses, you can also earn up to RMB 110 in the economic games. Furthermore, you
       will be entered into a drawing that gives out 1 iPad with Retina Display, 5 iPad Minis,
       and 10 iPod Shuffles.

           Please note that you have to be at least 18 years old to be able to participate in this
       survey.

          If you are interested in participating in this study, please click on the link below:
       <link>

         Peking University, Guanghua School of Management
       May 6th, 2013


      In Chinese:

           亲爱的同学：

        见解独到的你，是否对中国的政治和社会有自己的见解？天资聪颖的你，是
       否想体验一下“高智商”的经济学游戏？现在，我们提供了一个机会让如此优秀的
       你发表独到见解、并且赢取高端大气上档次的iPad 4 和iPad Mini 幸运大奖！
        这是一份针对中国年轻人“社会观念和风险态度”的问卷调查和在线经济学小
       游戏，由美国加州大学伯克利分校（UC Berkeley）、斯坦福大学（Stanford）、


                                                 A.13
香港科技大学（HKUST)和北京大学光华管理学院（PKU GSM）联合组织。本
次调查针对北京大学本科生（年满18周岁）。我们的研究主要为了了解中国年
轻人的社会观念、价值偏好和风险规避行为等，我们搜集到的所有信息将只用
于学术研究。你的回答将直接有利于学术研究，推动人类知识的开拓。每一个
北大学生的参与都对研究的结果至关重要！

 整个在线调查只需花费你30分钟时间，但报酬非常丰厚！完成整个问卷你即
可凭借学号获得至少40元，至多110元的现金奖励！参加此次研究，你更有机会
抽奖获得1台iPad with Retina Display, 5台iPad Mini和10台iPod Shuffle！

  开始行动起来吧！马上点击以下链接：<link>

  请注意本调查只持续两周，即2013年5月6日（周一）至5月19日（周日），
过时不候哦 上个月第一轮问卷抽奖的幸运儿照片如下。好运齐分享！邀请你的
北大本科朋友一起来参加很攒人品哦！

   北京大学光华管理学院
2013年5月6日




                            A.14
E.2     Detailed description of survey sections
A first set of questions is our focus in the main text of the paper:

      • Personal background. We asked about students’ backgrounds and demographic character-
        istics, including questions about students’ parents’ Communist Party membership, parents’
        professions and residential status (hukou), students’ sources of news, and students’ majors,
        among others. These variables are never examined as outcomes (though we test for balance
        across curricula, which functions as a sort of placebo test).

      • Attitudes toward political participation. We asked students a range of questions related
        to political participation and democracy. We asked factual questions to determine whether
        students were aware of certain electoral institutions; we asked students for their opinions of
        how democratic China is; we asked about students’ plans to vote; and, we asked students about
        their views on the defining characteristics of a democracy. These variables are considered
        as outcomes in our analysis of the effects of the new curriculum’s sharp increase in content
        focused on Chinese democratic institutions.

      • Trust in government officials. We asked students about their trust in the central, provincial,
        and local governments; in courts; in the armed forces; and, in the police. We also asked
        students whether government officials were self-serving or served the interests of the rich and
        powerful. These variables are all outcomes when we evaluate whether new discussions of the
        rule of law, citizen oversight, and constitutional sources of the government’s authority resulted
        in greater trust in government officials.

      • General questions about trust. We asked students about their trust in people generally; and,
        we asked about trust in various non-governmental institutions: NGO’s, banks and the financial
        system, and foreign investors. These variables are “placebo” outcomes when we evaluate
        whether changes in trust in government officials are simply a result of greater trust across
        institutions or groups of people.

      • The “Three Represents”. We asked students which segments of society should play a role in
        shaping government policy. We use the responses as an outcome in our analysis of whether the
        teaching of the Three Represents broadened students’ views of groups that should influence
        policy.

      • Views on minorities. We asked about students’ trust of minorities; we asked whether stu-
        dents viewed Han Chinese and minorities as sharing a common ethnic heritage; and, we asked
        whether students would consider marrying someone from a different ethnic group.6 We also
        asked whether students’ identities were “Chinese”—a question we examine when studying the
        responses of minority students. These variables are examined as outcomes when evaluating
        whether the new curriculum was successful in crafting a common ethnic identity among all
        Chinese, whether Han or minorities.
   6 We had hoped to conduct an Implicit Association Test to complement direct questions about minorities, but imple-

menting the IAT proved logistically difficult. In addition, it was theoretically unclear whether even a persuasive curriculum
change should change implicit attitudes. Still, we hope to use other attitude elicitation mechanisms in future work.




                                                           A.15
    • Views on markets. We asked students whether a market economy is preferable to other eco-
      nomic systems. This is an outcome variable we consider when evaluating whether the new
      curriculum’s emphasis on the need for government intervention in markets affected students’
      views on the economic system.

    • Views on the environment. We asked students several questions about willingness to trade-
      off economic growth for environmental protection. We examine these questions as outcomes
      potentially affected by the new curriculum’s new discussion of environmental issues.

    • Teaching methods. We asked students about several aspects of their classroom experience
      (e.g., encouragement of student participation or the importance of memorization); we also
      asked about teachers’ focus on the gaokao. We examine these variables as outcomes to de-
      termine whether changed teaching practices were associated with the change in educational
      content.

A second set of questions is of interest to us, because the questions touch on important political atti-
tudes; however, these questions are not our focus here because they are not discussed in the govern-
ment documents outlining the curriculum reform, are not associated with changes in the textbooks’
content, or because there is some ambiguity in the government’s desired attitudes. The following
sections are briefly examined in Appendix Table A.1:

    • The wisdom of the masses. We asked students several questions regarding whether “the
      people” do a good job selecting leaders; whether “the people” know whether village heads
      are doing a good job; etc. As we discuss below, we view this issue as an ambiguous one,
      as the government emphasizes that political participation is important, but also that political
      participation is a responsibility.

    • Disobedience. We asked students whether they would disobey or stand up to the government
      if an official does not adhere to the rule of law. Again, this is an ambiguous set of attitudes:
      the government certainly emphasizes officials’ adherence to the rule of law, and also discusses
      the importance of citizen monitoring; however, the government does not want to promote
      excessive disobedience or uncontrolled protests.

    • Political action. We asked students whether they had reported government misconduct; whether
      they had participated in protests; whether they had voted; and, whether they had joined various
      political organizations. We do not focus on these outcomes because college students in China
      do not have many opportunities to engage in political action. Instead, we study political action
      by studying a broader sample of individuals (see Section 5.2 in the main text and Table A.3).

    • Bribery. We asked students about the necessity of making unofficial payments in a variety of
      settings; we also asked about the efficacy of paying bribes and about students’ views on the
      morality of paying bribes. These variables are outcomes closely related to the new curriculum’s
      discussion of the importance of rule of law; however, there is less direct discussion of bribery
      or corruption in the government documents structuring the curriculum reform.

    • Equity/Efficiency tradeoffs. We asked students whether they would be willing to trade-off
      lower growth rates or lower incomes in return for greater equity. We do not focus on these
      questions in the paper because the government’s aims here are competing: growth is a high

                                                 A.16
      priority, as is equity (perhaps with efficiency taking precedence). We also asked students to
      play an incentivized game revealing their preferences regarding equity/efficiency tradeoffs.

Finally, several sections of the survey were not intended to be outcomes in our current analysis of the
impact of the new curriculum on students’ political attitudes:

    • Career preferences. We asked students about the types of organizations and locations in
      which they would prefer to work.

    • Risk preferences. We asked students about their taste for risk generally, in a hypothetical
      investment decision, and regarding career choices.

    • Investments. The new curriculum included a discussion of modern financial markets and
      assets that was not part of the old curriculum. We asked students about their taste for investing
      in risky assets, and about their experience investing in different assets.

    • Students’ views on the determinants of success and the returns to schooling. We asked
      students for their opinions on the determinants of success in Chinese society (hard work, con-
      nections, etc.); we also asked them a set of questions eliciting their beliefs about the returns to
      schooling.

    • Personality. We asked students questions from a standard “Big 5” personality traits survey.

    • Values. We asked about the values students considered important (e.g., independence, imagi-
      nation, religious faith, obedience, etc.).

    • Incentivized risk preference game. We asked students to play an incentivized game to evalu-
      ate their risk preferences. We do not examine this as an outcome, but we do use it to “validate”
      students’ stated preference responses to a direct question about their preferences.




                                                 A.17
E.3   Screenshot of online survey




                                    A.18
E.4   Photo of student respondent (raffle winner)




                                        A.19
Appendix F          Additional outcomes
In addition to the main outcomes of interest that we study in the main text, a second set of questions
is of interest to us, because the questions touch on important political attitudes; however, these ques-
tions are not our focus here because they are not discussed in the government documents outlining
the curriculum reform, are not associated with changes in the textbooks’ content, or because there is
some ambiguity in the government’s desired attitudes.

Views on the wisdom of the masses The emphasis on Chinese democratic institutions in govern-
ment documents outlining the reforms, and in the new curriculum, raises an interesting question:
do students who studied under the new curriculum trust in the wisdom of the people more than
students who studied under the old curriculum? This is ambiguous from the discussion of democ-
racy in Chinese government documents and in the new textbooks: while a great deal of attention is
devoted to discussing political participation, there is also an emphasis on voting and political par-
ticipation as a responsibility. The new curriculum (quoted in the main text) states, “Citizens have
to continue improving themselves in participating in democratic elections, so that they can exercise
their voting rights well.” We asked students several questions in the survey to study students’ views
on “the people’s” competence in choosing good officials; we construct our standard index based on
these questions, with variables coded such that more positive beliefs about the wisdom of the masses
would lead to a positive change in the index.
     In Table A.1, column 1, we present the estimated effect of the new curriculum on students’
views of the wisdom of the masses in selecting leaders. We find that, if anything, students under
the new curriculum are more skeptical about the wisdom of the masses than are students under the
old curriculum. This is consistent with the emphasis in the new curriculum on the responsibilities of
citizens under a democracy, and with some skepticism among students regarding the preparation of
the majority of the Chinese population for those responsibilities.

Political disobedience Along with discussions of rule of law and democracy (emphasized above),
there is a significant discussion in the new curriculum of the importance of citizen monitoring of
government officials. Active citizen monitoring of government is another ambiguous issue among
Chinese officials (see, e.g., Lorentzen, 2013): on the one hand, monitoring of local officials is
seen as crucial for the maintenance of social order and for limiting corruption. On the other hand,
monitoring—often made effective in the form of protests—can be destabilizing (and the new cur-
riculum certainly does not promote protesting or disobeying the law). To determine whether the
increased emphasis on monitoring officials affected students’ views on disobeying the government
or engaging in protests, we included several questions about attitudes toward “disobedience.” We
again construct an index based on these questions, coded such that a positive change in the index
indicates more positive views toward protest and disobedience.
     In Table A.1, column 2, we present the estimated effect of the new curriculum on students’ views
on political disobedience. We again find no statistically significant effect of the new curriculum, and
if anything students view disobedience more negatively if they studied under the new curriculum.

Political actions Next, we examine students’ reported political actions, rather than attitudes. These
reported actions are not our focus: Chinese college students typically have very little time or oppor-
tunity to engage in political acts such as protesting government policies; voting opportunities may


                                                 A.20
vary depending on students’ hometowns, ages, and the timing of elections. Still, we asked students
about these activities. We also asked them whether they participated in political organizations. We
construct an index of students’ reported political activities, and find no effect of the new curricu-
lum on this index (Table A.1, column 3). We do find positive effects that are statistically significant
(p < 0.10) on joining non-CCP political organizations (detailed results available from the authors
upon request). We discuss the relationship between stated attitudes and political behavior using a
broader sample of Chinese individuals in the main text, Section 5.2 and present empirical results in
Table A.3.

Views on unofficial payments Although the Chinese government does not specifically discuss
bribery or corruption in its documents shaping the curriculum reform, the emphasis on government
legitimacy arising from adherence to the rule of law throughout the government documents, and
throughout the new curriculum, suggests that students’ views on the role of bribery in Chinese society
might also be affected by studying under the new curriculum. To examine whether this was the
case, we asked students a range of questions about the prevalence and efficacy of bribery in different
settings. We construct our standard index using these questions, with components coded such that the
index is more positive when students view bribes as less necessary, less prevalent, and less effective.
     In Table A.1, column 4, we present the estimated effect of the new curriculum on students’ views
on unofficial payments and find that these move in the direction one would expect: students under the
new curriculum generally see bribery as less necessary in various settings—for example, interacting
with traffic police or requesting official documents—and also view bribes as less effective (these
results are statistically significant at the 10% level).

Views on efficiency/equity tradeoffs Finally, we examine whether students’ views on tradeoffs
between efficiency and equity have changed as a result of studying under the new curriculum. The
curriculum and government documents are somewhat ambiguous on this point: while there is cer-
tainly discussion of concerns about equity and social inequality, economic development and effi-
ciency often seem to take precedence over concerns regarding equity. Because social inequality is
such a pressing issue in contemporary China, we included questions (and an incentivized game) to
gauge students’ preferences with respect to equity/efficiency tradeoffs. We construct an index based
on several survey questions and the incentivized game, with more positive values of the index indi-
cating preferences for greater efficiency (which seems to be emphasized under the new curriculum).
    In Table A.1, column 4, we present the estimated effect of the new curriculum on students’ pref-
erences with respect to equity/efficiency tradeoffs. We find that studying under the new curriculum,
indeed, has a significant effect of moving students toward favoring efficiency over equity.

Principal component analysis As another check of the robustness of our results, we present results
estimating the effects of the new curriculum on our various indices, but rather than using a weighted
sum of standardized outcomes within a category, we examine the first principal component of the
outcomes within a category. In Table A.2, we show our baseline regressions for the outcomes for
which we previously used z-score indices (compare to Table 9, Panel A). One can see that our results
are very similar constructing our indices in this alternative manner.

Attitudes and behavior In section 5.2, we relate our finding of increased trust in government of-
ficials among students exposed to the new curriculum to behavioral outcomes, as observed in the

                                                A.21
AsiaBarometer survey. This survey asks respondents about their trust in various government offi-
cials—central government, local government, courts, armed forces, and police. The only differences
between our survey questions and the AsiaBarometer questions are, first, that AsiaBarometer re-
spondents indicate their level of trust on a 1–4 scale, rather than a 1–5 scale; and, second, that we
specifically ask about trust in both local and provincial governments, while AsiaBarometer asks only
about trust in local government. Based on the questions in the AsiaBarometer survey, we can also
construct a z-score index of trust in government officials, just as in the main analysis of this paper.
To ensure comparability with our survey sample, we limit our analysis to Chinese respondents with
at least 12 years of schooling.
     The AsiaBarometer survey also asks the following two questions about political action:
     Here is a list of actions that people sometimes take as citizens. For each of these, please tell me
     whether you, personally, have never, once, or more than once done any of these things during the
     past three years:
     1.   Attended a demonstration or protest march.
     2.   Refused to pay taxes or fees to the government.
    We regress reported political actions on reported levels of trust in government officials, control-
ling for respondents’ age (and age squared) and gender.7 Across trust measures, we find that greater
trust in government officials is associated with significantly less frequent participation in demon-
strations and protests; we also find that across our measures of trust in government officials, greater
self-reported trust is associated with significantly less self-reported refusal to pay taxes and fees (re-
sults are presented in Table A.3). Looking at the summary trust index, we find that increasing the
index by one standard deviation makes an individual 13.5 percentage points less likely to attend a
demonstration, or 5 percentage points less likely to refuse to pay taxes or fees. In section 5.2 above,
we then put these findings in relation to the changes in trust induced by the new curriculum.




  7 Excluding   these controls does not affect our results.


                                                              A.22
                           Table A.1: Other outcomes




                                                                                                                                 (Equity/efficiency)
                               (Mass democracy)




                                                                        (Political action)
                                                   (Disobedience)
                               z-score index



                                                   z-score index



                                                                        z-score index



                                                                                                    z-score index



                                                                                                                                 z-score index
                                                                                                    (Bribes)
    Dependent variable:
                                  (1)                (2)                   (3)                        (4)                            (5)

       New Curriculum        -0.134               -0.040               -0.025                      0.124*                        0.131*
                             [0.092]              [0.076]              [0.083]                     [0.072]                       [0.078]
                 p-value     (0.146)              (0.601)              (0.761)                     (0.086)                       (0.098)
            Observations      1,529   1,755      1,698     1,733      1,610
               Mean DV          0        0          0        0          0
            Std.Dev. DV         1        1          1        1          1
  *: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set of
  province and cohort fixed effects (not reported). Robust standard errors in
  brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level. Number of clusters: 116.



                   Table A.2: First principal components
                                                                                                         (Minorities, non-Han)
                                                                               (Minorities, Han)




                                                                                                                                        (Environment)
                                                     (Trust in gov.)
                             (Democracy)
                             First p.c.



                                                     First p.c.



                                                                               First p.c.



                                                                                                         First p.c.



                                                                                                                                        First p.c.




  Dependent variable:
                               (1)                      (2)                       (3)                        (4)                            (5)

     New Curriculum        0.303***               0.495***                  0.105                      0.230                         -0.173
                            [0.104]                [0.167]                 [0.094]                    [0.355]                       [0.113]
         Observations       1,724      1,753       1654      141      1,708
             Mean DV          0          0           0        0         0
          Std.Dev. DV       1.234      1.981      1.204     1.118     1.141
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions include a full set
of province and cohort fixed effects (not reported). Robust standard errors in
brackets, clustered at the province×cohort level. Number of clusters: 116; 64
(column 5).




                                                  A.23
                                                          Table A.3: Outcomes from AsiaBarometer
             Dependent variable:              Attended a demonstration or protest march                        Refused to pay taxes or fees to the government
                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)      (11)         (12)

         Trust central government   -0.017*                                                           0.002
                                    [0.010]                                                          [0.011]
          Trust local government              -0.020**                                                           -0.023***
                                               [0.009]                                                             [0.008]
                     Trust courts                        -0.021**                                                             -0.018*
                                                          [0.009]                                                             [0.010]
               Trust armed forces                                    -0.005                                                              -0.016
                                                                     [0.007]                                                            [0.013]
                     Trust police                                              -0.020**                                                            -0.015*
                                                                                [0.009]                                                            [0.008]
                    z-score Index                                                         -0.022**                                                              -0.011
                                                                                           [0.009]                                                              [0.009]
                    Observations      956        958        953        953       955         875       956           958        953        953       955          875




A.24
                       Mean DV      0.0166     0.0166     0.0166     0.0166    0.0166      0.0166    0.0313        0.0313     0.0313     0.0313    0.0313       0.0313
                    Std.Dev. DV      0.160      0.160      0.160      0.160     0.160       0.160     0.208         0.208      0.208      0.208     0.208        0.208
       *: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. All regressions control for gender, age, and age2 . Samples restricted to individuals completed at least high school
       education. The z-score index in column 6 and 12 (weighting by the inverse covariance of the standardizes outcomes) is computed following Anderson (2008).
