                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ASSET PRICING WITH COUNTERCYCLICAL HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION
                                 RISK

                                   George M. Constantinides
                                        Anisha Ghosh

                                      Working Paper 20110
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20110


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




We thank Lorenzo Garlappi, the late Rick Green, Burton Hollifield, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh, Thomas Philippon, Bryan Routledge, Ken Singleton (the Editor), Chris Telmer,
Sheridan Titman, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Carnegie-Mellon
University, Concordia University, the EFA 2015 Annual Meeting in Vienna, the ESSFM 2015
conference in Gerzensee, the NBER 2015 summer institute, Georgetown University, New York
University, the 2015 Annual Meeting of the SED, the University of British Columbia, the
University of California at Los Angeles, the University of Chicago, the University of Miami, the
University of Michigan, the University of Southern California, and the University of Texas at
Austin for their helpful advice and feedback. Constantinides received financial support from the
Center for Research in Security prices, the University of Chicago, as trustee/director of the DFA
group of funds, SW7 Holdings, and Cook County Illinois Investment Policy Committee, and as
member of the advisory board of FTSE-Russell. Ghosh did not receive financial support from any
interested party and does not hold paid or unpaid positions in relevant nonprofit organizations or
profit-making entities. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by George M. Constantinides and Anisha Ghosh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Pricing with Countercyclical Household Consumption Risk
George M. Constantinides and Anisha Ghosh
NBER Working Paper No. 20110
May 2014, Revised November 2016
JEL No. D31,D52,E32,E44,G01,G12,J60

                                        ABSTRACT

We show that shocks to household consumption growth are negatively skewed, persistent,
countercyclical, and drive asset prices. We construct a parsimonious model where heterogeneous
households have recursive preferences. A single state variable drives the conditional cross-
sectional moments of household consumption growth. The estimated model fits well the
unconditional cross-sectional moments of household consumption growth and the moments of the
risk-free rate, equity premium, price-dividend ratio, and aggregate dividend and consumption
growth. The model-implied risk-free rate and price-dividend ratio are procyclical while the
market return has countercyclical mean and variance. Finally, household consumption risk
explains the cross-section of excess returns.


George M. Constantinides
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmc@ChicagoBooth.edu

Anisha Ghosh
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh PA 15213
anishagh@andrew.cmu.edu
       Considerable empirical evidence documents that households face a substantial amount of

uninsurable idiosyncratic labor income risk. The time-variation in idiosyncratic labor income risk

plays a central role in understanding several observed phenomena in macroeconomics and

finance. Earlier studies focus on the cross-sectional variance of idiosyncratic shocks, arguing that

they are countercyclical (e.g., Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004)) and can, in principle,

account for the high historically observed level of the equity premium (e.g., Constantinides and

Duffie (1996)). More recently, using a very large data set from the U.S. Social Security

Administration, Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014) find that the left skewness of the

idiosyncratic shocks is strongly countercyclical. Further, contrary to prior research, they find that

the cross-sectional variance is not countercyclical but rather remains mostly flat over the

business cycle even after controlling for observable characteristics like age and average past

earnings. Krebs (2007) argues that higher job displacement risk in recessions gives rise to the

countercyclical left skewness of earnings shocks and that this can generate a substantial cost of

business cycles.

       In this paper we study the implications of countercyclical left skewness in the cross-

sectional distribution of household consumption growth on aggregate asset prices. 1 We construct

a parsimonious dynamic equilibrium model with two key ingredients. First, the economy is

inhabited by a continuum of heterogeneous households with identical Epstein-Zin (1989)

recursive preferences. Second, the heterogeneity among households arises from their labor

income processes which are modeled as an exponential function of a Poisson mixture of normal

distributions. This specification generates higher-order moments in the cross-sectional

distribution of household consumption growth in a tractable fashion. In fact, the parameter

driving the Poisson process is the single state variable—hereafter referred to as household



                                                                                                   2
consumption risk—that drives the conditional cross-sectional third central moment of household

consumption growth. Aggregate consumption growth is modeled as an i.i.d. process to

emphasize that the explanatory power of the model does not derive from such predictability.

       We demonstrate that under certain conditions there exists a no-trade equilibrium. To our

knowledge, this is the first paper to establish the existence of equilibrium in a heterogeneous-

agent, incomplete-markets economy where investors have recursive preferences. For the log-

linearized version of the model, we obtain in closed form the equilibrium risk-free rate, expected

market return, and price-dividend ratio as functions of the single state variable, household

consumption risk.

       We estimate the model using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) approach,

targeting not only the model-implied moments of the market return, the risk-free rate, and the

market-wide price-dividend ratio, but also the first three central moments of the cross-sectional

distribution of household consumption growth. The estimated model provides a good fit for the

time-series averages of the moments of household consumption growth. It also matches well the

unconditional mean, volatility, and autocorrelation of the risk-free rate, thereby addressing the

risk-free rate puzzle, provides a good fit for the unconditional mean, volatility, and

autocorrelation of the market return, thereby addressing the equity premium and excess volatility

puzzles, and it matches well the mean, volatility, and autocorrelation of the market price-

dividend ratio and aggregate dividend growth, targets that challenge a number of other models.

Consistent with empirical evidence, the model implies that the risk-free rate and price-dividend

ratio are procyclical while the expected market return, its variance, and the equity premium are

countercyclical. The model is also consistent with the salient features of aggregate consumption

growth observed in the data: realistic mean and variance, and lack of predictability. Furthermore,



                                                                                                3
the third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth

explains the cross-section of excess returns of size-, book-to-market equity-, and industry-sorted

portfolios as well as the three Fama and French (1993) factors do.

          Uninsurable idiosyncratic income shocks is a new paradigm in asset pricing that does not

rely on a predictable component in aggregate consumption growth, as in the long-run risks

paradigm, time-varying and generally high levels of risk aversion, as in the external habit

paradigm, and both large and frequent aggregate macroeconomic disasters, as in the rare

disasters paradigm. This paper is the first to empirically establish that observed uninsurable

idiosyncratic consumption shocks can explain several observed time-series and cross-sectional

patterns in asset market data as well as several aspects of the cross-sectional distribution of

household consumption growth.

          Figure 1 displays the time series of the skewness in the cross-sectional distribution of

quarterly household consumption growth over the period 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The third central

moment is mostly negative and countercyclical, with a correlation with NBER recessions

between -24.9% and -21.7%. We note that our estimates are noisy because of the measurement

error in the survey-based CEX database that we employ in our analysis. Nevertheless, the results

suggest that the large countercyclical household income shocks identified in Guvenen, Ozkan,

and Song (2014) are transmitted to households as large countercyclical household consumption

shocks.

                                           -figure 1 here-

          Shocks to household consumption growth are persistent and so are the estimated

moments of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth: the

autocorrelation of the third central moment is between 12.4% and 18.0%. Similarly, the



                                                                                                4
autocorrelation of the fifth percentile of the cross-sectional distribution, an alternative measure of

skewness, is between 53.4% and 79.2%. The persistent risks play a pivotal role in matching the

data, given that the estimated model implies that in the context of recursive preferences,

households exhibit a preference for early resolution of uncertainty.

       This paper draws on several strands of the literature. First, it builds on the empirical

evidence of Attanasio and Davis (1996), Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), Cochrane

(1991), and Townsend (1994) that consumption insurance is incomplete. Constantinides (1982)

highlights the pivotal role of complete consumption insurance, showing that the equilibrium of

such an economy with households that have heterogeneous endowments and vonNeumann-

Morgenstern preferences is isomorphic to the equilibrium of a homogeneous-household

economy. Mankiw (1986) shows that, in a two-period economy with incomplete consumption

insurance, the concentration of aggregate shocks among the population is an important

determinant of the level of the equity premium. Constantinides and Duffie (1996) further show

that, in the absence of complete consumption insurance, given the aggregate income and

dividend processes, any given (arbitrage-free) price process can be supported in the equilibrium

of a heterogeneous-household economy with judiciously chosen persistent idiosyncratic income

shocks. Our paper provides empirical evidence that these shocks are negatively skewed,

persistent, and countercyclical, and, more importantly, that they drive asset prices and excess

returns.

       This paper also draws on Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) and Cogley (2002),

who address the role of incomplete consumption insurance in determining excess returns in the

context of economies in which households have power utility. Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy

(2002) present empirical evidence that the equity and value premia are consistent over the 1982



                                                                                                    5
to 1996 period, with a stochastic discount factor (SDF) obtained as the average of individual

households’ marginal rates of substitution with low and economically plausible values of the

relative risk aversion (RRA) coefficient. Since these premia are not explained with a SDF

obtained as the per capita marginal rate of substitution with low values of the RRA coefficient,

the evidence supports the incomplete consumption insurance hypothesis. Cogley (2002)

calibrates a model with incomplete consumption insurance that recognizes the variance and

skewness of the shocks to households’ consumption growth and obtains an annual equity

premium of 4.5% to 5.75% with an RRA coefficient of 15. Being framed in terms of economies

in which households are endowed with power utility, neither of these papers allows the RRA

coefficient and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) to be disentangled, a step that

appears to be important to address the level and time-series properties of the risk-free rate, price-

dividend ratio, and market return.

       In contrast to the two papers above, the present investigation disentangles the RRA

coefficient and the EIS with recursive preferences. The estimated EIS is low and the model is not

subject to the criticism of Dew-Becker and Giglio (2016) and Epstein, Farhi, and Strzalecki

(2014) on the extreme implications of models with high EIS regarding the preference for early

resolution of uncertainty. In addition, the model addresses the level and time-series properties of

the risk-free rate, the price-dividend ratio, and the market return, and it also addresses the cross-

section of size-, book-to-market equity-, and industry-sorted portfolio returns.

       By introducing recursive preferences, the Euler equations for consumption can no longer

be written in terms of household consumption growth alone. It therefore becomes necessary to

explicitly model the time-series processes of household consumption and to express the SDF in

terms of the consumption-wealth ratio. This complicates model construction and estimation but



                                                                                                   6
has the major side benefit that we no longer need to work with noisy time series of the cross-

sectional moments of household consumption growth, but with time-series averages of these

moments.

       The paper further draws on the literature on macroeconomic crises starting with Rietz

(1988) and revisited by Barro (2006) and others as an explanation for the equity premium and

related puzzles. 2 This literature builds on domestic and international evidence that

macroeconomic crises are associated with a large and sustained drop in aggregate consumption

that increases the marginal rate of substitution of the representative consumer. The basic

mechanism of macroeconomic crises in this literature is similar in spirit to that in our paper in

that a large decline in the consumption of some or all households increases the marginal rates of

substitution of these households. The two classes of models part ways, however, in their

quantitative implications. As Constantinides (2008) points out, Barro (2006) calibrates the model

by treating the peak-to-trough decline in aggregate consumption during macroeconomic crises

(which last on average four years) as if this decline occurs in one year, thus magnifying by a

factor of four the size of the observed annual disaster risks. Similar ad hoc magnification of the

annual aggregate consumption decline during macroeconomic crises is employed in a number of

papers that follow Barro (2006). Using an econometric methodology that allows the probabilities

attached to different states of the world to differ from their sample frequencies, and is therefore

robust to rare events problem in the data, Julliard and Ghosh (2012) reject the rare events

explanation for the equity premium puzzle. They show that to explain the equity premium puzzle

with power utility preferences of the representative agent and plausible RRA after the multi-year

nature of disasters is taken into account, one should be willing to believe that economic disasters

occur every 6.6 years, on average. Moreover, Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011) demonstrate



                                                                                                 7
that options imply smaller probabilities of extreme outcomes than the probabilities estimated

from international macroeconomic data.

       In contrast to these models, our model relies on shocks to household consumption

growth, with a frequency and annual size consistent with empirical observation. These shocks

support the observed time-series properties of the risk-free rate, market return, and market price-

dividend ratio. Furthermore, the shocks to household consumption “average out” across

households and do not imply unrealistically large annual shocks to aggregate consumption

growth.

       Finally, this paper relates to the literature on the cross-section of excess returns. We show

that the third central moment of the cross-sectional household consumption growth distribution

explains the cross-section of excess returns on the size-, book-to-market equity-, and industry-

sorted portfolios. The results from our one-factor model are comparable to those of the three-

factor Fama-French (1993) model.

       The paper is organized as follows. The model and its implications for consumption

growth and prices are presented in Section I. We discuss the data in Section II. In Section III, we

present summary statistics of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth.

The empirical methodology and main results are presented in Section IV. We further interpret

the results in Section V. In Section VI, we discuss implications of household consumption risk

for the cross-section of excess returns. We conclude in Section VII. Derivations are provided in

appendices.




                                                                                                  8
                                         I. The Model


        We consider an exchange economy with a single nondurable consumption good serving

as the numeraire. There are an arbitrary number of traded securities (for example, equities,

corporate bonds, default-free bonds, and derivatives) in positive or zero net supply.

Conspicuously absent are markets for trading the households’ wealth portfolios. A household’s

wealth portfolio is defined as a portfolio with dividend flow equal to the household’s

consumption flow. It is in this sense that the market is incomplete, thereby preventing

households from insuring their idiosyncratic income shocks. The sum total of traded securities in

positive net supply is referred to as the “market.” The market pays net dividend Dt at time t, has

ex-dividend price Pt , and has normalized supply of one unit. We assume that households are

endowed with an equal number of market shares at time 0 but can trade in these shares and all

other securities (except the wealth portfolios) thereafter.

        Aggregate consumption is denoted by Ct , log consumption by ct ≡ log ( Ct ) , and

consumption growth by ∆ct +1 ≡ ct +1 − ct . We assume that aggregate consumption growth is i.i.d.

normal: ∆ct +1 =µ + σ aε t +1 ,            . By construction, aggregate consumption growth has

zero autocorrelation, is unpredictable, and is uncorrelated with business cycles. We also consider

the case in which expected growth in aggregate consumption is a function of the state variable

that is correlated with the business cycle and obtain similar results. We choose to present the

case in which expected growth in aggregate consumption is uncorrelated with the business cycle

in order to highlight the role of variation in household consumption risk along the business cycle.

Aggregate labor income is defined as I=t Ct − Dt .


                                                                                                 9
        There are an infinite number of distinct households and their number is normalized to

one. Household i is endowed with labor income=
                                             I i ,t δ i ,t Ct − Dt at date t, where




                             t
                 δ i ,t exp  ∑
                 =
                             s =1
                                     {( j
                                        1/2
                                        i,s sηi , s − ji , sssη
                                                            2
                                                                        (                               )}
                                                              / 2 ) + j i , s   i , s − j i , s s / 2  .
                                                                            1/2                   2
                                                                                                                          (1)




The exponent consists of two terms inside the summation. The first term captures shocks to

household income that are related to the business cycle, for example, job loss by the prime wage-

earner in the household. The business cycle is tracked by the single state variable in the

economy, ωt > 0 , which follows a Markov process to be specified below. The state variable

drives the household income shocks through the random variable ji ,s , which has a Poisson

distribution with prob ( ji=
                           ,s n=) e −ωs ωsn / n !, =
                                                   n 0,1,...∞ , E ( ji ,s ) = ωs , and is independent of all

primitive random variables in the economy. The random variable                                                   is i.i.d. and

independent of all primitive random variables in the economy. Thus, the first term is the sum of

variables that are normal, conditional on the realization of ji ,s . The volatility of the conditional


                      , s s , which is driven by the variable ji , s and has a distribution driven by the
normal variable is ji1/2

state variable. 3 The second term of the exponent captures shocks to household income that are

unrelated to the business cycle, for example, the death of the prime wage-earner in the

household. It is defined in a similar manner as the first term with the major difference being that

   is a parameter instead of a state variable.

        This particular specification of household income captures several key features of

household income and consumption. First, since the income of the ith household at date t is

                                                                                                                           10
determined by the sum of all past idiosyncratic shocks, household income shocks are permanent,

which is broadly consistent with empirical evidence that household income shocks are persistent

(e.g., Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004)). Second, the joint assumptions that the number of

households is infinite and the income shocks are symmetric across households allow us to apply

the law of large numbers and show that the identity I=
                                                     t Ct − Dt is respected. 4 Third, this

particular specification of household income, combined with the symmetric and homogeneous

household preferences to be defined below, is shown to imply that households choose not to

trade in which case household consumption is given simply by Cit = I it + Dt = δ it Ct . Finally, the

                                                                           C /C 
cross-sectional distribution of relative household consumption growth, log  i ,t +1 t +1  , has a
                                                                            Ci ,t / Ct 

negative third central moment. Its moments depend on the parameters of the distribution of ji ,s ,

which are driven in turn by the state variable                 . Hereafter, we refer to the state variable as

“household risk.”

        We assume that households have identical recursive preferences,



                                                                                              1/ (1−1/ψ )


                                                                                )
                                                                                    1−1/ψ
                                                                                           
                           (1 − δ ) ( Ci ,t )
                    U i ,t =
                           
                                              1−1/ψ
                                                        (
                                                    + δ Et (U i ,t +1 ) 
                                                           
                                                                        1−γ

                                                                            
                                                                                     1−γ
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                (2)



where δ is the subjective discount factor, γ is the RRA coefficient, ψ is the EIS, and

       1−γ 5
θ≡            . As shown in Epstein and Zin (1989), the SDF of household i is
     1 − 1 /ψ




                                                                                                                11
                                                        θ                                
                               SDFi ,t +1 exp  θ log δ − Dci ,t +1 + (θ − 1) ri ,c ,t +1  ,
                               =
                                                        ψ                                                    (3)



where ∆ci ,t +1 ≡ log ( Ci ,t +1 ) − log ( Ci ,t ) and ri ,c ,t +1 is the log return on the ith household’s private

valuation of its wealth portfolio. As we discuss in Section V.C, recursive preferences appear to

be necessary to explain the equity premium and risk-free rate puzzles.

        We conjecture and verify that autarchy is an equilibrium. Autarchy implies that the

consumption of household i at date t is Ci ,t = I i ,t + Dt = δ i ,t Ct and household consumption growth

Ci ,t +1 / Ci ,t = δ i ,t +1Ct +1 / δ i ,t Ct is independent of the household’s consumption level. 6 This feature,

combined with the property that the household’s utility is homogeneous in the household’s

consumption level, implies that the return on the household’s private valuation of its wealth

portfolio is independent of the household’s consumption level. The SDF of household i is

therefore independent of the household’s consumption level—it is specific to household i only

through the term δ i ,t +1 / δ i ,t . In pricing any security, other than households’ wealth portfolios, the

term δ i ,t +1 / δ i ,t is integrated out of the pricing equation and the private valuation of any security

is common across households. This result verifies the conjecture that autarchy is an equilibrium.

We formalize this argument in Appendix B.

        In deriving the result that autarchy is an equilibrium and the equilibrium consumption of

household i at date t is Ci ,t = δ i ,t Ct , we rely on the assumption that the market is incomplete and

hence prevents households from insuring any component of their idiosyncratic income shocks. A

reader who finds implausible the assumption that households cannot insure any component of

their idiosyncratic income shocks and the resulting implication that autarchy is an equilibrium


                                                                                                                12
may simply interpret Ci ,t = δ i ,t Ct as the post-trade consumption of household i. Our empirical

methodology is consistent with either of these two interpretations of the relation Ci ,t = δ i ,t Ct

because we use household consumption data and not household income data. The degree of

market incompleteness and the relation between household income and household consumption

are outside the scope of the present investigation.

       The logarithm of cross-sectional relative household consumption growth is




                                                                                                             .




Its conditional central moments, derived in Appendix C, are as follows:



                                        Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1                               2
                              µ1  log                                 −σ 2ωt +1 / 2 − σ ω
                                                            | ωt +1  =                    / 2,              (4)
                                          C       / C
                                        i ,t t                      




                                                                            (               )
                     Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1            
                                         | ωt +1  = (σ + σ / 4 ) ωt +1 + σ + σ / 4 ω
                                                                               2    4
            µ2  log                                    2   4                          ,                      (5)
               
                     Ci ,t / Ct                  

and


                                                                                   (                  )
                     Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1            
                                                      − ( 3σ 4 / 2 + σ 6 / 8 ) ωt +1 − 3σ / 2 + σ / 8 ω
                                                                                          4        6
            µ3  log                   | ωt +1  =                                                 .       (6)
               
                     Ci ,t / Ct                  




                                                                                                                 13
         Equation (5) shows that the variance of the distribution of cross-sectional relative

household consumption growth increases as household risk increases. Empirically, we find that

the variance of cross-sectional relative household consumption growth is mildly countercyclical.

         Equation (6) shows that the third central moment is always negative and becomes more

so as household risk increases. 7 Moreover, the model can generate any desired value of the third

central moment, that is its maximum achievable absolute value is unbounded from above.

Empirically, we find that the third central moment is mostly negative and mildly countercyclical.

Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014) find that the skewness of household income shocks is

strongly countercyclical. This evidence allows us to associate an increase in household risk with

recessions. 8

         For computational convenience, we define xt in terms of the state variable ωt as


     (
xt ≡ e ( 1)
      γ γ− σ    2
                    /2
                           )
                         − 1 ωt . Since xt is proportional to ωt , we sometimes refer to xt as household risk,


in place of ωt . In our estimation, we limit the range of the RRA coefficient to γ > 1 , which

implies that xt > 0 . We assume that xt follows an autoregressive gamma process, ARG (1),

which is often referred to as a positive AR (1) process:



                                                                    ,                                        (7)




where ν > 0, ξ > 0 , and               >0,       is a martingale difference sequence, E [ xt +1 | xt=
                                                                                                    ] νx + ρ xt ,

and var ( xt +1 | x=
                   t ) νxrx
                         2
                           + 2 xt . 9 Thus, the autocorrelation of household risk is             . As we show

below, the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and expected market return are affine functions of

household risk and therefore their autocorrelation is also              .

                                                                                                              14
        The heteroskedasticity of the innovation in household risk implies that the volatility of

household risk is increasing in household risk, var ( xt +1 | x=
                                                               t ) νxrx
                                                                     2
                                                                       + 2 xt . This property drives

key features of the economy. As we shall see shortly, the model implies that the variance of the

risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio of the stock market, and expected market return are increasing

in household risk and therefore are increasing in recessions.

        In Appendix D, equation (D4), we calculate households’ common SDF as



                                                            2 /2
                                                       ( +1)σ          
                                                   egg
                                        θ log δ +ω                   −1 −gDct +1 + (θ −1){h0 + h1 A0 −( A0 + A1 xt )}+ l xt +1
                     ( SDF )t +1 = e                                  
                                                                                                                                  ,   (8)




where the parameters A0 , A1 , and λ are defined in Appendix D by equations (D2), (D3), and

(D5).

        The log risk-free rate is calculated in Appendix D, equation (D6), as




     rt =              (       2 /2
                     egg( +1)σ
         −θ log δ − ω                      )
                                       − 1 − (θ − 1)( h0 + h1 A0 − A0 ) + gµ − g 2σ a2 / 2 − lνx − l 2νx 2 / 2

          − {lr + l 2 rx − (θ − 1) A1} xt .
                                                                                                                                      (9)



Therefore, when household risk is high, the conditional variance of the risk-free rate is high. The

model also implies that the risk-free rate is low when household risk is high since, in the

estimated model, the coefficient on xt in equation (9) is negative. Thus, the model implies that,

in recessions, the risk-free rate is low and the variance of the risk-free rate is high. Both of these

implications are consistent with observation.

        Finally, the unconditional mean of the risk-free rate is

                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                             (10)



and its unconditional variance is




                                         {λrλrx − (θ − 1) A }
                                                                          2
                          var ( rt ) =      +     2
                                                                      1       var ( xt ) .   (11)




        In Appendix D, we also show that the real yield curve is upward-sloping, downward-

sloping, or humped depending on the state. Thus, the cross-sectional variation of the

idiosyncratic income shocks gives rise to familiar shapes of the yield curve.

        We assume that the log dividend growth of the stock market follows the process 10



                                     ∆dt +1 =α d + β d xt + σ d ε d .t +1 ,
                                                                                             (12)



where                  is i.i.d. and independent of all primitive random variables. The model

yields a positive equity premium because the estimated value of the coefficient β d is negative,

capturing the scenario in which the expected dividend growth is decreasing in household risk

(recessions).

        In Appendix D, we calculate the price-dividend ratio in equation (D8) as




                                                                                              16
                                                                                                    (13)



the expected stock market return in equation (D11) as



           E  rm ,t +1 | xt  = k0 + k1 B0 + k1 B1νx − B0 + α d + β d xt + {k1 B1 r − B1} xt ,   (14)




and the conditional variance of the stock market return in equation (D12) as



                          var ( rm ,t +1 | xt ) k12 B12 var ( xt +1 | xt ) + σ d2 ,
                          =                                                                         (15)




where the parameters B0 and B1 are determined in Appendix D.

       In the estimated model, the coefficient on xt in equation (13) is negative, implying that

the price-dividend ratio of the stock market is low in recessions. The coefficient on xt in

equation (14) is positive, implying that the expected return of the stock market is high in

recessions. Finally, equation (15) implies that the variance of the stock market is high in

recessions. All of these implications are consistent with the data.




                                                                                                     17
                                   II. Data Description


A. Prices and Dividends



       We use monthly data on prices and dividends from January 1929 to December 2009. The

proxy for the stock market is the Centre for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted

index of all stocks on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. The monthly portfolio return is the

sum of the portfolio price and dividend at the end of the month, divided by the portfolio price at

the beginning of the month. The annual portfolio return is the sum of the portfolio price at the

end of the year and uncompounded dividends over the year, divided by the portfolio price at the

beginning of the year. The real annual portfolio return is the annual portfolio return deflated by

the realized growth in the Consumer Price Index.

       The proxy for the real annual risk-free rate is obtained as in Beeler and Campbell (2012).

Specifically, the quarterly nominal yield on three-month Treasury bills is deflated using the

realized growth in the Consumer Price Index to obtain the ex-post real three-month T-bill rate.

The ex-ante quarterly risk-free rate is then obtained as the fitted value from the regression of the

ex-post real three-month T-bill rate on the three-month nominal yield and the realized growth in

the Consumer Price Index over the previous year. This procedure is equivalent to forecasting

inflation and subtracting the inflation forecast from the three-month nominal yield. Finally, the

ex-ante quarterly risk-free rate at the beginning of the year is annualized to obtain the ex-ante

annual risk-free rate.

       The above procedure in building an empirical counterpart of the real risk-free rate

ensures that the real risk-free rate for a given period (say, a quarter) is known at the beginning of


                                                                                                  18
the period, consistent with its definition in the context of our theoretical model. However, since

the real risk-free rate is unobservable in the data over the duration of our sample period, we also

consider two alternative approaches to constructing the real risk-free rate. In the first approach,

we deflate the three-month nominal Treasury bill rate with realized inflation. The mean and

volatility of the resulting time series are very similar to those obtained using our baseline

procedure. In particular, for the entire 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4 period over which aggregate

quarterly consumption data are available, the mean of the risk-free rate is 0.003 and its volatility

is 0.010. These values are very close (0.003 and 0.006, respectively) to those obtained using our

baseline procedure. Similar conclusions obtain for the 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4 subsample over

which household consumption data are available: deflating the nominal three-month rate using

realized inflation gives a mean risk-free rate of 0.006 with volatility 0.009 which are very close

to the corresponding baseline values of 0.005 and 0.005, respectively.

        In the second approach, we compound the monthly returns on one-month Treasury bills

within a quarter to obtain the quarterly nominal risk-free rate and then convert it to real terms

using realized inflation. This procedure also gives very similar values for the mean and volatility

of the real risk-free rate: the mean and volatility are 0.002 and 0.009, respectively, over the

1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4 period and 0.005 and 0.009, respectively, over the 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4

subperiod.

        The above results suggest that our conclusions regarding the fit of the theoretical model

for the risk-free rate is not sensitive to the precise procedure used to generate an empirical

counterpart of the real risk-free rate.

        The annual price-dividend ratio of the market is the market price at the end of the year,

divided by the sum of dividends over the previous 12 months. The dividend growth rate is the



                                                                                                 19
sum of dividends over the year divided by the sum of dividends over the previous year and is

deflated using the realized growth in the Consumer Price Index.



B. Household Consumption Data 11



       The household-level quarterly consumption data come from the Consumer Expenditure

Survey (CEX) produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). This series of cross-sections

covers the period since 1980:Q1. Each quarter, roughly 5,000 U.S. households are surveyed,

chosen randomly according to stratification criteria determined by the U.S. Census. Each

household participates in the survey for five consecutive quarters, one training quarter and four

regular ones, during which time their recent consumption and other information are recorded. At

the end of the fifth quarter, the subject household is replaced by another household, chosen

randomly according to the stratification criteria determined by the U.S. Census. The cycle of

subject households is staggered uniformly across quarters, such that new households replace

approximately one-fifth of the participating households each quarter. 12,13 If a household moves

away from the sample address, it is dropped from the survey and the new household that moves

into the address is included in the survey, provided it meets eligibility criteria.

       The number of households in the database varies from quarter to quarter. The survey

attempts to account for 95% of all quarterly household expenditures in each consumption

category from a highly disaggregated list of consumption goods and services. At the end of the

fourth regular quarter, data are also collected on the demographics and financial profiles of the

participating households, including the value of asset holdings as of the month preceding the

interview. We use consumption data only from the regular quarters, as we consider data from the



                                                                                              20
training quarter unreliable. In a significant number of years, the BLS failed to survey households

not located near an urban area. We therefore limit attention to urban households.

       The CEX survey reports are categorized into three tranches, namely, January, February,

and March tranches. For a given year, first-quarter consumption for the January tranche

corresponds to consumption over January through March, first-quarter consumption for the

February tranche corresponds to consumption over February through April, first-quarter

consumption for the March tranche corresponds to consumption over March through May and so

on for second-, third-, and fourth-quarter consumption. While the CEX consumption data are

presented at the monthly frequency for some consumption categories, the numbers reported as

monthly are often simply the quarterly estimates divided by three. 14 Thus, using monthly

consumption is not an option.

       Following Attanasio and Weber (1995), we discard from our sample consumption data

for the years 1980 and 1981 because they are of questionable quality. Starting in interview period

1986:Q1, the BLS changed its household identification numbering system without providing the

correspondence between the 1985:Q4 and 1986:Q1 identification numbers of households

interviewed in both quarters. This change in the identification system makes it impossible to

match households across the 1985:Q4 to 1986:Q1 gap and results in the loss of some

observations. This problem recurs between 1996:Q1 and 1997:Q1 and also in 2005:Q1.



C. Definition of the Household Consumption Variables



       For each tranche, we calculate each household’s quarterly nondurables and services

(NDS) consumption by aggregating the household’s quarterly consumption across the



                                                                                               21
consumption categories that comprise NDS. We use consumption categories that adhere to the

National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) classification of NDS consumption. Since the

                                                                        C /C 
quantity of interest here is relative household consumption growth, log  i ,t +1 t +1  , it is
                                                                         Ci ,t / Ct 

unnecessary to either deflate or seasonally adjust consumption.

       The per capita consumption,          , of a set of households is calculated as follows. First, the

total consumption in a given quarter is obtained by summing the NDS consumption of all

households in that quarter. Second, per capita consumption in a given quarter is obtained by

dividing total consumption in that quarter by the sum of the number of family members across all

households in that quarter. The per capita consumption growth between quarters t - 1 and t is

defined as the ratio of the per capita consumption in quarters t and t - 1.



D. Household Selection Criteria



       In each quarter, we delete from the sample those households that report zero total

consumption, or zero consumption of NDS, or zero food consumption. We also delete

household-quarters with missing information on the above items.

       To mitigate observation error, we subject sample households to a consumption growth

filter. The filter consists of the following selection criteria. First, we delete households with

consumption growth reported in fewer than three consecutive quarters. Second, we delete the

consumption growth rates                 and               if                    and               , or if

Ci ,t / Ci ,t −1 > 2 and Ci ,t +1 / Ci ,t < 1/ 2 . Third, we delete consumption growth           if it is

greater than five.

                                                                                                      22
                     III. Household Consumption Statistics


       Using panel data on household consumption growth constructed from the CEX database,

we compute summary statistics of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption

                                                                C /C 
growth relative to per capita aggregate consumption growth, log  i ,t +1 t +1  . These statistics
                                                                 Ci ,t / Ct 

are reported in Table I for the period 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The first row presents results for the

January tranche. The second row presents results for households in the combined January,

February, and March tranches, which provides a larger cross-section. The number of households

that survive the filters described in Section II is substantially smaller than the original sample.

For the January tranche, the maximum number of households in a quarter is 1,310 with a mean

of 674. 15 For the combined tranches, the maximum number of households in a quarter is 3,906

with a mean of 2,056.

                                           -Table I here-

       In the first row we find that, for the January tranche, the sample volatility, µ21/2 , has a

high mean value of 0.379 and is highly autocorrelated with a first-order autocorrelation

coefficient of 0.772. The sample third central moment, µ3 , is mostly negative with a mean value

of -0.025 which is strongly statistically significant, and is positively autocorrelated with a first-

order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.124. Our finding of negative skewness in the cross-

sectional distribution of household consumption growth is consistent with that in Guvenen,

Ozkan, and Song (2014), who report negative left skewness in the cross-sectional distribution of

income growth.

                                                                                                  23
       While the third central moment is a commonly used measure of a distribution’s skewness,

we also present results for a quantile-based measure that is more robust to outliers. In particular,

we report the time-series average of the fifth percentile of the relative household consumption

growth distribution, along with its first-order autocorrelation coefficient. The average fifth

percentile is equal to -0.595 and is strongly positively auto-correlated with a first-order

autocorrelation coefficient of 0.534. The results are largely similar for the February and March

tranches, which are omitted in the interest of brevity.

       Stronger results obtain in the second row where we combine the households in the

January, February, and March tranches to provide a larger cross-section. The third central

moment is negative on average, strongly statistically significant, and positively autocorrelated.

The fifth percentile of the cross-sectional distribution is negative and strongly positively

autocorrelated with first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.792. In the lower panel of Table I,

we present the statistics implied by the estimated model. We defer discussion of this panel until

we present the empirical results.

       In each quarter, the indicator variable I rec takes the value of one if there is a NBER-

designated recession in at least two of the three months in the quarter. In Table II, we present the

correlations of the cross-sectional mean, volatility, third central moment, and fifth percentile

with NBER-designated recessions. In recessions, the third central moment becomes more

negative—the correlation between the recession dummy and the third central moment is -0.249

for the January tranche (row 1) and -0.217 for the combined January, February, and March

tranches (row 2). The fifth percentile of the cross-sectional distribution also becomes more

negative in recessions—the correlations between the recession dummy and the fifth percentile is

-0.142 and -0.087, respectively, for the January tranche and the combined tranches. These


                                                                                                 24
findings are also consistent with those reported in Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014), who find

evidence of countercyclical left skewness in the cross-sectional distribution of household income

growth. In the last panel of Table II, we present correlations implied by the estimated model. We

again defer discussion of this panel until we present the empirical results.

                                          -Table II here-

       Note that the CEX database may contain substantial measurement error because it is

based on a survey. Measurement error may contaminate both the level of the variance and the

third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth, as

well as their autocorrelations. To obtain more reliable estimates of households’ consumption

expenditures, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) impute a measure of NDS consumption for

the families contained in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) database by combining

information from the PSID and CEX databases. They then use the imputed consumption to

construct time series of the cross-sectional variance of household consumption growth for

families in the PSID over the period 1980 to 1992. Furthermore, they specify a reduced-form

model for the joint dynamics of household income and consumption that allows for measurement

error in observed consumption. We apply their framework to compute the contribution of the

different shocks, including measurement error, to the cross-sectional variance and third central

moment of household consumption growth.

       Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) assume that the observed consumption of

household i at time t may be written as the sum of the true unobserved consumption and

measurement error that is independent over time:



                                          c*=
                                            i ,t ci ,t + ui ,t .                            (16)


                                                                                              25
Therefore, taking first differences, we have



                     ∆ci*,t =                         φς i ,t +ψε i ,t + ξi ,t + ui ,t − ui ,t −1.
                            ∆ci ,t + ui ,t − ui ,t −1 =                                                              (17)
                                                      
                                                                   ∆ci ,t




As in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), the true (unobserved) consumption growth,                               ,

depends on permanent shocks to income (ς), insurance with respect to the permanent shocks (ϕ),

transitory shocks to income (ε), insurance with respect to the transitory shocks (ψ), and shocks to

consumption that are uncorrelated with those to income (ξ), for example, preference shocks or

shocks to the higher-order moments of the income process. All of the shocks are assumed to be

mutually independent.

       Given the above structure, we have



           var (=
                ∆ci*,t ) φ 2 var (ς i ,t ) +ψ 2 var ( ε i ,t ) + var (ξi ,t ) + var ( ui ,t ) + var ( ui ,t −1 ) .   (18)




       Note that using the CEX database, we estimate the time series of the cross-sectional

volatility of relative household consumption growth (the square root of the left-hand side of (18))

over the 1982 to 2009 period. We find that, at the quarterly frequency, the cross-sectional

volatility is 38% on average and varies from 28.4% to 80.5%.

       Using the CEX and PSID databases to impute a measure of NDS consumption for the

households in the PSID, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) show that, for the period 1980 to

1992, cross-sectional volatility is 39.6% on average and varies from 34.6% to 44.9%. These


                                                                                                                      26
estimates are similar to those obtained using the CEX data alone.

       Based on the parameter estimates from Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), the

volatility of the cross-sectional household consumption growth accounted for by the permanent

component (the square root of the first term on the right-hand side of (18)) is 8.7% on average,

varying from 6.5% to 11.1%. 16 The volatility of the cross-sectional household consumption

growth accounted for by the permanent and transitory components (the square root of the sum of

the first and second terms on the right-hand side of (18)) is 8.8% on average, varying from 6.6%

to 11.2%. Thus, the transitory component contributes little to the overall volatility. Preference

shocks and/or shocks to the higher-order moments of the income process (the third term on the

right-hand side of (18)), together with the permanent and transitory shocks, generate an average

cross-sectional volatility of 13.5% that varies from 12.2% to 15.2%. Therefore, measurement

error (the fourth and fifth terms on the right-hand side of (18)) accounts for a large proportion of

the overall cross-sectional volatility of household consumption growth.

       Turning next to the third central moment, we have




           E ( ∆ci*,t )=  φ 3 E (ς 3 ) + ψ 3 E ( ε 3 ) + E (ξ 3 ) + E ( u 3 ) − E ( u 3 ) .
                         3
                                                                                                    (19)
                                    i ,t            i ,t       i ,t        i ,t        i ,t −1




Assuming that                           , equation (19) implies that measurement error does not affect

the level of the third central moment. 17




                                                                                                     27
                      IV. Empirical Methodology and Results


A. Empirical Methodology



          The model has 14 parameters: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of aggregate consumption

growth; the three parameters for household income shocks,                   ; the three parameters

for the dynamics of the state variable, n , ξ , and ρ ; the three parameters governing the dynamics

of aggregate dividend growth,                   ; and the three preference parameters, namely the

subjective discount factor, δ , the RRA coefficient, γ , and the EIS, ψ . We estimate the model

parameters using GMM to simultaneously match the following moments of aggregate stock

market data as well as household-level consumption data: the mean and variance of aggregate

consumption growth rate; the mean, variance, and autocorrelation of the risk-free rate, market

return, market-wide price-dividend ratio, and aggregate dividend growth rate; and the mean,

variance, and third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption

growth relative to per capita aggregate consumption growth rate. We therefore have 17 moment

restrictions in 14 parameters, providing overidentifying restrictions to test the model

specification. We use a diagonal weighting matrix with a weight of one on all the moments

except for the unconditional means of the market return and risk-free rate, which have weights of

100. 18




                                                                                                28
B. Empirical Results



        Since data on relative household consumption growth are available only at the quarterly

frequency as of 1982:Q1, we estimate the model at the quarterly frequency over the period

1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4 to test the fit of the model-generated moments of aggregate stock market

data and the cross-sectional distribution of relative quarterly household consumption growth to

their sample counterparts. Table III presents model fit and parameter estimates for the January

tranche. 19 The table shows that the parsimonious model with just one state variable fits the

sample moments of the risk-free rate, market return, price-dividend ratio, aggregate consumption

growth rate, and dividend growth rate, as well as the first three central moments of the cross-

sectional distribution of household consumption growth, very well. The J-stat is 4.38 and the

model cannot be rejected at the 10% level of significance. The asymptotic 90% critical value is

6.52.

                                         -Table III here-

        The model generates a quarterly mean risk-free rate of 0.7% and stock market return of

2.0%, both very close to their sample counterparts of 0.5% and 1.9%, respectively. The model

therefore provides an explanation for the equity premium and risk-free rate puzzles. The model

generates volatility of 1.0% and a first-order autocorrelation of 0.876 for the risk-free rate,

compared to sample counterparts of 0.5% and 0.863, respectively. The model also generates

volatility of 22.8% and a first-order autocorrelation of -0.061 for the market return, compared to

sample counterparts of 8.7% and 0.056, respectively. The model-implied mean of the market-

wide price-dividend ratio is 3.787, which is very close to its sample counterpart of 3.745. More

importantly, the model generates the high volatility of the price-dividend ratio observed in the



                                                                                               29
data (47.0% versus 41.1%), and thus explains the excess volatility puzzle. Note that most asset

pricing models, including those with long-run risks and rare disasters, have difficulty matching

the latter moment and therefore at explaining the high volatility of stock prices (see

Constantinides and Ghosh (2011)). The model-implied first-order autocorrelation of the market-

wide price-dividend ratio is 0.876, which is close to its sample counterpart of 0.972.

       The model matches well the unconditional mean and volatility of the annual aggregate

consumption growth rate. Note that models that rely on the incidence of shocks to aggregate, as

opposed to household, consumption growth to address the equity premium and excess volatility

puzzles require unrealistically high variance of aggregate consumption growth: the Barro (2006)

rare disasters model implies aggregate consumption growth volatility of 4.6%. By contrast, the

incidence of shocks to household consumption growth, as modeled in our paper, does not affect

the volatility of aggregate consumption growth.

       The model generates a mean of -0.2% and a volatility of 2.5% for the aggregate dividend

growth rate, compared to sample counterparts of 0.5% and 2.6%, respectively. The model-

implied autocorrelation of dividend growth rate is 0.308, close to its sample counterpart of 0.328.

       The model matches well the unconditional third central moment of the cross-sectional

distribution of relative household consumption growth. The model-implied third central moment

of -0.027 is almost identical to its sample counterpart of -0.025. The model-implied

unconditional volatility of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth is

21.9%. Even though the volatility in the data is 37.9%, we argue in Section III that after

adjusting for measurement error, the volatility is about 15%. Therefore, the model-implied

unconditional volatility of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth

matches well its error-adjusted empirical counterpart.



                                                                                                30
       The estimated preference parameters are reasonable: the risk aversion coefficient is 1.12

and the EIS is one. The EIS is higher than the inverse of the risk aversion coefficient, which

highlights the importance of recursive preferences and points towards a preference for early

resolution of uncertainty.

       The parameters                govern household risk. The autocorrelation of household risk

is    0.876, which induces the autocorrelation of the risk-free rate and the price-dividend ratio

to be 0.876 also, close to their sample values. The parameters               govern the variance of

household risk and induce the variance of the risk-free rate, market return, and price-dividend

ratio to be close to their sample counterparts.

       We use the point estimates of the model parameters in Table III to calculate the signs of

the coefficients on household risk in the equations that determine the risk-free rate, price-

dividend    ratio,   and     conditional     expected    market             rf ,t 0.009 − 28.38 xt ,
                                                                    return: =

                     , and E  rm ,t +1=
                                        | xt  0.010 + 142.6 xt . Consistent with empirical evidence,

the model implies that the risk-free rate and price-dividend ratio are procyclical while the

expected market return is countercyclical.

       We extract the time series of the model-implied cross-sectional moments of household

consumption growth from the observed time series of the risk-free rate and market-wide price-

dividend ratio. 20 The middle panel of Table I displays the model-implied cross-sectional

moments of household consumption growth. The volatility is of the same order of magnitude as

its sample counterpart. The third central moment is almost identical to its sample counterpart.

The first-order autocorrelation of the model-implied volatility is high and of the same order of

magnitude as the autocorrelation in the data but the first-order autocorrelation of the third central

moment is higher than the autocorrelation in the data, probably due to the small sample size and

                                                                                                   31
the quality of the consumption data. The model-implied autocorrelation of the fifth percentile of

the cross-sectional distribution is 84.6%, which is more in line with its sample counterpart of

53.4%. The bottom panel of Table I displays correlations between the historical and model-

implied moments. The model-generated cross-sectional volatility has a correlation of 49.0% with

its sample counterpart and the cross-sectional third central moment has a correlation of 37.7%

with its sample counterpart.

       The bottom panel of Table II displays the correlations between the model-implied

household consumption growth moments and NBER-designated recessions. The correlation

between the model-implied volatility of the cross-sectional distribution and recessions is 26.4%,

the correlation between the third central moment and recessions is -26.8%, and the correlation

between the fifth percentile and recessions is -23.4%. These values are close to the sample values

of 13.9%, -24.9%, and -14.2%, respectively, for the January tranche and 11.8%, -21.7%, and -

8.7%, respectively, for the combined tranches.

       Note that we estimate the model without attempting to match the real term structure of

interest rates. This is because data on long-term real risk-free bonds are only available for the

post-2003 period in the U.S. The average annualized yield of 10-year real bonds, obtained from

the Treasury website, is 0.019 over the period 2003 to 2009 (the end of our sample period).

Based on the point estimates of the parameters, the model-implied annualized yield of 10-year

real bonds is -0.024. While the term premium is slightly positive in the U.S. over the short

available sample period, Evans (1998) documents that the premiums for inflation-indexed bonds

in the U.K. are significantly negative (less than -2% at the one-year horizon). Given the short

length of the period over which Treasury data are available, we do not attempt to determine




                                                                                               32
whether the real term structure is upward- or downward-sloping and we do not attempt to match

such a pattern.



                    V. Further Interpretation of the Results


       We consider several variants of the baseline model and obtain insights into the role each

of its key ingredient plays. In Section V.A, we estimate the model over the entire quarterly

sample period, 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4, over which aggregate consumption and asset price data are

available. In Section V.B, we examine the performance of the model at the annual frequency

over the full sample period 1929 to 2009. In Section V.C, we investigate the role of recursive

preferences by considering a variant of the baseline model in which households have constant

RRA (CRRA) preferences. In Section V.D, we consider a version of the model in which the

shocks to household consumption growth are conditionally lognormal, instead of a Poisson

mixture of normal distributions as assumed in Section II. Finally, in Section V.E we highlight the

significance of shocks unrelated to the business cycle by estimating a version of the model in

which we suppress household income shocks that are unrelated to the business cycle.



A. Estimation with Quarterly Data, 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4



       We reestimate the model using quarterly data over the period 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4, the

period over which quarterly aggregate consumption data are available. Since household

consumption data are not available over much of this period, the GMM system consists of only

the 13 moment restrictions on aggregate asset prices and consumption and dividend growth rates.


                                                                                               33
 The model fit and parameter estimates are presented in Table IV. The model matches well the

 moments of the risk-free rate, stock market return, and price-dividend ratio.

                                           -Table IV here-

         As with the quarterly analysis in Section IV, the model generates the empirically

 observed dynamics of the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and stock market return. The model

 implies that the volatility of the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and conditional expected

 market return are countercyclical, consistent with observation. We use the point estimates of the

 model parameters in Table IV to calculate the coefficients on household risk in the equations that

 determine the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and conditional expected market return:

rf ,t 0.010 − 0.188 xt ,
=                                            , and E  rm ,t +1=
                                                                | xt  0.010 + 0.768 xt . Consistent with

 observation, the model implies that the risk-free rate and price-dividend ratio are procyclical

 while the expected market return is countercyclical. The estimated preference parameters are

 reasonable: the risk aversion coefficient is 13.3 and the EIS is 1.02. Based on the point estimates

 of the model parameters, the model-implied unconditional 10-year annualized real bond yield is

 0.020, which is almost identical to its data counterpart of 0.019.



 B. Estimation with Annual Data, 1929 to 2009



         So far we have assumed that the decision frequency of households is quarterly. In this

 subsection, we present results at the annual frequency for the full sample period, 1929 to 2009.

 As in Section V.A, the GMM system consists of only the 13 moment restrictions on aggregate

 asset prices and aggregate consumption and dividend growth rates.




                                                                                                       34
       The results are reported in Table V. The model matches well the moments of the stock

market return and price-dividend ratio but less so the moments of the risk-free rate. The model

generates the empirically observed dynamics of the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and stock

market return. The model implies that the volatility of the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and

conditional expected market return are countercyclical, that the risk-free rate and price-dividend

ratio are procyclical, and that the expected market return is countercyclical. The estimated

preference parameters are reasonable: the RRA is 5.05 and the EIS is 1.10. These results suggest

that the model is robust to the assumed decision frequency of households. Based on the point

estimates of the model parameters, the model-implied unconditional 10-year real bond yield is

0.018, which is almost identical to its data counterpart of 0.019.

                                          -Table V here-



C. Estimation with CRRA Preferences



       To shed light on the role played by recursive preferences, we discuss the special case of

our baseline model with CRRA preferences. In Table VI we present the counterpart of Tables III

at the quarterly frequency but with CRRA preferences. Not surprisingly, we find that the equity

premium and risk-free rate puzzles arise: the model-implied annual risk-free rate is 9.2% and the

equity premium is 0.0%. In Table VII, we present the counterpart of Table V at the annual

frequency but with CRRA preferences. Again we find that the equity premium and risk-free rate

puzzles arise: the model-implied annual risk-free rate is 4.2% and the equity premium is -0.6%.

                                     -Tables VI and VII here-




                                                                                                  35
D. Estimation with Lognormal Shocks



        In this section we present results for the same specification of preferences as in our

baseline model but with idiosyncratic shocks to household consumption that are conditionally

lognormal rather than negatively skewed:




=ds
 i ,t
           t
           s =1
                  {
      exp  ∑ ( sηi , s − ssη
                          2
                            s / 2) +  ( i,s         
                                                    
                                                         )}
                                       − s 2 / 2  , η ,η ~ i.i.d. N ( 0,1) .
                                                         i,s i,s                           (20)




The state variable     is assumed to follow an autoregressive gamma (positive AR (1)) process:




                                  σ t2+1 =ν σ ξσ + ρσ σ t2 + ε σ ,t +1.                    (21)




        The results are reported in Table VIII for the quarterly subsample 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4

for the January tranche. We find that the equity premium and risk-free rate puzzles arise: the

model-implied annual risk-free rate is 8.0% and the equity premium is 0.4%, compared to

sample counterparts of 2.0% and 6.4%, respectively.

                                           -Table VIII here-

        More importantly, the model implies that the equilibrium risk-free rate, price-dividend

ratio, and conditional expected market return are affine functions of the state variable   . We

                                                                                             36
use the point estimates of the model parameters in Table VIII to calculate the coefficients on

in the equations that determine the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and conditional expected

market return:=
              rf ,t 0.020 − 1.92σ 2t ,                         , and E  rm ,t +1 | σ
                                                                                     = 2
                                                                                           0.020 + 6.70σ 2t .
                                                                                         t



Note that the state variable    now also drives the variance of the cross-sectional distribution of

household consumption growth. As a result, to generate the empirically observed dynamics of

the risk-free rate, price-dividend ratio, and stock market return, the model requires that the

variance of cross-sectional household consumption growth be countercyclical. This is

improbable, given that Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014) show that the variance of cross-

sectional household income growth is not countercyclical.



E. Estimation without Household Income Shocks Unrelated to the Business Cycle



       In this section we explore the significance of shocks to household income that are


unrelated to the business cycle, by suppressing the term                              in equation (1) and

writing shocks to household income as



                                 t
                    =δ i ,t exp  ∑
                                 s =1
                                               {( j1/2
                                                   i,s                        }
                                                      sηi , s − ji , ss 2 / 2 )  .                     (22)




The results are reported in Table IX for the quarterly subsample 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4 for the

January tranche. The model-implied risk-free rate is negative and its volatility is too high. These




                                                                                                          37
results are inferior to those in Table III and thus highlight the significance of shocks to household

income that are unrelated to the business cycle.

                                           -Table IX here-



                       VI. Household Consumption Risk
                     and the Cross-Section of Excess Returns

       Our empirical results above show that household consumption risk, measured by the third

central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth, is an

important risk factor that drives the time-series properties of aggregate quantities: the risk-free

rate, market return, and market price-dividend ratio. We next show that household consumption

risk also explains the cross-section of excess returns.

       We follow the standard Fama-Macbeth (1973) methodology. In the first step, we run

time-series regressions of quarterly excess returns of each asset on household consumption risk

and obtain the factor loading for each asset. In the second step, for each quarter in the second

half of the sample, we estimate a cross-sectional regression of excess asset returns on their

estimated factor loadings from the first step and obtain a time series of cross-sectional intercepts

and slope coefficients. We present the average of the cross-sectional intercepts,        , and slope

coefficients,   . We calculate the standard errors of     and     from the time series of the cross-

sectional intercepts and slope coefficients. Given the short length of the time series, we expect

and find that the standard errors are large.

       We present results for two variations of the first-stage time-series regressions. In the first

variation (“rolling”), in each period t (starting with the midpoint of the sample) we use all of the

returns up to period t to estimate the factor loadings as inputs to the cross-sectional regressions.

                                                                                                  38
In the second variation (“fixed”), we use the first half of the sample to estimate the factor

loadings as inputs to the cross-sectional regressions performed on the second half of the sample.

                                          -Table X here-

         The results for the rolling time-series regressions are reported in Table X. Panels A, B,

and C present results when the set of test assets consists of the 25 size- and book-to-market-

sorted equity portfolios of Fama and French (FF) (1993), the 30 industry-sorted portfolios, and

the combined 25 FF and 30 industry-sorted portfolios, respectively. We include the industry

portfolios as test assets in addition to the 25 FF portfolios because the size- and book-to-market-

sorted equity portfolios have a strong factor structure making it easy for almost any proposed

factor to produce a high cross-sectional adjusted      (which we denote throughout by R 2 ). 21

         In the first row of each panel, we present the results when the only factor is household

consumption risk, the third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household

consumption growth. In all three panels, the intercept is both statistically and economically

insignificant, as expected. The slope coefficient is positive, as expected, but is not statistically

significant given the small sample size. The cross-sectional R 2 is stable, varying from 13.6% to

14.9%.

         In the second row of each panel, we present the results when the only factor is the

volatility of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth. In all three

panels, the intercept is both statistically and economically insignificant, as expected. In Panels A

and C, the slope coefficient is negative, as expected, but small; in Panel B the slope coefficient is

zero. The cross-sectional R 2 varies from -6.9% to 40%, suggesting that the results are unstable

and possibly spurious. Further evidence against volatility as a factor is provided in the third row

of Panels A, B, and C, where we simultaneously consider household consumption risk and


                                                                                                  39
volatility as factors. While in all three panels the slope coefficient on household consumption

risk is positive as expected, in Panels B and C the slope on the volatility factor is positive,

against expectation.

       In the last row of each panel, we present the results for the three FF risk factors. In all

three panels the estimated intercept is economically large; it is also statistically significant in

Panel A. All slope coefficients are economically insignificant. The cross-sectional R 2 varies

from -22.8% to 59.5%, suggesting that the results are unstable.

       The results for the fixed time-series regressions are reported in Table XI and reinforce the

above results. When the only factor is household consumption risk, the intercept is both

statistically and economically insignificant, as expected. The slope coefficient is positive, as

expected, but is not statistically significant given the small sample size. The cross-sectional R 2

is stable, varying from 7.5% to 21.5%.

                                         -Table XI here-

       When the only factor is the volatility of the cross-sectional distribution of household

consumption growth, the intercept is both statistically and economically insignificant, as

expected. The slope coefficient is positive in Panel B, against expectation and zero in Panel C,

also against expectation. The cross-sectional R 2 varies from -2.0% to 42.8%, suggesting that the

results are unstable and possibly spurious.

       With the three FF risk factors, the estimated intercept is economically large; it is also

statistically significant in Panels B and C. All slope coefficients are economically insignificant.

The cross-sectional R 2 varies from 28.3% to 53.6%.

       Overall, we conclude that household consumption risk does well in explaining the cross-

section of excess returns: the intercept is economically and statistically insignificant, the slope

                                                                                                 40
coefficient is consistently positive, as expected, and the cross-sectional adjusted R 2 is

consistently positive.



                              VII. Concluding Remarks


       In this paper we explore cross-sectional variation in household income shocks as a factor

that drives the time-series properties of the risk-free rate, market return, and market price-

dividend ratio as well as the cross-section of excess returns. We focus on this channel by

suppressing potential predictability of aggregate consumption growth and modeling it as an i.i.d.

process. The model is parsimonious with only one state variable that is countercyclical and

drives the moments of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth. Despite

this enforced parsimony, the model fits reasonably well both the unconditional and the

conditional price moments, particularly the moments of the market price-dividend ratio, a target

that has eluded a number of other models. More to the point, the model-generated moments of

the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption match well their sample counterparts.

       To check the robustness of model, we consider two variants of the baseline model. We

first reestimate the model over the entire quarterly sample period, 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4, over

which aggregate consumption and asset price data are available and obtain similar results. We

also reexamine the performance of the model at the annual frequency over the full sample period

1929 to 2009 and conclude that the results are insensitive to the assumed decision frequency of

households.

       We also explore the role played by three key ingredients of the model. First, we

investigate the role of recursive preferences by considering a variant of the baseline model in


                                                                                              41
which households have CRRA preferences. We conclude that recursive preferences are pivotal in

addressing the equity premium and risk-free rate puzzles. Second, we investigate the role of

negative skewness in shocks to household consumption growth by considering a variant of the

baseline model in which shocks to household consumption growth are conditionally lognormal.

We conclude that negative skewness is pivotal in explaining the data. Third, we explore the

significance of shocks to household income that are unrelated to the business cycle, in addition to

shocks that are related to the business cycle. We find that shocks to household income that are

unrelated to the business cycle also play a significant role.

       Finally, we address the cross-sectional variation in the excess returns of size-, book-to-

market-equity-, and industry-sorted equity portfolios. We show that the single factor—household

consumption risk—explains the cross-section of excess returns at least as well as the combined

three Fama-French factors do.




                                                                                                42
                Appendix A: Proof that the Identity I=
                                                     t Ct − Dt is Respected

       Since the households are symmetric and their number is normalized to equal one, we

apply the law of large numbers as in Green (1989) and claim that I t = E  I i ,t | Ct , Dt  .

Furthermore, since household shocks are assumed to be conditionally normally distributed and

independent of anything else in the economy, we obtain




                                                                                            (A1)




proving the claim.




                                                                                              43
                              Appendix B: Proof that Autarchy is an Equilibrium

         We conjecture and verify that autarchy is an equilibrium. The proof follows several steps.

First, we calculate household i’s private valuation of its wealth portfolio. Next we calculate the

log return, ri ,c ,t +1 , on household i’s wealth portfolio and substitute this return in the household’s

SDF, as stated in equation (3). We integrate out of this SDF the household’s idiosyncratic

income shocks and show that households have a common SDF. This implies that the private

valuation of any security with payoffs independent of the idiosyncratic income shocks is the

same across households, verifying the conjecture that autarchy is an equilibrium.

         Let Pi ,c ,t be the price of household i’s private valuation of its wealth portfolio,

Z i ,c ,t ≡ Pi ,c ,t / Ci ,t , and zi ,c ,t ≡ log ( Z i ,c ,t ) . We prove by induction that the price-to-consumption

ratio is a function of only state variable ωt . We conjecture that zi ,c ,t +1 = zc ,t +1 (ωt +1 ) . The Euler

equation for ri ,c ,t +1 is




                           θ log δ −ψθ ∆ci ,t +1 +(θ −1)ri ,c ,t +1 + ri ,c ,t +1                                              
                        E e                                                       | ∆ct , ωt , ji ,t ,ηi ,t , j i ,t ,η i ,t  =1.
                                                                                                                                  (B1)

We write




                                                                                                                                   (B2)




and substitute (B2) into Euler equation (B1) to obtain
                                                                                                                                      44
          or


                                   θ log δ +(1−g ) µ +σ ae t +1 + ji1/2,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ 2 /2+ j1/2i ,t +1 ση i ,t +1 − ji ,t +1 σ 2 /2 +θ log( e zc .t +1 +1)                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                    | ∆ct , ωt , ji ,t ,ηi ,t , j i ,t ,η i ,t  .
                   θ zi ,c ,t
                  e             E e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (B3)




          We integrate out of equation (B3) the random variables                                                                                                                                               , leaving

           zi ,c ,t as a function of only ωt , which proves the claim that zi ,c ,t = zc ,t (ωt ) .


                      Now, the ( SDF )i ,t +1 of household i is


                                              θ                                
           ( SDF
              =  )i ,t +1       exp  θ log δ − Dci ,t +1 + (θ − 1) ri ,c ,t +1 
                                              ψ                                
= exp  θ log δ − g Dct +1 + ji1/2
                                          (               2       1/2                2
                                 ,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ / 2 + j i ,t +1ση i ,t +1 − j i ,t +1σ / 2 + (θ − 1) log e
                                                                                                                       zc ,t +1
                                                                                                                                + 1 − zc ,t  .
                                                                                                                                                                          )                     ( (                            )      )
                                                                                                                                (B4)




          In pricing any security other than households’ wealth portfolios, we integrate out of ( SDF )i ,t +1


          the household-specific random variables                                                                                                                   and obtain a SDF common

          across households. Therefore, each household’s private valuation of any security, other than

          households’ wealth portfolios, is common. This completes the proof that no-trade is an

          equilibrium.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              45
     Appendix C: Derivation of the Cross-Sectional Moments of Consumption Growth




       We use the following result:




                                 ∑ ( e k ω ) / n ! e −ω e e ω .
                  e ∑ e ω / n ! e=
       −ω ∞       −ω ∞                                     n
                  =
                                                                         k
             kn n
      =   n 0=       n 0                                                                      (C1)




Differentiating one, two, and three times with respect to k and setting k = 0 , we obtain




                                  e −ω ∑ n =0 nω n / n ! = ω
                                         ∞



                                  e −ω ∑ n =0 n 2ω n / n=! ω 2 + ω
                                         ∞



                                  e −ω ∑ n =0 n3ω n / n ! =ω 3 + 3ω 2 + ω.
                                         ∞



                                                                                              (C2)




We calculate the mean of the cross-sectional distribution of relative household consumption

growth as




                                                                                               46
                                                   Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1           
                                µ1 = E log                          | ωt +1 
                                                  Ci ,t / Ct                 
                                      C /C                                                 
                                = E  E log  i ,t +1 t +1  | ji ,t +1 , j i ,t +1  | ωt +1 
                                       Ci ,t / Ct                                     

                        = E  E  ji1/2                                1/2                2                                        
                                      ,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ / 2 + j i ,t +1ση i ,t +1 − j i ,t +1σ / 2 | ji ,t +1 , j i ,t +1 | ωt +1 
                                                                2

                                
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                           (C3)
                                E  − ji ,t +1σ 2 / 2 − j i ,t +1σ / 2 | ωt +1 
                                                                    2
                                =
                                                                               
                                − (σ 2 / 2 ) ωt +1 − σ / 2 ω
                                =
                                                       2
                                                             (
                                                            .
                                                                        )

     We calculate the variance as




                         Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1           
      µ2 = var  log                       | ωt +1 
                   
                         Ci ,t / Ct                  
= var  ji1/2
      
           , t (
               +1ση i , t +1
                                                   1/2
                                                             − j σ 2 / 2 | ω 
                             − ji ,t +1σ 2 / 2 + j i ,t +1ση i ,t +1 i ,t +1   t +1 
                                                                                         )
      =var ( ji1/2                        2
                                                           
                                                                           (               2
                                                                                                        )
                  ,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ / 2 ) | ωt +1  + var  j i ,t +1ση i ,t +1 − j i ,t +1σ / 2 | ωt +1 
                                                                     1/2                                      
                                                                                                                  
        E  E ( ji1/2
                      ,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ / 2 ) | ji ,t +1  | ωt +1 − (σ ωt +1 / 2 )
                                                                           
                                                      2
      =                                           2                            2            2

                                                                       

                   (
            1/2  
                                                       )
                                        j σ 2 / 2 | j   − σ 2 ω
                                                                            (         )
                                                       2                          2
      + E  E  j i ,t +1ση  i ,t +1 −   i ,t +1            i ,t +1  
                                                                              /2
                                                                   

                                                                                                                      (         )
                                                                                                                                    2
      = E ( ji ,t +1σ 2 + ji2,t +1σ 4 / 4 ) | ωt +1  − (σ 2ωt +1 / 2 ) + E  j i ,t +1σ + j i ,t +1σ / 4  − σ ω
                                                                          2                  2     2        4          2
                                                                                                                          /2
                                                                                                               

                                                                                          (          )( )(                 )
                                                                                                                               2
      = σ 2ωt +1 + (σ 4 / 4 ) ωt +1 (1 + ωt +1 ) − (σ 2ωt +1 / 2 ) + σ ω
                                                                       2
                                                                  2
                                                                          + σ 4 / 4 ω     − σ 2 ω
                                                                                       1+ ω        /2

                                   2
                                     (
      = (σ 2 + σ 4 / 4 ) ωt +1 + σ + σ / 4 ω
                                        4
                                             .
                                                        )                                                                               (C4)




                                                                                                                                               47
                   We calculate the third central moment as




                                                           Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1            
                                         µ3  log                            | ωt +1 
                                               
                                                           Ci ,t / Ct                  
                                  = µ3  ji1/2 ση     (− j
                                        ,t +1 i ,t +1 i ,t +1
                                                               σ 2
                                                                   / 2 + j1/2 ση
                                                                           i ,t +1
                                                                                     − j σ 2 / 2 | ω 
                                                                                      i ,t +1 i ,t +1   t +1 
                                                                                                                              )
                                         =µ3 ( ji1/2                        2
                                                                                             
                                                                                                            (               2
                                                                                                                                            )
                                                    ,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ / 2 ) | ωt +1  + µ3  j i ,t +1ση i ,t +1 − j i ,t +1σ / 2 | ωt +1  .
                                                                                                      1/2                                      
                                                                                                                                                   

                   We have


                       µ3 ( ji1/2
                                 ,t +1σηi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ / 2 ) | ωt +1 
                                                           2
                                                                          

      = E  E  ji1/2                (                                                        )
                                              + (ωt +1 − ji ,t +1 ) σ 2 / 2 | ji ,t +1  | ωt +1 
                                                                           3

            
                          ση                                                                     
                    , t +1        i , t +  1                                           

      = σ 3 E  E  ji1/2                  (                                                  )
                                               + (ωt +1 − ji ,t +1 ) σ / 2 | ji ,t +1  | ωt +1 
                                                                           3

               
                                 η                                                              
                           , t +1     i , t +1                                        

= σ 3 E  E 3 ji ,t +1 (ωt +1 − ji ,t +1 ) σ / 2 + (ωt +1 − ji ,t +1 ) σ 3 / 8 | ji ,t +1  | ωt +1 
                                                                       3

                                                                                                  
= (σ 4 / 2 ) E  E 3 ji ,t +1ωt +1 − 3 ji2,t +1 + (ωt3+1 − 3ωt2+1 ji ,t +1 + 3ωt +1 ji2,t +1 − ji3,t +1 ) σ 2 / 4 | ji ,t +1  | ωt +1 
                                                                                                                                         
            =          (σ / 2 ){3ω − 3 (ω
                              4                     2
                                                   t +1
                                                                    2
                                                                   t +1              (                                                                   )       }
                                                                          + ωt +1 ) + ωt3+1 − 3ωt3+1 + 3ωt +1 (ωt2+1 + ωt +1 ) − (ωt3+1 + 3ωt2+1 + ωt +1 ) σ 2 / 4

                       − ( 3σ / 2 + σ / 8 ) ω
                       =            4                 6
                                                                   t +1   .




                   Likewise, we can show that                                                                                                   . Therefore,




                                                                                                                           (                    )
                                                          Ci ,t +1 / Ct +1            
                                                                                           − ( 3σ 4 / 2 + σ 6 / 8 ) ωt +1 − 3σ / 2 + σ / 8 ω
                                                                                                                               4        6
                                        µ3  log                            | ωt +1  =                                                 .
                                           
                                                          Ci ,t / Ct                                                                                        (C5)




                                                                                                                                                                     48
                Appendix D: Derivation of the Common SDF, Risk-Free Rate,
                    Market Price-Dividend Ratio, and Expected Market Return



       Solution for a Household’s Consumption-Wealth Ratio. In Appendix B we prove that any

household’s consumption-wealth ratio is a function of only the state variable, that is,

zi ,c ,t = zc ,t (ωt ) . Here we conjecture and verify that zc=
                                                              ,t A0 + A1 xt . To do so, we plug


zc=
  ,t                                                                                             (
     A0 + A1 xt into the Euler equation (B3). We also log-linearize the term log e c ,t +1 + 1 as in
                                                                                                     z
                                                                                                             )
Campbell      and       Shiller     (1988)      and     obtain          (   z
                                                                                     )
                                                                    log e c ,t +1 + 1 ≈ h0 + h1 zc ,t +1 ,   where


        (       )
h0 ≡ log e zc + 1 −
                       z c e zc
                      e zc + 1
                                and h1 ≡
                                            e zc
                                         e zc + 1
                                                  . We have specifically,




or




or




or



                                                                                                                 49
                                  θ log δ +(1−g ) µ +(1−g )2 σ a2 /2+ xt +1 + egg( −1)σ 2 /2 −1ω +θ {h0 + h1 ( A0 + A1xt +1 )− A0 − A1xt }      
                               E e                                                                
                                                                                                                                                  | ωt  = 1,
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                      




       e −ω ∑ e knω n / n ! e=  ∑ ( ekω ) / n ! e−ω ee ω and
                     ∞                                          ∞                n
 since =                     −ω
                                                                                                                                                                  . Therefore,
                                                                                                           k

=n 0=n 0




 or, up to a second-order approximation,




                                            ( −1)σ 2 /2  
                                2
     θ log δ + (1−g ) µ + (1−g ) σ a2 /2 +  egg                                                                                    ( 2
                                                                                                                                                    )
                                                         −1ω +θ ( h0 + h1 A0 − A0 − A1 xt ) + (1+θ h1 A1 )(νx + ρ xt ) + (1+θ h1 A1 ) νx 2 + 2 ρx xt /2
    e                                                     
                                                                                                                                                           ≈ 1.              (D1)




 Matching the constant, we obtain




 θ log δ + (1 − g ) µ + (1 − g ) σ a2 / 2 + egg( −1)σ
                                                  2
                                                                     (             2 /2
                                                                                           −1 ω)
                                                                                               + θ ( h + h A − A ) + (1 + θ h A )νξ + 1 (1 + θ h A )2 νξ 2 =
                                                                                                       0   1 0   0            1 1
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                 1 1        0,
                                                                                                                                             (D2)

 and matching the coefficient of xt , we obtain




                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                  − A1θ + (1 + θ h1 A1 ) ρ + (1 + θ h1 A1 ) ρξ =
                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                               0.
                                                                                                                                                                                              (D3)




The solution of equations (D2) and (D3) produces values for the parameters A0 and A1 that verify


the conjecture that                           zc=
                                                ,t A0 + A1 xt . 22 Since                               z=
                                                                                                        c A0 + A1 x , h0 ≡ log e zc + 1 −              (              )       z c e zc
                                                                                                                                                                             e zc + 1
                                                                                                                                                                                       , and


          e zc
h1 ≡            , the parameters h0 and h1 are determined in terms of the parameters A0 , A1 , and x .
       e zc + 1




         Common SDF across Households. In pricing any security, other than households’ wealth

portfolios, we integrate out of the SDF in equation (B4) the household-specific random variables

                                                       and obtain a SDF that is common across households:




                         θ log δ −g  Dct +1 + ji1/2,t +1σhi ,t +1 − ji ,t +1σ 2 /2+ j1/2                             2 
                                                                                          i ,t +1 σ h i ,t +1 − j i ,t +1 σ /2  + (θ −1)( h0 + h1 zc ,t +1 − zc ,t )
                                                                                                                                                                                             
         ( SDF )t +1 
                    = E   e                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                      | ct , ct +1 , ωt , ωt +1 
                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                              2
                                                     2 /2        gg( +1)σ /2 −1 + θ −1 h + h z
                                           ( +1)σ
               θ log δ −gDct +1 +ωt +1  egg                 −1 +ω e               (     )( 0 1 c ,t +1 − zc ,t )
                                                               
         =e                                                                         

                             ( +1)σ  2 /2     
                          egg
               θ log δ +ω                     −1 −gDct +1 + (θ −1){h0 + h1 A0 −( A0 + A1 xt )}+ l xt +1
         =e                                    
                                                                                                           ,

                                                                                                                                                                                              (D4)

where


                                                             eγ (γ +1)σ
                                                                           2
                                                                               /2
                                                                                    −1
                                                  λ≡             γ ( γ −1)σ 2 /2
                                                                                         + (θ − 1) h1 A1.                                                                                     (D5)
                                                             e                      −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    51
         Solution for the Risk-Free Rate. The Euler equation for the log risk-free rate is




                             θ log δ +ω  egg( +1)σ 2 /2 −1 −g∆ct +1 +(θ −1){h0 + h1 A0 −( A0 + A1xt )}+ l xt +1 + rt      
                          E e                                 
                                                                                                                            | ωt  = 1,
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                




or, up to a second-order approximation,




or


                      (                         )
                                     2

     rt =            e
         −θ log δ − ω      ( +1)σ /2
                          gg
                                          − 1 − (θ − 1)( h0 + h1 A0 − A0 ) + gµ − g 2σ a2 / 2 − lνx − l 2νx 2 / 2

         − {lr + l 2 rx − (θ − 1) A1} xt .
                                                                                                                                           (D6)




The implications of the model regarding the term structure of interest rates are the same as those

for a discretized version of the Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985) model. Recall that xt follows a

heteroskedastic AR (1) process with conditional variance νx 2 + 2 ρx xt . We prove that, under the

risk-neutral probability measure Q, xt follows a heteroskedastic AR (1) process, where the mean

of xt +1 , conditional on xt , is shifted by approximately λ νx 2 + 2 ρx xt  and the variance is affine

in xt . To see this, note that e rt ( SDF )t +1 is the discrete-time Radon-Nikodym derivative. Under

the risk-neutral probability measure Q, the mean of                                                              xt +1 , conditional on   xt , is

                                                                                                                                              52
E Q [ xt +1 | xt ] E  xt +1e rt ( SDF )t +1 | xt  ≈ E [ xt +1 | xt ] + λ νxrx
=                                                                                2
                                                                                   + 2 xt  and its variance is affine in

   xt . Since the risk-free rate is affine in household risk xt , the risk-free rate also follows a

  heteroskedastic AR (1) process with variance of the innovation affine in the risk-free rate under

  the risk-neutral probability measure. Thus, the model is isomorphic to a discretized version of the

  Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985) model and implies that the yield curve is upward-sloping,

  downward-sloping, or humped depending on the state, where the state may be represented by the

  risk-free rate.




           The Price-Dividend Ratio of the Stock Market. We denote the log stock market return as

   rm ,t and the stock market price-dividend ratio as zm ,t . As in Campbell-Shiller (1988), we write




                                           rm ,t +1= k0 + k1 zm ,t +1 − zm ,t + ∆dt +1 ,
                                                                                                                    (D7)




                      (
  where k0 ≡ log e zm + 1 −    )    z m e zm
                                   e zm + 1
                                             and k1 =
                                                         e zm
                                                      e zm + 1
                                                               . We conjecture and verify that the price-


  dividend ratio of the stock market is




                                                     zm=  B0 + B1 xt
                                                       ,t
                                                                                                                    (D8)

  and write




                                                                                                                      53
                               rm ,t +1 = k0 + k1 ( B0 + B1 xt +1 ) − ( B0 + B1 xt ) + α d + β d xt + σ d ε d .t +1.




The Euler equation is




or


         θ log d +ω  egg( +1)σ 2 /2 −1+(θ −1){h0 + h1 A0 −( A0 + A1xt )}−g∆ct +1 + l xt +1 + k0 + k1 ( B0 + B1xt +1 )−( B0 + B1xt )+α d + βd xt +σ d e d .t +1      
      E e                                 
                                                                                                                                                                      | ωt  = 1
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                          

or

                    ( +1)σ 2 /2     
                 egg
      θ log d +ω                    −1 + (θ −1){h0 + h1 A0 −( A0 + A1 xt )}−gµ +g 2σ a2 /2 + k0 + k1B0 −( B0 + B1 xt ) +a d + β d xt +σ d2 /2
                                                                                                                                                 E e(
                                                                                                                                                          l + k1B1 ) xt +1
     e                               
                                                                                                                                                                             | ωt  = 1,


or, up to a second-order approximation,




                 egg( +1)σ
      θ log d + ω          (                 2 /2
                                                          )
                                                     − 1 + (θ − 1) {h0 + h1 A0 − ( A0 + A1 xt )} − gµ + g 2σ a2 / 2 + k0 + k1 B0

      − ( B0 + B1 xt ) + a d + β d xt + σ d2 / 2 + ( l + k1 B1 ){νx + ρ xt } + ( l + k1 B1 ) {νx 2 + 2 ρx xt } / 2
                                                                                                                                                    2



      ≈ 0.




We set the constant and coefficient on xt equal to zero and obtain two equations that determine

the parameters B0 and B1 :

                                                                                                                                                                                            54
                                                                                                         (D9)



and


                 − (θ − 1) A1 − B1 + β d + ( λ + k1 B1 ) ρ + ( λ + k1 B1 ) ρξ =
                                                                            2
                                                                              0. 23                     (D10)




Note that the parameters k0 and k1 are determined in terms of the parameters B0 , B1 , and x .

Therefore, the expected stock market return is




                 E  rm ,t +1 | ωt  = k0 + k1 B0 + k1 B1 {νxr
                                                               + xt } − ( B0 + B1 xt ) + α d + β d xt
                                                                                                        (D11)
                 = k0 + k1 B0 + k1 B1νx − B0 + α d + β d xt + {k1 B1 r − B1} xt .




                                                                                                          55
                                        REFERENCES




Ahn, Seung C., and Christopher S. Gadarowski, 1999, Small sample properties of the model

specification test based on the Hansen-Jagannathan distance, working paper, Arizona State

University.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Steven J. Davis, 1996, Relative wage movements and the distribution

of consumption, Journal of Political Economy 104, 1227-1262.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guliermo Weber, 1995, Is consumption growth consistent with

intertemporal optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, Journal of

Political Economy 103, 1121-1157.

Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Ian Martin, 2011, Disasters implied by equity index

options, Journal of Finance 66, 1967-2009.

Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the 20th century, Quarterly Journal of

Economics 121, 823-866.

Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursùa, 2008, Macroeconomic crises since 1870, Brookings Papers

on Economic Activity 39, 255-335.

Beeler, Jason, and John Y. Campbell, 2012, The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices:

An empirical assessment, Critical Finance Review 1, 141-182.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston, 2008, Consumption inequality and partial

insurance, American Economic Review 98, 1887-1921.

Brav, Alon, George M. Constantinides, and Christopher C. Geczy, 2002, Asset pricing with


                                                                                               56
heterogeneous consumers and limited participation: Empirical evidence, Journal of Political

Economy 110, 793-824.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of

future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.

Cochrane, John, 1991, A simple test of consumption insurance, Journal of Political Economy 99,

957-976.

Cogley, Thomas, 2002, Idiosyncratic risk and the equity premium: Evidence from the Consumer

Expenditure Survey, Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 309-334.

Constantinides, George M., 1982, Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers and

without demand aggregation, Journal of Business 55, 253-267.

Constantinides, George M., 2008, Comment on Barro and Ursùa, Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity 39, 341-350.

Constantinides, George M., and Darrell Duffie, 1996, Asset pricing with heterogeneous

consumers, Journal of Political Economy 104, 219-240.

Constantinides, George M., and Anisha Ghosh, 2011, Asset pricing tests with long-run risks in

consumption growth, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1, 96-136.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, A theory of the term structure

of interest rates, Econometrica 53, 385-407.

Dew-Becker, Ian, and Stefano Giglio, 2016, Asset pricing in the frequency domain: theory and

empirics, Review of Financial Studies 29, 2029-2068.




                                                                                           57
Epstein, Larry G., Emmanuel Farhi, and Thomasz Strzalecki, 2014, How much would you pay to

resolve long-run risk? American Economic Review 104, 2680-2697.

Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior

of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica 57, 937–969.

Evans, Martin D. D., 1998, Real rates, expected inflation and inflation risk premia, Journal of

Finance 53, 187-218.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns of stocks

and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests,

Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.

Ferson, Wayne, and Stephen R. Foerster, 1994, Finite sample properties of the generalized

methods of moments tests of conditional asset pricing models, Journal of Financial Economics

36, 29-56.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in

macro-finance, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645-700.

Ghosh, Anisha, Christian Julliard, and Alex P. Taylor, 2014, What is the consumption-CAPM

missing? An information-theoretic framework for the analysis of asset pricing models,

Forthcoming in Review of Financial Studies.

Gourieroux, Christian, and Joann Jasiak, 2006, Autoregressive gamma processes, Journal of

Forecasting 25, 129-152.

Gourio, François, 2008, Disasters and recoveries, American Economic Review Papers and

Proceedings 98, 68–73.
                                                                                             58
Green, Edward J., 1989, Individual-level randomness in a nonatomic population, working paper,

University of Pittsburgh.

Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song, 2014, The nature of countercyclical income risk,

Journal of Political Economy 122, 621-660.

Hansen, Lars P., John Heaton, and Amir Yaron, 1996, Finite-sample properties of some

alternative GMM estimators, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 262-280.

Harvey, Campbell R., and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests,

Journal of Finance 55, 1263–1295.

Julliard Christian, and Anisha Ghosh, 2012, Can rare events explain the equity premium puzzle?

Review of Financial Studies 25, 3037-3076.

Krebs, Thomas, 2007, Job displacement risk and the cost of business cycles, American Economic

Review 97, 664-686.

Kreps, David M., and Evan L. Porteus, 1978, Temporal resolution of uncertainty and dynamic

choice theory, Econometrica 46, 185–200.

Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel, and Jay Shanken, 2010, A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing

tests, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 175-196.

Mankiw, Gregory N., 1986, The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate shocks,

Journal of Financial Economics 17, 211-219.

Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert J. Barro, and José F. Ursùa, 2013, Crises and recoveries

in an empirical model of consumption disasters, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics

5, 35-74.



                                                                                            59
Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary Economics

22, 117-131.

Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, The response of household consumption to income tax refunds,

American Economic Review 89, 947-958.

Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris I. Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic

labor market risk, Journal of Political Economy 112, 695-717.

Townsend, Robert M., 1994, Risk and insurance in village India, Econometrica 62, 539-591.

Veronesi, Pietro, 2004, The peso problem hypothesis and stock market returns, Journal of

Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 707–725.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2013, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market

volatility? Journal of Finance 68, 987-1035.

Weil, Philippe, 1990, Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal of Economics

105, 29–42.




                                                                                              60
                                                      Table I
   Summary Statistics for Household Consumption Growth, Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to
                                      2009:Q4

The table reports the point estimates of the standard deviation ( µ21/2 ), third central moment ( µ3 ),
and fifth percentile of the cross-sectional distribution of quarterly household consumption
growth, along with their first-order autocorrelations. Standard errors are in parentheses. The
January tranche is the sample of households with first-quarter consumption in January through
March; “All tranches” refers to the combined January, February, and March tranches, where the
February tranche is the sample of households with first-quarter consumption in February through
April and the March tranche is the sample of households with first-quarter consumption in March
through May. AC1 denotes first-order autocorrelation. For the January tranche, the minimum,
maximum, and mean number of households in a quarter is 19, 1,310, and 674, respectively. For
all tranches, the minimum, maximum, and mean number of households is 64, 3,906, and 2,056,
respectively. The time series of the model-implied first, second, and third central moments are
obtained by inverting the expressions for the equilibrium price-dividend ratio and risk-free rate
to obtain the time series of the state variable and then computing the time series of the cross-
sectional moments as affine functions of the state variable (equations (4) to (6)). The time series
of the model-implied percentiles are obtained via simulations. Specifically, the time series of the
state variable is obtained as above by inverting the expressions for the equilibrium price-
dividend ratio and risk-free rate. Then using this aggregate time series, we simulate the
consumption growth of 10,000 households of the same length as that of the state variable and
obtain the time series of the fifth percentile from the cross-sectional distribution of household
consumption growth.


                                  µ 21/ 2     µ3        Q.05     AC1( µ21/2 )   AC1( µ3 )


                                              Data-Implied Moments
                      Jan.       0.379      -0.025   -0.595   0.772             0.124       0.534
                      tranche    (0.015)    (0.008)    (0.026)   (0.073)        (0.230)     (0.583)
                      All        0.383      -0.024     -0.616    0.897          0.180       0.792
                      tranches   (0.015)    (0.006)    (0.029)   (0.055)        (0.146)     (0.405)


                                              Model-Implied Moments
                                 0.219      -0.027    -0.246   0.864            0.876       0.846

                       Correlation between Data-Implied (All Tranches) and Model-Implied
                                                   Moments
                                 0.490     0.377




                                                                                                      61
                                       Table II
Correlation between Household Consumption Growth Statistics and Recessions, Quarterly Data
                                  1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4

  The table reports the correlation between household consumption growth statistics and
  recessions. The January tranche is the sample of households with first-quarter consumption in
  January through March; “All tranches” refers to the combined January, February, and March
  tranches, where the February tranche is the sample of households with first-quarter consumption
  in February through April and the March tranche is the sample of households with first-quarter
  consumption in March through May. I rec is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if
  there is a NBER-designated recession in at least two of the three months of the quarter. The time
  series of the model-implied first, second, and third central moments are obtained by inverting the
  expressions for the equilibrium price-dividend ratio and risk-free rate to obtain the time series of
  the state variable and then computing the time series of the cross-sectional moments as affine
  functions of the state variable (equations (4) to (6)). The time series of the model-implied
  percentiles are obtained via simulations. Specifically, the time series of the state variable is
  obtained as above by inverting the expressions for the equilibrium price-dividend ratio and risk-
  free rate. Then, using this aggregate time series, we simulate the consumption growth of 10,000
  households of the same length as that of the state variable and obtain the time series of the fifth
  percentile from the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth.


                                   corr ( µ 21/ 2 , I rec )   corr ( µ3 , I rec )
                             Correlation between Data-Implied Statistics and
                                               Recessions
                        January        0.139          -0.249          -0.142
                        tranche
                        All            0.118          -0.217          -0.087
                        tranches

                            Correlation between Model-Implied Statistics and
                                              Recessions
                                       0.264         -0.268          -0.233




                                                                                                   62
                                         Table III
     Model Fit and Parameter Estimates, Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4, January
                                        Tranche

The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the baseline model over the quarterly
sample period 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The GMM system consists of 17 moment restrictions (14
aggregate moments and the first three central moments of the cross-sectional distribution of
household consumption growth) in 14 parameters. E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf ) are the mean,
standard         deviation,     and     first-order  autocorrelation    of     the    risk-free    rate;
E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of
the market return; E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard deviation, and
first-order autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio; and µ21/2 ( ∆cCEX ) and µ3 ( ∆cCEX ) denote
the volatility and third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household
consumption growth. ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and ∆d is dividend growth. The
preference parameters are the RRA coefficient, γ , the EIS ψ , and the subjective discount factor,
δ . The other parameters are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of aggregate consumption growth;
the parameters governing the dynamics of the state variable, n , ξ , and ρ ; the parameters for
household income shocks, σ , σˆ , and ω̂ ; and the three parameters governing the dynamics of
aggregate dividend growth, α d , β d , and σ d . The J-stat is 4.38 and the model is not rejected at
the 10% level of significance. The simulated 90%, 95%, and 99% critical values of the J-stat are
6.52, 9.11, and 15.50, respectively. Note that because we use a pre-specified weighting matrix,
the J-stat has a nonstandard asymptotic distribution and its critical values are computed via
simulation.




                                                                                                     63
                                                                             Prices
           E  rf      σ ( rf )   AC1 ( rf   )   E [ rm ]      σ ( rm )                        E[p / d]   σ (p/d)    AC1 ( p / d )
Data   0.005              0.005       0.863         0.019         0.087          0.056             3.745      0.411       0.972
      (0.001)            (0.001)     (0.044)        (0.009)      (0.007)        (0.104)           (0.066)    (0.031)     (0.021)
Model 0.007               0.010       0.876         0.020         0.228         -0.061             3.787      0.470       0.876

                                                               Consumption and Dividends
          E [ ∆c ]      σ ( ∆c )     E [ ∆d ]       σ ( ∆d )                  µ 21/ 2 ( ∆cCEX )



Data  0.004              0.004        0.005         0.026         0.328            0.379          -0.025
     (0.001)            (0.0004)     (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.088)          (0.016)         (0.008)
Model 0.008              0.004       -0.002         0.025         0.308            0.219          -0.027

                                                         Estimates of Preference Parameters
γ              ψ            δ
1.12          1.00        0.939
(0.396)     (0.526)      (0.150)

                                                               Other Parameter Estimates
µ             σa                                                   σ                     σd
0.008        0.004        0.040      0.0002         0.876         0.718           0.001             0.020      -40.1         0.110       0.623
(0.001)     (0.001)      (0.324)     (0.006)        (0.125)      (0.027)         (0.102)           (0.613)    (0.001)       (0.085)     (0.161)




                                                                                                                                        64
                                       Table IV
          Model Fit and Parameter Estimates, Quarterly Data 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4

The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the baseline model over the quarterly
sample period 1947:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The GMM system consists of 13 moment restrictions (only
aggregate moments, that is, excluding the first three central moments of the cross-sectional
distribution of household consumption growth) in 13 parameters. E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf )
are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of the risk-free rate;
E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of
the market return; and E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard deviation, and
first-order autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio. ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and
 ∆d is dividend growth. The preference parameters are the RRA coefficient, γ , the EIS, ψ , and
the subjective discount factor, δ . The other parameters are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of
aggregate consumption growth; the parameters for the dynamics of the state variable,
n , ξ , and ρ ; the parameters for household income shocks, σ , σˆ , and ω̂ ; and the three
parameters governing the dynamics of aggregate dividend growth, α d , β d , and σ d .


                                                                     Prices
              E  rf        σ ( rf )       AC1 ( rf   )    E [ rm ]   σ ( rm )                  E[p / d]   σ (p/d)   AC1 ( p / d )
Data          0.003            0.006           0.821          0.017        0.083        0.091       3.470      0.422      0.979
             (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.060)        (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.063)    (0.046)    (0.029)    (0.012)
Model         0.007            0.003           0.960          0.018        0.123        -0.016      3.390      0.437      0.960

                                                     Consumption and Dividends
              E [ ∆c ]         σ ( ∆c )        E [ ∆d ]  σ ( ∆d )
Data          0.005            0.005           0.004          0.023          0.369
             (0.0004)         (0.0003)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.070)
Model         0.008            0.004          -0.015          0.037          0.293

                                                 Estimates of Preference Parameter
γ                ψ               δ
13.3           1.02            0.988
(0.001)       (1.12)          (0.263)

                                                         Other Parameter Estimates
µ           σa                                                       σ                            σd
0.008    0.004             0.622          0.0007      0.960              0.0000      0.001        0.031       -1.47      0.392          0.039
(0.001) (0.0005)           (7.03)         (0.004)    (0.133)             (6.42)      (0.168)      (0.156)     (6.23)     (0.023)        (0.521)




                                                                                                                          65
                                                         Table V
                                Model Fit and Parameter Estimates, Annual Data 1929 to 2009

          The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the baseline model over the annual
          sample period 1929 to 2009. The GMM system consists of 14 moment restrictions (only
          aggregate moments, that is, excluding the first three central moments of the cross-sectional
          distribution of household consumption growth) in 14 parameters. E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf )
          are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of the risk-free rate;
          E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of
          the market return; and E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard deviation, and
          first-order autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio. ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and
           ∆d is dividend growth. The preference parameters are the RRA coefficient, γ , the EIS, ψ , and
          the subjective discount factor, δ . The other parameters are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of
          aggregate consumption growth; the parameters governing the dynamics of the state variable,
          n , ξ , and ρ ; the parameters for household income shocks, σ , σˆ , and ω̂ ; and the three
          parameters governing the dynamics of aggregate dividend growth, α d , β d , and σ d .




                                                                          Prices
              E  rf      σ ( rf )    AC1 ( rf   )    E [ rm ]   σ ( rm )             E[p / d]   σ (p/d)    AC1 ( p / d )

Data   0.006                 0.030       0.647          0.070        0.187     -0.084     3.390      0.435       0.864
      (0.005)               (0.005)     (0.111)         (0.019)     (0.019)    (0.098)   (0.081)    (0.053)     (0.058)
Model 0.025                  0.008       0.837          0.049        0.224     -0.077     3.330      0.399       0.837

                                                              Consumption and Dividends
               E [ ∆c ]      σ ( ∆c )    E [ ∆d ]       σ ( ∆d )    AC1(∆d )

      0.020                 0.020        0.012           0.115       0.086
Data (0.002)               (0.002)      (0.011)         (0.018)     (0.110)
Model 0.018                 0.020        0.013           0.054       0.114

                                                        Estimates of Preference Parameters
      γ                         δ
5.05             1.10         .983
    (0.071)     (0.868)      (0.198)


                                                               Other Parameter Estimates
µ                σa                                                   σ                  σd
0.018         0.020         0.111        0.004           0.837      0.224       0.020     0.050       -2.37     0.448          0.037
(0.003)       (0.004)      (0.538)      (0.019)         (0.162)     (1.54)     (0.059)   (0.305)     (0.147)    (0.048)        (1.19)




                                                                                                                                 66
                                        Table VI
CRRA Model Fit and Parameter Estimates, Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4, January Tranche

The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the variant of the baseline model with
CRRA preferences over the quarterly sample period 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The GMM system
consists of 17 moment restrictions (14 aggregate moments and the first three central moments of
the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth) in 13 parameters.
 E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of
the risk-free rate; E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order
autocorrelation of the market return; E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard
deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio; and µ21/2 ( ∆cCEX ) and
 µ3 ( ∆cCEX ) denote the volatility and third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of
household consumption growth. ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and ∆d is dividend
growth. The preference parameters are the RRA coefficient, γ , and the subjective discount
factor, δ . The other parameters are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of aggregate consumption
growth; the parameters governing the dynamics of the state variable, n , ξ , and ρ ; the parameters
for household income shocks, σ , σˆ , and ω̂ ; and the parameters governing the dynamics of
aggregate dividend growth, α d , β d , and . The J-stat is 14.58 and the model is rejected at the
5% level of significance. The simulated 90%, 95%, and 99% critical values of the J-stat are 6.35,
8.93, and 15.28, respectively. Note that because we use a prespecified weighting matrix, the J-
stat has a nonstandard asymptotic distribution and its critical values are computed via simulation.




                                                                                                        67
                                                                            Prices
          E  rf      σ ( rf )   AC1 ( rf   )   E [ rm ]      σ ( rm )                          E[p / d]        σ (p/d)    AC1 ( p / d )
Data   0.005             0.005       0.863         0.019         0.087          0.056               3.745           0.411       0.972
      (0.001)            (0.001)    (0.044)        (0.009)      (0.007)        (0.104)             (0.066)         (0.031)     (0.021)
Model  0.023             0.019       0.912         0.023         0.025          0.125               3.792           0.013       0.912

                                                              Consumption and Dividends
           E [ ∆c ]      σ ( ∆c )    E [ ∆d ]      σ ( ∆d )                    µ 21/ 2 ( ∆cCEX )    µ3 ( ∆cCEX )


Data   0.004            0.004        0.005          0.026         0.328           0.379             -0.025
      (0.001)          (0.0004)     (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.088)         (0.016)            (0.008)
Model 0.002             0.008        0.001          0.025         0.134           0.059             -0.002

                                                       Estimates of Preference Parameters
    γ       δ
2.45        0.943
(8.34)     (0.513)

                                                              Other Parameter Estimates
µ            σa                                                   σ                                    σd
0.002     0.008          0.000      0.096          0.912        0.0007           0.001                0.023          -1.31        0.007       0.672
(0.001)   (0.001)       (0.005)     (5.14)         (0.132)      (0.033)         (0.012)              (0.206)         (16.3)      (0.080)      (1.68)




                                                                                                                                        68
                                    Table VII
           CRRA Model Fit and Parameter Estimates, Annual Data 1929 to 2009

The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the variant of the baseline model with
CRRA preferences over the annual sample period 1929 to 2009. The GMM system consists of 14
moment restrictions (only aggregate moments, that is, excluding the first three central moments
of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth) in 13
parameters. E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order
autocorrelation of the risk-free rate; E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard
deviation,         and        first-order     autocorrelation of  the     market   return;   and
E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order
autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio. ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and ∆d is
dividend growth. The preference parameters are the RRA coefficient, γ , and the subjective
discount factor, δ . The other parameters are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of aggregate
consumption growth; the parameters governing the dynamics of the state variable, n , ξ , and ρ ;
the parameters for household income shocks, σ , σˆ , and ω̂ ; and the parameters governing the
dynamics of aggregate dividend growth, α d , β d , and σ d . The J-stat is 26.02 and the model is
rejected at the 1% level of significance. The simulated 90%, 95%, and 99% critical values of the
J-stat are 10.11, 14.34, and 24.78, respectively. Note that because we use a pre-specified
weighting matrix, the J-stat has a nonstandard asymptotic distribution and its critical values are
computed via simulation.




                                                                                                69
                                                                           Prices
          E  rf     σ ( rf )   AC1 ( rf   )   E [ rm ]      σ ( rm )                 E[p / d]    σ (p/d)    AC1 ( p / d )
Data       0.006         0.030      0.647         0.070         0.187         -0.084      3.390       0.435       0.864
          (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.111)        (0.019)      (0.019)        (0.098)    (0.081)     (0.053)     (0.058)
Model      0.042         0.029      0.787         0.036         0.114          0.117      3.397       0.069       0.787

                                                             Consumption and Dividends
           E [ ∆c ]     σ ( ∆c )    E [ ∆d ]      σ ( ∆d )     AC1(∆d )
Data   0.020            0.020       0.012         0.115          0.086
      (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.011)        (0.018)       (0.110)
Model   0.011           0.023       0.003         0.112          0.139

                                                      Estimates of Preference Parameters
γ           δ
14.7        0.987
(0.242)    (0.002)

                                                             Other Parameter Estimates
µ            σa                                                  σ                           σd
.011       .023         .001        .167           .787        .00001           .005        .110       -1.75        .951         .026
(0.003)   (0.004)      (0.056)     (3.39)         (0.171)      (0.016)         (0.050)     (0.164)     (8.04)      (0.000)      (0.012)




                                                                                                                                70
                                        Table VIII
                      Lognormal Model Fit and Parameter Estimates,
                    Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4, January Tranche

The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the variant of the baseline model with
lognormal shocks over the quarterly sample period 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The GMM system
consists of 16 moment restrictions (14 aggregate moments and the first two central moments of
the    cross-sectional           distribution    of   household  consumption    growth)   in     12
parameters. E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order
autocorrelation of the risk-free rate; E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard
deviation,          and         first-order     autocorrelation  of      the    market    return;
E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order
autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio; and µ21/2 ( ∆cCEX ) and µ3 ( ∆cCEX ) denote the volatility
and third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household consumption growth.
 ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and ∆d is dividend growth. The preference parameters are
the RRA coefficient, γ , the EIS, ψ , and the subjective discount factor, δ . The other parameters
are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of aggregate consumption growth; the parameters for the
dynamics of the state variable, n σ , ξσ , and ρσ ; the parameter for household income shocks, σˆ ;
and the parameters governing the dynamics of aggregate dividend growth, α d , β d , and σ d . The
J-stat is 4.63 and the model is not rejected at the 10% level of significance. The simulated 90%,
95%, and 99% critical values of the J-stat are 6.30, 8.85, and 15.09, respectively. Note that
because we use a pre-specified weighting matrix, the J-stat has a nonstandard asymptotic
distribution and its critical values are computed via simulation.




                                                                                                    71
                                                                   Prices
          E  rf      σ ( rf )   AC1 ( rf   )      E [ rm ]    σ ( rm )                      E[p / d]   σ (p/d)    AC1 ( p / d )
Data   0.005             0.005       0.863            0.019       0.087       0.056              3.745      0.411       0.972
      (0.001)           (0.001)     (0.044)          (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.104)            (0.066)    (0.031)     (0.021)
Model 0.020              0.006       0.922            0.021       0.163      -0.032              3.787      0.419       0.922

                                                      Consumption and Dividends
           E [ ∆c ]     σ ( ∆c )     E [ ∆d ]        σ ( ∆d )                µ21/ 2 ( ∆cCEX )


Data   0.004            0.004        0.005            0.026       0.328       0.379             -0.025
      (0.001)          (0.000)      (0.003)          (0.004)     (0.088)     (0.016)            (0.008)
Model 0.007             0.004       -0.001            0.037       0.314       0.297                 0.0

                                                   Estimates of Preference Parameters
γ             ψ            δ
1.03         1.00        0.901
(14.5)     (0.501)       (1.13)

                                                       Other Parameter Estimates
µ              σa                                                           σd
0.007       0.004        0.008       0.003            0.922       0.001       0.030               -7.25      0.297
(0.001)    (0.001)      (0.104)      (0.012)         (0.125)     (0.024)     (0.160)             (0.388)    (0.024)




                                                                                                                                72
                                       Table IX
          Model Fit and Parameter Estimates, Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4,
                       January Tranche: Only Business Cycle Shock

The table reports parameter estimates and model fit for the baseline model over the quarterly
sample period 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The GMM system consists of 17 moment restrictions (14
aggregate moments and the first three central moments of the cross-sectional distribution of
household consumption growth) in 12 parameters. E  rf  , σ ( rf ) , and AC1( rf ) are the mean,
standard         deviation,     and      first-order autocorrelation    of     the    risk-free    rate;
E [ rm ] , σ ( rm ) , and AC1(rm ) are the mean, standard deviation, and first-order autocorrelation of
the market return; E [ p / d ] , σ ( p / d ) , and AC1( p / d ) are the mean, standard deviation, and
first-order autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio; and µ21/2 ( ∆cCEX ) and µ3 ( ∆cCEX ) denote
the volatility and third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of household
consumption growth. ∆c is aggregate consumption growth and ∆d is dividend growth. The
preference parameters are the RRA coefficient, γ , the EIS, ψ , and the subjective discount
factor, δ . The other parameters are: the mean, µ , and volatility, σ a , of aggregate consumption
growth; the parameters governing the dynamics of the state variable, n , ξ , and ρ ; the parameter
for household income shocks, σ ; and the parameters governing the dynamics of aggregate
dividend growth, α d , β d , and σ d . The J-stat is 5.84 and the model is not rejected at the 10%
level of significance. The simulated 90%, 95%, and 99% critical values of the J-stat are 6.20,
8.74, and 14.99, respectively. Note that because we use a pre-specified weighting matrix, the J-
stat has a nonstandard asymptotic distribution and its critical values are computed via simulation.




                                                                                                     73
                                                              Prices
          E  rf      σ ( rf )   AC1 ( rf   )   E [ rm ]   σ ( rm )               E[p / d]    σ (p/d)     AC1 ( p / d )

Data   0.005             0.005       0.863         0.019       0.087      0.056       3.745       0.411       0.972
      (0.001)           (0.001)     (0.044)        (0.009)    (0.007)    (0.104)     (0.066)     (0.031)      (0.021)
Model -0.008             0.023       0.992         0.012       0.055      0.017       3.719       0.386        0.992

                                                   Consumption and Dividends
           E [ ∆c ]     σ ( ∆c )     E [ ∆d ]      σ ( ∆d )


Data   0.004            0.004        0.005         0.026       0.328       0.379      -0.025
      (0.001)          (0.000)      (0.003)        (0.004)    (0.088)     (0.016)     (0.008)
Model 0.008             0.005       -0.012         0.032       0.277       0.130      -0.022

                                                Estimates of Preference Parameters
γ             ψ            δ
1.05         1.00        0.989
(0.278)    (0.046)      (0.068)

                                                    Other Parameter Estimates
µ              σa                                              σ                       σd
0.008       0.005        1.355       0.000         0.992       0.999      0.008         0.027      -58.13
(0.001)     (0.390)     (0.331)     (0.000)        (0.129)    (0.641)    (0.113)       (0.182)     (0.279)




                                                                                                                        74
                                      Table X
    Rolling Fama-MacBeth Regressions, Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4, January
                                      Tranche

The table reports Fama-Macbeth (1973) cross-sectional regression results using as test assets the
25 Fama-French (1993) portfolios (Panel A), the 30 industry-sorted portfolios (Panel B), and the
combined set of 25 Fama-French and 30 industry-sorted portfolios (Panel C). The data are
quarterly over 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The adjusted R squared, R 2 , are reported. The standard
errors of a and λ are calculated from the time series of the cross-sectional intercepts and slope
coefficients. The factor loadings are estimated at each period t, starting with the midpoint of the
sample, using all the returns up to period t.


               2
           R
                                       Panel A: 25 FF Portfolios
          13.6%         0.01          0.73
                       (0.01)        (0.61)
          40.0%         0.01                     -0.09
                       (0.01)                    (0.07)
          37.4%         0.01          0.01       -0.10
                       (0.01)        (0.70)      (0.07)
          59.5%         0.04                                 -0.03         0.01     0.01
                       (0.02)                               (0.03)        (0.01)   (0.01)

                                     Panel B: 30 Industry Portfolios
          14.0%         0.01          0.34
                       (0.01)        (0.38)
          -6.9%         0.01                       0.00
                       (0.01)                     (0.07)
          10.4%         0.02          0.74         0.09
                       (0.01)        (0.38)       (0.07)
          -22.8%        0.02                                  -0.01       -0.01    0.005
                       (0.02)                                 (0.02)      (0.01)   (0.01)

                                Panel C: 25 FF and 30 Industry Portfolios
          14.9%         0.01          0.37
                       (0.01)        (0.37)
          5.0%          0.02                      -0.03
                       (0.01)                    (0.06)
          9.4%          0.02          0.54         0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.39)      (0.06)
          -7.5%         0.03                                  -0.01       0.004     0.01
                       (0.02)                                (0.02)       (0.01)   (0.01)




                                                                                                75
                                           Table XI
                               Fixed Fama-MacBeth Regressions,
                      Quarterly Data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4, January Tranche

The table reports Fama-Macbeth (1973) cross-sectional regression results using as test assets the
25 Fama-French (1993) portfolios (Panel A), the 30 industry-sorted portfolios (Panel B), and the
combined set of 25 Fama-French and 30 industry-sorted portfolios (Panel C). The data are
quarterly over 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4. The adjusted R squared, R 2 , are reported. The standard
errors of a and λ are calculated from the time series of the cross-sectional intercepts and slope
coefficients. The factor loadings are estimated on the first half of the sample.


               2
           R
                                      Panel A: 25 FF Portfolios
           21.5%         0.01        0.92
                        (0.01)      (0.65)
           42.8%         0.01                   -0.11
                        (0.01)                  (0.06)
           41.6%         0.01        0.16       -0.11
                        (0.01)      (0.90)      (0.06)
           53.6%         0.04                               -0.03         0.01      0.01
                        (0.03)                             (0.03)        (0.01)    (0.01)

                                    Panel B: 30 Industry Portfolios
           7.5%          0.01        0.33
                        (0.01)      (0.39)
           7.9%          0.02                     0.06
                        (0.01)                   (0.06)
           39.0%         0.02        0.57         0.10
                        (0.01)      (0.42)       (0.06)
           28.3%         0.07                                -0.05       0.002     0.001
                        (0.03)                               (0.03)      (0.01)    (0.01)

                               Panel C: 25 FF and 30 Industry Portfolios
           9.8%          0.01        0.40
                        (0.01)      (0.37)
           -2.0%         0.02                    0.00
                        (0.01)                  (0.05)
           13.2%         0.02        0.53        0.02
                        (0.01)      (0.41)      (0.05)
           30.2%         0.07                                -0.06       0.004      0.01
                        (0.03)                              (0.02)       (0.01)    (0.01)




                                                                                                76
Figure 1. Time series of the cross-sectional skewness, quarterly data 1982:Q1 to 2009:Q4.




                                                                                            77
         1
           In a different context, in particular, relying on a non-parametric relative entropy minimizing
         approach to filter the most likely SDF, Ghosh, Julliard, and Taylor (2014) highlight the
         importance of higher moments of the SDF, especially skewness, in pricing assets. In particular,
         they show that about a quarter of the overall entropy of the most likely SDF is generated by its
         third- and higher-order moments, with the third central moment alone accounting for about 18%
         of the entropy.
         2
           Related references include Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011), Barro and Ursùa (2008),
         Constantinides (2008), Gabaix (2012), Gourio (2008), Harvey and Siddique (2000), Julliard and
         Ghosh (2012), Nakamura et al. (2013), Veronesi (2004), and Wachter (2013).
         3
                                                                  , s sηi , s is known as a Poisson mixture of
           The probability distribution of the random variable ji1/2
         normals. This distribution is tractable because it is normal, conditional on ji , s .
         4
           The argument is due to Green (1989) and is elaborated in Appendix A.
         5
           Recursive preferences were introduced by Kreps and Porteus (1978) and adapted in the form
         used here by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990).
         6
           Essentially, we build into the model the assumption that the consumption growth of all
         households in a given period is independent of each household’s consumption level. A richer
         model would allow the consumption growth of each household in a given period to depend on
         the household’s consumption level, consistent with the empirical findings of Guvenen, Ozkan,
         and Song (2014). Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014) analyze the confidential earnings histories
         of millions of individuals over the period 1978 to 2010 and find that the earning power of the
         lowest income workers and the top 1% of income workers declines the most in recessions,
         compared to other workers.
         7
           The reader may wonder why the model-implied third central moment is always negative. While
         the        third         central         moment           of             , s sηi , s
                                                                               ji1/2           is zero,

µ3 ( ji1/2
           ,t +1σηi ,t +1 ) | ωt +1 
                                        ( i ,t +1 i ,t +1 ) i ,t +1  t +1 
=                                       E  j1/2 ση
                                     E=
                                                               3
                                                                 | j  | ω  0 , the third central moment of

− ji , ss 2 / 2 is negative and this imparts a negative third central moment to the random
         variable ji1/2  , s sηi , s − ji , ss / 2 .
                                              2

         8
           Equations (4) to (6) show that the mean, variance, and third central moment of the cross-
         sectional distribution of relative household consumption growth are affine in the single state
         variable, household consumption risk, ωt . Therefore, an increase in household consumption risk
         simultaneously results in a decrease in the cross-sectional mean and an increase in both the
         cross-sectional variance and the absolute value of the (negative) third central moment.
         9
           The ARG (1) process is the exact discrete-time equivalent of the square-root (CIR) process, and
         is defined as follows (see, for example, Gourieroux and Jasiak (2006)):
         ( xt +1 / x ) | yt +1 ~ Γ (ν + yt +1 ) , ν > 0, yt +1 | xt ~ Ρ ( ρ xt / x ) , ρ , x > 0 , where Γ denotes a gamma
         distribution, P denotes a Poisson distribution, ξ is a scale parameter, ν is the degree of freedom,
         ρ is the correlation parameter, and yt +1 is the mixing variable. The conditional probability density
         function of an ARG (1) process, f ( xt +1 | xt ;ν , x , ρ ) , is a mixture of gamma densities with

                                                                                                                       78
Poisson weights. Therefore, the ARG (1) process is strictly positive. Moreover, it also admits the
autoregressive representation in equation (7).
10
   We draw a distinction between the stock market and the “market,” which we define earlier as
the sum total of all assets in the economy. The log dividend growth of the stock market is ∆dt +1 .
11
    Our description and filters of the household consumption data closely follow Brav,
Constantinides, and Geczy (2002).
12
   If we were to exclude the training quarter in classifying a household as in the panel, then each
household would stay in the panel for four quarters and new households would replace one-
fourth of the participating households each quarter.
13
   The constant rotation of the panel makes it impossible to test hypotheses regarding a specific
household’s behavior over time for more than four quarters. A longer time series of individual
household consumption is available from the PSID database, but only for food consumption.
14
   See Attanasio and Weber (1995) and Souleles (1999) for further details regarding the database.
15
   A relatively mild minimum asset criterion of $2,000 for a household to be included in the
sample eliminates about 80% of households and eliminates all households in some quarters.
Stricter filters further eliminate households to the point that statistics with a small number of
households become unreliable. In the interest of having a large sample, we do not impose a
minimum asset filter in the reported tests.
16
   See Table 4 of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008).
17
   This equality holds if the measurement error has a stationary cross-sectional distribution or if
the higher-order (>2) moments of its cross-sectional distribution are zero for all time periods t.
18
   The pre-specified weighting matrix has two advantages over the efficient weighting matrix.
First, it has superior small-sample properties (see, for example, Ahn and Gadarowski (1999),
Ferson and Foerster (1994), and Hansen, Heaton, and Yaron (1996)). Second, the moment
restrictions included in the GMM have different orders of magnitude, with the mean of the price-
dividend ratio being a couple of orders of magnitude larger than the means of the market return
and risk-free rate. Therefore, placing larger weights on the latter two moments allows the GMM
procedure to put equal emphasis in matching all these moments. We repeated our estimation
using the efficient weighting matrix and obtained similar results.
19
   Similar results are obtained for the February and March tranches.
20
   The model implies that the risk-free rate and price-dividend ratio are affine functions of the
state variable. We use the point estimates of the parameters and extract the current value of the
state variable from the observed risk-free rate and price-dividend ratio by minimizing the least-
squares criterion function. Given the current value of the state variable, we calculate the model-
implied cross-sectional moments using equations (4) to (6).
21
   See Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010).
22
    Note that equation (D3) implies that A1 is the solution of a quadratic. We verified, via
simulations, that the economically meaningful root is the smaller of the two.
23
   Note that equation (D10) implies that B1 is the solution of a quadratic equation. We verified,
via simulations, that the economically meaningful root is the smaller of the two.




                                                                                                79
