                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE EFFECT OF PUBLIC INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR CHILDLESS ADULTS
                             ON LABOR SUPPLY

                                           Laura Dague
                                          Thomas DeLeire
                                         Lindsey Leininger

                                        Working Paper 20111
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20111


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




This work is supported by grants from the UC Davis Poverty Center and the W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research. We thank Gaston Palmucci, Chris Reynolds, Kristen Voskuil, and Kara
Mandell for excellent research assistance. Alan Barreca, Kitt Carpenter, Donna Friedsam, Kosali Simon,
Tim Moore, and participants of the 2014 Affordable Care Act and the Labor Market conference at
the Chicago Fed provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20111.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Laura Dague, Thomas DeLeire, and Lindsey Leininger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Public Insurance Coverage for Childless Adults on Labor Supply
Laura Dague, Thomas DeLeire, and Lindsey Leininger
NBER Working Paper No. 20111
May 2014
JEL No. I13,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

This study provides plausibly causal estimates of the effect of public insurance coverage on the employment
of non-elderly, non-disabled adults without dependent children (“childless adults”). We use regression
discontinuity and propensity score matching difference-in-differences methods to take advantage of
the sudden imposition of an enrollment cap, comparing the labor supply of enrollees to eligible applicants
on a waitlist. We find enrollment into public insurance leads to sizable and statistically meaningful
reductions in employment up to at least 9 quarters later, with an estimated size of from 2 to 10 percentage
points depending upon the model used.


Laura Dague                                          Lindsey Leininger
Bush School of Government                            School of Public Health
  & Public Service                                   University of Illinois-Chicago
Texas A&M University                                 1603 W. Taylor St
4220 TAMU                                            Chicago, IL 60612
College Station, TX 77843                            lindseyl@uic.edu
dague@tamu.edu

Thomas DeLeire
McCourt School of Public Policy
Georgetown University
Old North, Suite 100
37th and O Streets, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20057
and NBER
td495@georgetown.edu
I.      Introduction

Medicaid is currently the third largest federal domestic spending item after
Medicare and Social Security and the second largest state spending item after
education. Nearly 60 million low-income adults and children benefit from the
program and up to 21.3 million additional low-income adults could eventually
gain coverage under Medicaid expansions associated with the 2010 Affordable
Care Act (ACA; Stephens 2013).1 Given the large and increasing population
served by the program, knowing how Medicaid and other public health insurance
programs affect the labor supply of recipients and their family members has
become increasingly important for understanding the total costs of the program.
        Economic theory predicts that cash and in-kind transfer programs
generally should reduce labor supply, and extensive empirical research typically
has shown that most such programs do indeed have the hypothesized effect.
However, the literature on Medicaid’s effect on the labor supply of low-income
parents is mixed. While initial work finds strong work disincentives (Ellwood
and Adams 1990, Moffitt and Wolfe 1992), later papers find weaker or even
positive effects (Yelowitz 1995, Montgomery and Navin 2000, Ham and Shore-
Sheppard 2001 and 2005, Hamersma and Kim 2009, Hamersma 2010, Strumpf
2011). The inconclusive nature of the existing literature suggests effects are
heterogeneous across populations and time periods studied.
        We contribute to this literature by providing plausibly causal estimates of
the effect of means-tested public insurance coverage on the employment of non-
elderly, non-disabled adults without dependent children (“childless adults”).
Researchers have largely been unable to explore the effects of Medicaid eligibility
on the labor supply of childless adults, as states have only recently begun

1
 Approximately half these projected new adults live in states where, as of March 5, 2013,
governors either had not yet decided to expand or oppose the Medicaid expansion (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2013).


                                              2
extending coverage to this population. A recent paper by Garthwaite et al. (2013)
examines eligibility contractions in Tennesse’s program (TennCare), which had
been available to childless adults until July 2005, and found both large reductions
in Medicaid coverage and large increases in employment rates among childless
adults in Tennessee following this contraction. These results are consistent with a
60 percentage point reduction in labor supply stemming from the availability of
public insurance. Baicker et al. (2013) examined the impacts of Medicaid on the
employment of recipients through the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment and
found modest labor supply effects, of 1.6 percentage points, that are not
statistically different from zero.
        Learning about the likely labor market effects of the ACA on low-income
childless adults is of critical policy importance. Initial Congressional Budget
Office projections suggested that the version of the legislation signed into law
would have increased coverage by 33 million people by 2019, with Medicaid
accounting for about half these gains and low-income childless adults comprising
the majority of the Medicaid expansion population (Congressional Budget Office
2012a). While the subsequent Supreme Court decision making the ACA-related
Medicaid expansion a state option will certainly reduce the magnitude of the
coverage increases, it remains the case that childless adults are projected to gain
large-scale eligibility for Medicaid in 2014 (Congressional Budget Office 2012b).
        In this study, we exploit a recent policy reversal in Wisconsin, during
which a major public insurance expansion for adults without dependent children
(“childless adults”) was implemented and, several months later, abruptly frozen.
Individuals who applied after the program was frozen were placed on a waitlist.
Those on the waitlist would only be allowed to enroll in the program once
enrollment dropped below the capped level, which did not occur at any time
during our study period. We obtain estimates of the causal effect of Medicaid on
the labor supply of childless adults by comparing the labor market outcomes of


                                          3
those who applied prior to the program freeze and received benefits to those who
applied after the program freeze and did not receive benefits.
       We use two complementary empirical strategies. First, we use a
regression discontinuity design that employs the timing of the enrollment
suspension and waitlist introduction. Second, we use a propensity score matching
difference-in-differences approach that matches plan enrollees with waitlisted
applicants on their observable characteristics. While the regression discontinuity
design likely has stronger internal validity, the propensity score matching
difference-in-differences approach allows us to take advantage of a greater
amount of our data.
       A particular strength of our study is that we rely on the state’s own
administrative records rather than on self-reported enrollment, employment, and
earnings data. The data for our study are Medicaid enrollment files merged with
quarterly unemployment insurance earnings reports from Wisconsin. The
Medicaid records allow us to observe all enrolled and waitlisted applicants,
including their exact date of application. The unemployment insurance earnings
records are from employer reporting to the state and allow us to observe quarterly
wages from all employers, changes in employer, and any spells of non-
employment lasting more than one quarter. We merge the two administrative
datasets using Social Security numbers.
       We find public insurance enrollment reduces the likelihood an adult in our
sample will be employed by 2.4 to 5.9 percentage points in the difference-in-
difference models and by 6.1 to 10.6 percentage points in the regression
discontinuity models. These effect sizes are similar to magnitudes found in the
current literature on the labor supply effects of other types of health insurance
programs and the sign is consistent with both the theoretical and empirical
literatures on the effects of cash and transfer programs on labor supply.



                                          4
II.    Program Background

Launched in January 2009, Wisconsin’s BadgerCare Plus Core Plan provides
health insurance to childless adults with household incomes below 200% of the
Federal Poverty Line (FPL). The state of Wisconsin applied for and received a
federal 1115 waiver to extend some health benefits to this population. Once
enrolled, members receive a managed care benefit package and face little cost-
sharing. With few exceptions, coverage is not available to persons who already
have any form of private health insurance, quit their job, or voluntarily dropped
any health insurance in the 12 months prior to application. The program initially
required a $60 application fee and sliding scale premiums for those with incomes
from 150-200% FPL. Upon enrollment, members were eligible to receive benefits
for a period of 12 months, when eligibility would be reevaluated.
       Enrollment began January 1, 2009 for a limited group and opened to the
public on July 1, 2009. Application levels immediately exceeded projections and
program budget, with enrollment reaching a high of 65,057. On October 5, 2009,
then-Governor Jim Doyle announced at a news conference that Core Plan
applications would be suspended effective October 9, 2009 at noon. The
suspension was stated by the Governor to result from unanticipated demand for
the program and was reported in newspapers statewide.
       Subsequent eligible applications were placed on a waitlist. Waitlisted
applicants were not required to pay the application fee, and were told that once
openings in Core were available they would be notified. The waitlist had reached
89,412 individuals by December 2010. The state has sought to decrease overall
Core Plan enrollment to a sustainable level, and has thus not been enrolling
waitlisted applicants as current Core Plan members leave the program. The only
waitlisted applicants ever enrolled were a small number who were eligible for a
medical waitlist bypass because of cancer or heart disease. The presence of a



                                         5
waitlist, imposed quickly based only on state budget criteria and not on
participant characteristics, provides a natural and ready comparison group for
those enrolled in the Core Plan. Those on the waitlist wanted and were eligible to
enroll, but were not able to do so before the enrollment suspension went into
effect.2
           Core Plan enrollment to date has not been opened up to waitlist applicants,
and attrition had reduced enrollment levels to approximately 24,000 as of July
2012. Attrition can occur through a change in eligibility (such as an out of state
move, a change in insurance status such as eligibility for insurance through a new
job, or a change in categorical eligibility criteria), or failure to re-enroll on the
part of the beneficiary. In addition, effective July 1, 2012 non-payment of newly
required monthly premiums for enrollees with incomes above 133% FPL and a
change in income eligibility prior to the end of the 12 month enrollment period
became possible reasons for a change in eligibility. Wisconsin’s governor and
legislature chose not to participate in federally incentivized Medicaid expansions
under the Affordable Care Act; however, effective April1, 2014 all childless
adults with income under 100% FPL are allowed to enroll in the Medicaid
program and all adults with incomes over 100% FPL are required to transition out
of the program.



2
 A stop-gap program with more limited benefits, called the BadgerCare Plus Basic Plan, was
promised for waitlisted applicants at the time of the announcement. The Basic Plan was formally
announced in January 2010 and coverage was eventually offered to those enrolled on the waitlist
effective in July 2010. The state legislature required the Basic Plan to be self-supporting through
premiums. Participants in Basic were required to remain eligible for the Core Plan; this meant,
among other requirements, their incomes had to remain below the 200% FPL threshold. Adverse
selection has been a problem for the Basic Plan: enrollment in the program was closed on March
19, 2011 and enrollees saw multiple increases in required premiums over time. According to a
state press release, (http://www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/News/PressReleases/2011/031811.htm) these
changes were made because program expenditures had outpaced revenues. Enrollment in Basic
reached a high of 6,013 in April 2011 (reflecting March applicants) and has steadily declined
since.


                                                 6
       A potential complication is whether the distribution mechanism itself
influences the labor supply decisions of affected participants. If the waitlist
participants we use as a control group for Medicaid recipients are themselves
constrained by the waitlist because, for example, they believe they need to remain
eligible for the program in order to eventually receive it, this would bias against
us finding any effects. If true, a better allocation mechanism would perhaps be a
lottery since non-recipients would immediately know they would not receive the
program and would make their labor supply decisions accordingly. We are unable
to answer this question directly. Most of the literature on waiting lists relates to
allocation of medical care. Propper (1990, 1995) points out that there are costs to
using waiting lists as mechanisms for medical care allocation in the U.K. and
estimates these costs using contingent valuation. M. Johannesson et al. (1998)
estimate the demand for private insurance that would reduce waiting times in
Sweden. Globerman (1991) discusses the potential for decreases in productivity
due to waiting times. None of these studies examine a random allocation
mechanism as an alternative choice. Cullis et al. (2000) provide a general
treatment of the theoretical and empirical literature on waiting lists for health care
services.



III.   Theory and Related Literature

A standard static labor supply model would predict that income eligibility
thresholds for public health insurance likely reduce the incentive to remain in or
return to the workforce and, among workers, likely reduce the incentive to
increase work hours. The negative effect on labor supply results from the reduced
need for private coverage among recipients as well as the possibility that
increased earnings would disqualify them from public coverage (the “Medicaid
notch”).


                                           7
       The existing economics literature portrays a mixed picture of the impact of
Medicaid eligibility on the labor supply of low-income parents, the most
comparable population available that has been studied. Initial work found strong
work disincentives of Medicaid: Ellwood and Adams (1990) and Moffitt and
Wolfe (1992) find single mothers on AFDC were less likely to exit coverage (and
become employed) if Medicaid’s value to them was high. Subsequent work finds
effect sizes of smaller magnitude (Yelowitz 1995, Ham and Shore-Sheppard
2001) and of the opposite sign (Ham and Shore-Sheppard 2005). Recent papers
either find mixed effects (Hamersma and Kim 2009) or no effect (Hamersma
2010, Strumpf 2011). The inconclusive nature of the existing literature suggests
heterogeneous effects across populations and time periods studied, further
motivating the need to study childless adults in isolation during recent years.
       The literature on other important publicly provided health insurance
programs is more conclusive. French and Jones (2011) show Medicare eligibility
is an important determinant of retirement decisions. Boyle and Lahey (2010) find
decreased labor supply on both the extensive and intensive margins for older
veterans eligible for Department of Veteran’s Affairs health programs. Dave et
al. (2013) find declines in labor supply among pregnant eligible for Medicaid
coverage during their pregnancy.
       Other types of cash and in-kind transfer programs in the United States
have been found to negatively affect labor supply. Moffitt (2002) reviews the
extensive empirical literature. More recently, Jacob and Ludwig (2012) find a 6%
decline in labor force participation and a 10% decrease in earnings resulting from
housing vouchers. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012) find reductions in
employment and hours worked among single-headed households resulting from
the food stamp program. Meyer (2002) finds the Earned Income Tax Credit
discourages work on the extensive but not on the intensive margin; Eissa and
Hoynes (2004) confirm the finding of extensive margin work disincentives at the


                                         8
family level. Social Security Disability Insurance has generally been found to
reduce employment among older men (Bound 1989, Parsons 1990, Gruber and
Kubit 1997, Chen and Van der Klaauw 2008, Maestas et al. 2011, French and
Song 2012).
       The effect of public insurance on earnings is ambiguous in our context. If
availability of public insurance leads to increased job mobility and increased
mobility results in better job matches, we could, all else equal, observe higher
wages (and therefore earnings) among the public insurance enrollees. A second
possibility is that workers could match with jobs that pay higher wages since the
job would no longer need to pay health benefits. Baicker and Chandra (2006) find
increases in health insurance premiums result in both a decreased probability of
employment and lower wages, supporting a partial wage offset for health
insurance. Since we do not observe hours worked, only quarterly earnings, in
practice earnings could either increase (because of better matches and/or wage
offsets) or decrease (because of fewer hours worked). Again, since workers must
remain below the income eligibility threshold the positive effects are likely
limited.
       Finally, increased availability of public insurance may increase the
likelihood a worker would leave the labor force to become self-employed.
Consistent with a compensating differential framework, the self-employment
wage is effectively increased by the value of public insurance coverage. Results
from the empirical literature are mixed (Lombard 2001, Holtz-Eakin et al. 1996,
Zissimopoulos and Karoly 2007, Fairlie, Kapur, and Gates 2011); however, we
acknowledge the possibility and discuss it further below.



IV.    Data




                                         9
The data sources for this project are state administrative records on enrolled and
waitlisted Core Plan applicants and earnings records from Wisconsin’s
unemployment insurance (UI) system. In the state’s records on Core plan
enrollees and waitlisted applicants, we observe exact application date, age in
months, monthly income at the time of application, county of residence and sex.
The UI data include quarterly earnings for each individual from each covered firm
where he or she worked during that quarter; only employers not subject to
unemployment insurance laws (for example, the self-employed) are exempt from
the reporting requirement. We observe these data for each person from the first
quarter of 2005 (Q1 2005) through the final quarter of 2011 (Q4 2011). We merge
the data on Core Plan applicants and enrollees to the UI data using Social Security
numbers.
       A particular strength of our analysis is that UI data exhibit superior
accuracy over the survey-based data used in the existing literature. Virtually all
employers are required to file quarterly wage reports for each employee on their
payrolls. The wage reports include the employee's Social Security number and
quarterly wages and the employer’s federal tax identification number and industry
classification code. Using these data, we can track quarterly earnings and
employment at all covered firms, job changes, and any periods of non-
employment lasting for at least one quarter.
       Waitlist members were subject to basic screening, but to ensure
comparability we employ several sample filters to ensure those on the waitlist
would have actually been eligible for Core had they been invited to enroll (on the
basis of all characteristics other than earnings, which may have changed in
response to being on the waitlist). First, we drop anyone not in the eligibility age
range (ages 19-64) according to date of birth. Second, we observe termination
codes (reasons) for waitlist members that are removed from the waitlist, and we
drop all waitlist members with codes indicating they either do not meet program


                                         10
requirements or are eligible for other Medicaid programs. We do not observe
Core plan applicants who applied before the program cutoff and were found
ineligible by the state.
        Table 1 reports demographic characteristics. Individuals who enrolled in
the Core Plan are aged 43 on average and 49.6 percent were female, while the
average age on those on the waitlist was lower – 38 years – and 43.7 percent were
female. If we examine only those who applied within about a month of the
October 9 cut-off date (i.e., those who enrolled into Core between September 1,
2009 and October 2, 2009 and those who were waitlisted and applied between
October 9, 2009 and October 31, 2009), these differences are slightly smaller.
        We consider several outcomes to measure labor supply using the quarterly
employment records available in the UI data. For employment, we consider
average quarterly employment over the Q4 2009 to Q4 2011 period, with
employment defined as having any earnings in a quarter. Earnings are defined as
average earnings over Q4 2009 to Q4 2011. For the difference-in-differences
models, these outcomes are defined analogously for the pre-program period. To
consider intensive margin decisions, we select a subsample of applicants who
were continuously employed (had positive earnings) throughout 2009 and 2010,
and look at their average earnings for Q4 2009 to Q4 2011.
        Finally, in order to assess the potential for our results to be explained by
transitions to self-employment, which would not be recorded in our administrative
data, we use the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2009 to 2011.We
chose the ACS for its relatively large state sample sizes. The ACS includes a
question asking participants whether they were employed by a government,
private company, nonprofit organization, or were self-employed. We classify all
respondents who indicated they were self-employed (whether at an incorporated
or unincorporated business) as self-employed.



                                          11
V. Empirical Method

We identify the effect of the Core plan on the labor supply of childless adults
using two complementary sets of analyses, each with its own relative strengths.
The first is regression discontinuity (Lee and Lemieux, 2010) and the second is
propensity score difference-in-differences (Heckman et al., 1997). Each empirical
strategy relies on a slightly different assumption about the comparability of the
waitlist applicants versus the enrolled applicants. If there were no differences
between waitlist applicants and enrolled applicants, both approaches would be
equally valid. While the regression discontinuity design likely exhibits superior
internal validity relative to matching methods, the latter design is relatively better
powered. We think the ability to assess the robustness of the results across these
two methods provides more convincing evidence than implementing either
approach on its own.
       We first use a regression discontinuity (RD) design. Lee and Lemieux
(2010) provide an overview and summary of recent applications. In essence, this
approach involves comparing the labor supply of those who applied just prior to
October 9, 2009 (immediately before the enrollment cap was implemented) with
the labor supply of those who applied just after October 9, 2009 (immediately
after the enrollment cap was set). As discussed above, eligible applicants who
applied prior to October 9 were enrolled into the program while those who
applied after October 9 were placed on a waiting list. Because all eligible people
who applied before October 9 were allowed to enroll in the Core plan and none
who applied after were, we use a `sharp’ regression discontinuity design.
       Importantly, the date was announced precipitously (on October 5) and
would have been unexpected by all potential applicants. However, the data show
the announcement resulted in an increase in applications between October 5 and
October 9. Our preferred specifications use only the data on enrollees up to the



                                          12
announcement date, but we estimate and report specifications including
applications between October 5 and 9 as well.3
         The RD approach enjoys a distinct advantage over simple comparisons of
those enrolled in the Core Plan with those on the waiting list. Since the cutoff
date was imposed arbitrarily by the state (and was not an original feature of the
program), it is reasonable to assume the individuals applying just before the
announced cutoff date were very similar to those applying just after the cutoff
date. The standard RD identification assumption applies, and in this context is
interpreted as: there is no self-selection into application based on the knowledge
the applicant will be on the waitlist rather than gain immediate insurance. We
implement our estimates using a local linear regression approach. We include
robustness checks to various bandwidths as part of our analysis. The standard
validity checks are included in the Appendix.
         The exact specification of our RD estimator is:
(1)                                                              ,
with triangular kernel weights, where all observations outside the bandwidth h
(more than      away from          ) are discarded. Here,     is the outcome under
consideration,       is the date of application,        is the cutoff date,      is an indicator
for whether or not the individual was enrolled in Medicaid (equals one if on the
waitlist, zero if in Core), and        is a random error term. The treatment effect of
interest is . The coefficients         and   allow the slope of the regression to differ on
either side of the cutoff      .
         A disadvantage of RD is that it does not use the entire samples of those on
the Core Plan and on the waitlist, so lack of sample size could lead to power
issues (though this concern does not appear to be an issue in our case) and limit
our ability to conduct sub-analyses that further stratify by age or sex of the

3
  This is similar to although not the same as the “donut-RD” estimate studied in Barreca et al.
(2011) as a solution to heaping bias.


                                                13
applicant. A second issue is that the announcement prior to the actual application
cutoff date makes the identification less straightforward than might be desired.
Specifically, we might be concerned the announcement is a form of manipulation
and affects waitlisted applicants in the post period in addition to those who
enrolled during the few days between the announcement and the suspension of
enrollment.
       For these reasons we complement our regression discontinuity design by
including a second approach, the use of difference-in-differences and propensity
score weighted difference-in-differences methods. This design involves making
the Core group and waiting list groups as comparable as possible based on
observable characteristics, as well as taking advantage of the panel nature of the
earnings data. In contrast to the regression discontinuity analysis, propensity score
weighting uses the entire samples of waitlisted and enrolled applicants. The most
important difference with propensity score weighting relative to the discontinuity
approach is the assumption required for identification: we must assume that
conditional on observables included in the propensity score and an individual
fixed effect, there was no selection on time-varying characteristics in the date of
application (Smith and Todd 2005).
       A rich methodological literature establishes the conditions under which
the use of propensity scores is appropriate in examining labor market outcomes
(examples include Card and Sullivan 1988; Dehejia and Wahba 1999; Deheija
and Wahba 2002; Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd 1996; Heckman, Ichimura
and Todd 1997; Heckman and Smith 1999; and Smith and Todd 2005). A key
finding from this body of work is the underlying assumptions of propensity score
methods are best met by including data on lagged labor market outcomes; indeed,
lagged labor market measures have been found to be the single most important set
of matching variables. We have access to historical UI data, which we use to
construct such measures for the study sample. Moreover, our data meet the other


                                         14
key conditions established in the aforementioned methodological literature:
matched treatments and controls are drawn from the same geographical labor
market and their respective labor market outcomes are measured in the same way
(Heckman, Ichimura and Todd 1997; Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd
1996).4
          We implement both standard difference-in-differences with a variety of
specifications as well as propensity score matched versions of these models. In
particular, we estimate the following model:


(2)
where:
Yit is an indicator for positive employment or total earnings for individual i in
quarter t,
      Postit is an indicator for the earnings occurred in a quarter between Q3 2009 to
      Q4 2011,
      Coreit is an indicator the individual enrolled into the Core plan,
      Zi is a set of indicator variables for sex, age in months, and county of
      residence.
      To implement our propensity score adjustments, we estimate the propensity
score using a probit with controls for quarterly employment for each quarter from
Q1 2005 to Q2 2009, quarterly earnings in each quarter from Q1 2005 to Q2
2009, age, sex, and county of residence. We then construct a propensity score
weight for each control observation (waitlisted applicants) using an Epanechnikov
kernel weight (Leuven and Sianesi 2003). The results of the propensity score
models and the balancing tests are reported in the Appendix.

4
  Also of note is a German study that finds that propensity score models including lagged labor
market measures and a set of demographic covariates similar to our own perform just as well as
models augmented with additional person-level measures such as personality traits and motivation
(Biewen, Fitzenberger, Osikominu, and Paul 2010).


                                              15
      Finally, we also embed our regression discontinuity framework within the
propensity score approach and estimate these models restricting the sample to
applications within thirty days of the cut-off date.



VI.       Results

In this section, we present the results from the regression discontinuity analysis
and those from the propensity score differences in differences analysis. Overall,
both sets of analysis yield similar estimates despite being identified from different
sets of assumptions.


Probability of Employment
          Figure 1 illustrates the results of our local linear RD specifications for the
employment outcome. All figures in the left column have the assignment variable,
the exact date of application, on the x-axis and the outcome variable, average
quarterly employment from Q4 2009 to Q4 2011, on the y-axis. The figure in the
first row includes all application days thirty days before and after October 9,
2009. Each observation is the average of the outcome for all applicants on that
day. The lines are estimated local linear regression functions.
          The figure in the first column of the second row excludes the week prior to
and after the cutoff day, starting from the left application date begins on
September 4, 2009 and goes through October 4, 2009 and from the right
application date begins October 15, 2009 and ends on November 15, 2009. The
figure in the first column of the third row excludes just those days between the
announcement and the cutoff, with applications from September 4, 2009 through
October 4, 2009 and October 10, 2009 through November 10, 2009.
          Results of the estimation are summarized in Table 2. Most specifications
show a statistically significant and relatively large drop in employment among


                                            16
Core plan enrollees relative to waitlisted applicants, from 6.9 percentage points in
the specification including all applications to 11.8 percentage points in the
specification excluding one week around the cutoff and 5.9 percentage points in
the specification excluding just the surge of applications between the
announcement and the cutoff date. The results in Table 2 are all reported at a
bandwidth of 20 days. While the 5.9 percentage point result is not statistically
significant at the bandwidth in Table 2, it remains stable and becomes statistically
significant at slightly higher bandwidths. Table 2 also includes specification
checks adding all available covariates to the analysis (age, sex, employment in
prior quarter, earnings in prior quarter). Results are not statistically different from
the specifications without covariates.
       Figure 1 also includes bandwidth robustness illustrations for each set of
results in the right column. In these, the x-axis is the bandwidth at which the
specification was estimated, while the y-axis is the size of the estimate. The solid
dark line represents the estimate itself, and the lighter dashed lines represent the
95% confidence interval for the estimate. After some variability at the smallest
bandwidths (as is to be expected), estimates do not vary with the bandwidth used
for estimation.
       In addition to quarterly measures of employment, Table 2 also includes
specifications that aggregate the results to an indicator for ever being employed in
2010. Results and conclusions are very similar.
       We include standard validity checks in the Appendix. These include a
density test (Appendix Figure 1) placebo tests (Table A3 and A4), and covariate
tests (Table A5). All placebo and covariate tests are consistent with the
regression discontinuity assumption with one exception: a small but statistically
significant drop in age of applicants at the time of the cut-off of slightly over 3
years. However, including age as a covariate makes no difference in the results.



                                          17
       Appendix Figure 1 makes clear the increase in applications during the last
week. In addition, Figure A2 shows applications were allowed on weekends
during the post period and not during the pre period, resulting in a Monday bump.
Therefore, we also estimate models defined by application week (Saturday-
Friday) rather than day. We find no difference in the size or significance of results
using these specifications. We also estimated all specifications controlling for the
day of week of the application and found no differences in the results. These
results are available upon request.
       Figure 2 plots quarterly employment rates for those enrolled in the Core
Plan and those waitlisted from Q1 2005 to Q4 2011 for our different estimation
samples. In the first set of plots, we include all observations, with the plot on the
left unweighted and on the right propensity-score reweighted. In the second set of
plots, we include only those observations who applied in either September or
October 2009.
       Three things can be seen in Figure 2. First, Core plan enrollees and
waitlisted enrollees both suffered large declines in employment rates around Q3
2009, bottoming out in about Q1 2010, suggesting that employment losses (and
perhaps loss of employer-sponsored insurance coverage) led many to apply for
the Core Plan. Second, Core Plan enrollees tended to have higher employment
rates in the quarters leading up to when enrollment into the plan opened in July 1,
2009 than did waitlisted applicants, suggesting an adjustment based on
observables and fixed unobservables needs to be conducted (as in equation (3)).
Third, waitlisted applicants had higher employment rates in the quarters following
the cut-off date, suggesting a substantial employment disincentive effect of public
insurance.
       The second two plots also show the Core Plan enrollees and the waitlisted
applicants who applied within one month of October 9 look relatively more
similar in terms of their employment rates in the “pre” period but in the “post”


                                         18
period, the waitlisted applicants still show a substantially higher rate of
employment.
        Table 3 reports the results from our difference-in-differences models. The
models based on equation (2) can be interpreted as the change in average
employment rates over the “post” period (Q4 2009 to Q4 2011) from the average
employment rate in the “pre” period (Q1 2005 to Q2 2009) for those enrolled in
the Core Plan relative to those waitlisted.
        The results indicate a relative decline in average employment rates of 5.9
percentage points for those with public insurance; these results are statistically
significant and are robust to including controls for sex, age, and county of
residence. When we restrict the sample to those who applied in September and
October 2009, the estimated relative reduction in employment rates remains
economically large – 5.0 percentage points – and statistically significant.
        When we estimate the same models using our propensity score weighted
sample, we find smaller estimates when the comparison is relative average
employment rates between the “pre” and “post” periods (between 2.4 and 3.3
percentage points) that also are statistically significant.



Earnings

A negative earnings effect across the sample would be expected if wage rates
remained the same and Medicaid enrollees were less likely to work. Figure 3
shows local linear regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of public
insurance participation on quarterly earnings. The dependent variable is the
average total quarterly wage and salary earnings from Q4 2009 to Q4 2011. A
summary of these results is included in the second row of Table 2. In these
specifications, waitlist participants earn more than Medicaid enrollees; the results
suggest a negative earnings effect of Medicaid of between $200 and $400 per


                                           19
quarter. Table 2 also includes an annual measure, total annual earnings in 2010.
The results for annual earnings are very similar, suggesting an annual difference
of $950 – $1460 depending on the specification.
       Table 4 reports the results from our difference-in-differences models. The
results from those who applied within 30 days indicate a relative decline in
quarterly earnings of $200-210 for those with public insurance; these results are
statistically significant and are robust to including controls for sex, age, and
county of residence. When we include the full sample, the estimated relative
difference in earnings is essentially zero (a statistically insignificant $16-20).
       When we estimate the same models using our propensity score weighted
sample, we find a slightly different pattern. In the full sample, the results suggest
a positive earnings effect of around $70, while in the restricted sample, a negative
earnings effect of $120. These effects are statistically significant in both samples.



Subgroups

Table 5 reports the results of the regression discontinuity estimation for each of
the date specifications and four splits of the sample: by sex, by age, by
employment status prior to application, and by local unemployment rate. The
table includes only the specification that excludes October 5 to October 14
applications and all results are reported at a bandwidth of 20 days.
       Results are not particularly different for men and women, although effects
are slightly larger for women. For age, however, there are clear and important
differences in the employment effects. The effect is approximately twice as large
as average for those between 35 and 55 years old, and more than three times as
large as average for those over the age of 55. For those under 35, effects are
weakly negative (meaning that employment among Core Plan enrollees increased




                                          20
relative to those on the waitlist). This is consistent with an early retirement story
for older workers who may have found it more difficult to obtain a new job.
        Point estimates for those who were not employed in the second quarter of
2009 are 2.4 percentage points larger than for those who were employed in the
second quarter of 2009. The effect also is substantially larger for people living in
counties with low rather than high unemployment rates (split at 10 percent, the
75th percentile unemployment rate weighted by individual). In counties with
unemployment rates of 10 percent or less, we find a reduction of employment of
6.8 percentage points of Core enrollees relative to waitlisted applicants. By
contrast, the estimate in counties with unemployment rates greater than 10 percent
is very small (0.7 percentage points) and statistically insignificant.


Self-Employment

If some Core Plan participants are leaving wage and salary work for self-
employment as a result of receiving public insurance, we would classify them as
unemployed in our data. This would bias our results toward finding negative labor
supply effects when none exist. As discussed above, results from the literature on
the empirical relationship between health insurance portability and self-
employment are mixed; however, given that it is a concern for us we wanted to
test for the possibility.
        We choose a sample of families with no children from the 2009-2011
American Community Survey (ACS) and compare those with incomes up to
200% of the federal poverty level to those with incomes from 200-400% of the
federal poverty level in Wisconsin and nationally, before and after the Wisconsin
program implementation. While we found the share of low-income self-employed
Wisconsin residents eligible for public insurance was higher than in the national
sample, we found no evidence of a difference in the shares relative to the national



                                          21
difference over time. We interpret these results as supportive of the hypothesis
that changes in self-employment are not an important determinant of changes in
labor supply in our context. Full results from the triple difference estimation are
available from the authors on request.



VII.   Discussion and Conclusion

In this study, we examine the labor supply effects of publicly provided health
insurance for low-income adults without dependent children. Our findings suggest
public insurance has a disincentive effect on the labor supply of low-income
childless adults. The sizes of our estimated effects are large, ranging from 2.4 to
5.9 percentage points in the difference-in-difference models and from 6.1 to 10.6
percentage points in the regression discontinuity models. Among a population in
which only approximately half of enrollees had any positive earnings in the
quarter prior to application, these are meaningful effects. Our evidence suggests
the net effect on earnings (including those who lost or changed jobs) was a
reduction of $100-300 per quarter.
       There are several caveats to our results. First, while we find negative
employment effects using two different and complementary methods relying upon
different identifying assumptions and across a variety of specifications, our
identification strategies are imperfect. For example, even adjusting for observable
differences between the Core Plan enrollees and the waitlisted applicants using
the rich earnings and employment histories available in the UI data and
employing difference-in-differences (which nets out any fixed unobserved
differences), does not preclude the existence of time-varying unobserved
differences between the two samples. Moreover, we do find differences at the cut-
off discontinuity in the age of the applicants between those waitlisted and those
enrolled, which may indicate a violation of the strict RD identifying assumptions.


                                         22
While these age differences are small and the estimated effects change little when
we control for age in the RD models, the concern remains.
       Second, extrapolating from the Wisconsin Core Plan for childless adults to
an expansion of Medicaid to childless adults may not be possible. The two
programs differ in an important way: Medicaid is an entitlement while the Core
Plan is not. Since new enrollment into the Core Plan was ended on October 9,
2009, any Core Plan member who left the plan (perhaps as a result of gaining
health insurance through a new employer), would not be able to go back on the
plan should he or she subsequently lose private insurance. This would not be the
case with Medicaid; individuals would be free to exit and reenter the program as
their eligibility changes. The fact that the Core Plan is not an entitlement could
have had a “lock-in” effect on enrollees, exacerbating any employment
disincentive relative to Medicaid. On the other hand, the waitlist itself may have
provided a disincentive and waitlisted applicants had access to the Basic plan.
Although only a small percentage of them took up Basic, its existence would
provide a work disincentive as well, and minimize the estimated employment
disincentive of public insurance.
       Finally, as with other studies utilizing unemployment insurance records,
we do not observe transitions into and out of self-employment. As we cannot
differentiate between self-employment and being out of the labor force, we could
be overstating the association between public insurance eligibility and labor
market attachment. Using auxiliary data from the ACS, we explore trends in self-
employment among the target population of interest over the study period in order
to deduce the potential magnitude and direction of any resulting bias from
mislabeling. We find no evidence of important bias from our inability to identify
self-employed members of our sample.
       Our estimates of the labor supply disincentive of public insurance are
slightly larger than those found by Baicker et al. (2013) in Oregon and


                                         23
substantially smaller than those found by Garthwaite et al. (2013) in Tennessee.
One possible explanation for the variation in estimates is an interaction between
the programs and the business cycle. Our findings suggest that almost all of the
labor supply response came from individuals living in counties with relatively low
unemployment rates and that the labor supply response was greater among
individuals who had been working in Q2 of 2009 (a little more than a year prior to
their application to the Core plan). These findings suggest that part of the reason
for the larger estimates in Garthwaite et al. (2013) and for the smaller estimates in
Baicker et al. (2013) may be differing levels of economic activity across years and
states. For example, the statewide unemployment rate was 5.6 percent in
Tennessee in 2005, was 11.1 percent in Oregon in 2009, and was 8.5 percent in
Wisconsin in 2010.
        In light of these results, policymakers should be prepared for a reduction
in labor supply among childless adults affected by the Medicaid expansion under
the Affordable Care Act. These labor supply effects may be sufficiently large to
be noticeable economy wide. For example, if 21.3 million additional adults gain
Medicaid coverage following the ACA expansions, then approximately between
511,000 and 2.2 million fewer individuals will be employed as a result of the
labor supply response (corresponding to our labor supply estimates ranging from
2.4 and 10.5 percentage points). These aggregate numbers would be equivalent to
roughly a 0.2 to 0.9 percentage point drop in the labor force participation rate in
2014.




                                         24
REFERENCES

Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra. “The Labor Market Effects of Rising
Health Insurance Premiums,” Journal of Labor Economics 24 no. 3 (2006): 609-
634.

Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman, "The Impact
of Medicaid on Labor Force Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from
the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment" NBER Working Paper 19547 (2013).

Barreca, Alan, Jason Lindo, and Glen Waddell. "Heaping-Induced Bias in
Regression Discontinuity Designs." NBER Working Paper No. 17408 (2011).

Biewen Martin, Bernd Fitzenberger, Aderonke Osikominu, Marie Paul. 2010.
“The Comparative Effectiveness of Public Sponsored Training Revisited: The
Merits of Using Rich Administrative Data.” Unpublished. Available at:
http://www.empedu.uni-freiburg.de/udocs/aopub/fbwmeval. Accessed: 12/13/11.

Bound, John. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance
Applicants”,
The American Economic Review 79 no. 3 (1989): 482-503.

Boyle, Melissa A., and Joanna Lahey. “Health insurance and the labor supply
decisions of older workers: Evidence from a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
expansion,” Journal of Public Economics 94 no. 7-8 (2010): 467-478.

Card, David and Daniel Sullivan. “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training
Programs on Movements into and out of Employment.” Econometrica 56 (1988):
497-530.

Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw. “The Effect of Disability Insurance on
Labor
Supply of Older Individuals in the 1990s”, Journal of Econometrics 142 no. 2
(2008): 757-784.

Congressional Budget Office. Updated Estimates for the Insurance Coverage
Provisions of the Affordable Care Act (2012a). Available:
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/03-13-
Coverage%20Estimates.pdf. Accessed 10/22/2012.



                                      25
Congressional Budget Office. Estimates for the Insurance Coverage Provisions of
the Affordable Care Act Updated for the Recent Supreme Court Decision (2012b).
Available: http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43472-07-
24-2012-CoverageEstimates.pdf. Accessed 10/22/2012.

Cullis, John G, Philip R. Jones and Carol Propper. Waiting Lists and Medical
Treatment: Analysis and Policies. Chapter 23 in Culyer A. J. and Newhouse J. P.
(eds.) Handbook of Health Economics 1B (2000), Elsevier: North-Holland.

Deheija Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba. “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental
Studies: Reevaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 94 (1999): 1053-1062.

Deheija Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba. “Propensity Score Matching Methods for
Nonexperimental Causal Studies.” Review of Economic Studies 84 (2002): 151-
161.

Dave, Dhaval M., Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali Ilayperuma
Simon, 2013. "The Effect of Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early
1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant Women," NBER Working Paper 19161,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Ellwood, David T. and Adams Kathleen. “Medicaid Mysteries: Transitional
Benefits, Medicaid Coverage, and Welfare Exits.” Health Care Financing Review
11 (1990): 119-131.

Eissa, Nada and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. “Taxes and the labor market
participation of married couples: the earned income tax credit.” Journal of Public
Economics 88 vol. 9–10 (2004): 1931-1958.

Fairlie, Robert, Kanika Kapur, and Susan Gates. “Is employer-based health
insurance a barrier to entrepreneurship?” Journal of Health Economics 30 vol. 1
(2011): 146-162

French, Eric and John Bailey Jones. “The Effects of Health Insurance and Self-
Insurance on Retirement Behavior.” Econometrica 79 (2011): 693–732.




                                        26
French, Eric and Jae Song. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor
Supply: A Dynamic Analysis (2012),” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, No. 2012-12.

Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. “Public Health
Insurance, Labor Supply, and Employment Lock (2013),” NBER Working Paper
19220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19220

Globerman, Steven. A Policy Analysis of Hospital Waiting Lists. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 10 (1991): 247-62.

Gruber, Jonathan and Jeffrey D. Kubik, Disability insurance rejection rates and
the labor supply of older workers, Journal of Public Economics 64 no. 1 (1997):
1-23.

Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. “Did Expanding Medicaid Affect
Welfare Participation?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58 no. 3 (2005):
452-470.

Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. “The Impact of Public Health
Insurance on Labor Market Transitions (2001).” Working Paper, Williams
College. January 2001.

Hamersma Sarah (2010) “The Effects of Medicaid Earnings Limits on Earnings
Growth among Poor Workers.” Available at:
http://bear.warrington.ufl.edu/hamersma/Research/MedicaidThreshold.6.12.10.pd
f.

Hamersma Sarah, and Matthew Kim. “The Effect of Parental Medicaid
Expansions on Job Mobility.” Journal of Health Economics 28 no. 4 (2009):761-
70.

Heckman James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffery Smith and Petra Todd. “Sources of
Selection Bias in Evaluating Programs: An Interpretation of Conventional
Measures and Evidence on the Effectiveness of Matching as a Program
Evaluation Method.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 (1996):
13416-13420.




                                       27
Heckman James J., Hidehiko Ichimura and Petra Todd. “Matching as an
Econometric Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training
Programme.” Review of Economic Studies 64 (1997): 605-654.

Heckman James J. and Jeffery Smith. “The Pre-Program Earnings Dip and the
Determinants of Participation in a Social Program: Implications for Simple
Program Evaluation Strategies.” The Economic Journal 109 (1999): 315-348.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, John R. Penrod, and Harvey Rosen. “Health insurance and
the supply of entrepreneurs.” Journal of Public Economics 62 no. 1–2 (1996):
209–235.

Hoynes, Hilary Williamson and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. “Work
incentives and the Food Stamp Program,” Journal of Public Economics 96 no. 1–
2 (2012): 151-162

Jacob, Brian A. and Jens Ludwig. "The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor
Supply: Evidence from a Voucher Lottery." The American Economic Review 102
no. 1 (2012): 272-304.

Kaiser Family Foundation. “Medicaid Expansion Under the Affordable Care
Act.” Journal of American Medical Association. 309 no. 12 (2013): 1219.

Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in
Economics.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 no. 2 (2010): 281-355.

Leuven, Edwin and Barbara Sianesi. "PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full
Mahalanobis and propensity score matching, common support graphing, and
covariate imbalance testing". 2013. Available at:
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html.

Lombard, K. (2001). “Female self-employment and demand for flexible,
nonstandard work schedules.” Economic Inquiry 29 no. 2 (2001): 214–317.

Johannesson, Magnus, Per-Olov Johansson and Tore Soderqvist. Time Spent on
Waiting List for Medical Care: An Insurance Approach. Journal of Health
Economics 20 no. 1 (1998): 68-86.




                                     28
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen and Alexander Strand. “Does Disability
Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate
Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt”, manuscript (2011).

Meyer, Bruce D. Labor Supply at the Extensive and Intensive Margins: The
EITC, Welfare, and Hours Worked. The American Economic Review 92 no. 2
(2002): 373-379.

Moffitt, Rober A. “Chapter 34 Welfare programs and labor supply,” In: Alan J.
Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Editor(s), Handbook of Public Economics 4
(2002): 2393-2430.

Moffitt Robert A., and Barbara Wolfe. “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on
Welfare Participation and Labor Supply.” Review of Economics and Statistics 74
no.4 (1992): 615-626.

Montgomery, Edward and John Navin 2000 “Cross State Variation in Medicaid
Programs and Female Labor Supply” Economic Inquiry 38 no. 3 (2000): 402-418.

Parsons, Donald. The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance
Applicants: Comment.” American Economic Review 81 (1990): 1419-1426.

Propper, Carol. Contingent Valuation of Time Spent on NHS Waiting Lists.
Economic Journal 100 no. 400 (1991): 193-200.

Propper, Carol. The Disutility of Time Spent on United Kingdom’s National
Health Service Waiting Lists. The Journal of Human Resources 30 no. 4 (1995):
677-700.

Smith, Jeffery and Petra Todd. “Does Matching Overcome LaLonde’s critique of
Nonexperimental Estimators?” Journal of Econometrics 125 (2005): 305-353.

Stephens, Jessica, Samantha Artiga, Robin Rudowitz, Anne Jankiewicz, and
David Rousseau. Medicaid Expansion Under the Affordable Care Act. Journal of
American Medical Association 309 no. 12 (2013). Available:
http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1672246

Strumpf, Erin. “Medicaid’s Effect on Single Women’s Labor Supply: Evidence
from the Introduction of Medicaid.” Journal of Health Economics, 30 no. 3
(2011): 531-548.


                                      29
Yelowitz, Aaron S. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation: Evidence from Eligibility Expansions.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110 no. 4 (1995): 909-940.

Zissimopoulos, Julie and Lynn A. Karoly. “Transitions to self-employment at
older ages: The role of wealth, health, health insurance and other factors.” Labour
Economics, 14 no. 2 (2007): 269-295.




                                        30
31
                                0.25
                                             0.35
                                                          0.45
                                                                       0.55
                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.55




                          0.2
                                                    0.4
                                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6




                                       0.3
                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                Q1 2005                                                                                                                                 Q1 2005
                Q2 2005                                                                                                                                 Q2 2005
                Q3 2005                                                                                                                                 Q3 2005
                Q4 2005                                                                                                                                 Q4 2005
                Q1 2006                                                                                                                                 Q1 2006
                Q2 2006                                                                                                                                 Q2 2006
                Q3 2006                                                                                                                                 Q3 2006
                Q4 2006                                                                                                                                 Q4 2006
                Q1 2007                                                                                                                                 Q1 2007
                Q2 2007                                                                                                                                 Q2 2007
                Q3 2007                                                                                                                                 Q3 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 2. Average Employment by Quarter




                Q4 2007                                                                                                                                 Q4 2007
                Q1 2008                                                                                                                                 Q1 2008




     Waitlist
                                                                                                                                             Waitlist
                Q2 2008                                                                                                                                 Q2 2008
                Q3 2008                                                                                                                                 Q3 2008
                Q4 2008                                                                                                                                 Q4 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            All Applicants




                Q1 2009                                                                                                                                 Q1 2009




     Core
                                                                                                                                             Core
                Q2 2009                                                                                                                                 Q2 2009
                Q3 2009                                                                                                                                 Q3 2009




                                                                                      Applications Within 30 Days
                Q4 2009                                                                                                                                 Q4 2009
                Q1 2010                                                                                                                                 Q1 2010
                Q2 2010                                                                                                                                 Q2 2010
                Q3 2010                                                                                                                                 Q3 2010
                Q4 2010                                                                                                                                 Q4 2010
                Q1 2011                                                                                                                                 Q1 2011
                Q2 2011                                                                                                                                 Q2 2011




32
                Q3 2011                                                                                                                                 Q3 2011
                Q4 2011                                                                                                                                 Q4 2011
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6




                                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5




                          0.2
                                0.25
                                             0.35
                                                    0.4
                                                          0.45
                                                                       0.55
                                                                              0.6




                                       0.3
                                                                 0.5




                Q1 2005                                                                                                                                 Q1 2005
                Q2 2005                                                                                                                                 Q2 2005
                Q3 2005                                                                                                                                 Q3 2005
                Q4 2005                                                                                                                                 Q4 2005
                Q1 2006                                                                                                                                 Q1 2006
                Q2 2006                                                                                                                                 Q2 2006
                Q3 2006                                                                                                                                 Q3 2006
                Q4 2006                                                                                                                                 Q4 2006
                Q1 2007                                                                                                                                 Q1 2007
                Q2 2007                                                                                                                                 Q2 2007
                Q3 2007                                                                                                                                 Q3 2007
                Q4 2007                                                                                                                                 Q4 2007
                Q1 2008                                                                                                                                 Q1 2008
                                                                                                                                             Waitlist




     Waitlist




                Q2 2008                                                                                                                                 Q2 2008
                Q3 2008                                                                                                                                 Q3 2008
                Q4 2008                                                                                                                                 Q4 2008
                Q1 2009                                                                                                                                 Q1 2009
                                                                                                                                             Core




     Core




                Q2 2009                                                                                                                                 Q2 2009
                Q3 2009                                                                                                                                 Q3 2009
                Q4 2009                                                                                                                                 Q4 2009
                Q1 2010                                                                                                                                 Q1 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            All Applicants, Propensity Score Adjusted




                Q2 2010                                                                                                                                 Q2 2010
                Q3 2010                                                                                                                                 Q3 2010
                Q4 2010                                                                                                                                 Q4 2010
                                                                                    Applications Within 30 Days, Propensity Score Adjusted




                Q1 2011                                                                                                                                 Q1 2011
                Q2 2011                                                                                                                                 Q2 2011
                Q3 2011                                                                                                                                 Q3 2011
                Q4 2011                                                                                                                                 Q4 2011
                                                                       Q4 20
                                                                       Q3 20
                                                                       Q2 20
                                                                       Q1 20
                                                                       Q4 20
                                                                       Q3 20
                                                                       Q2 20
                                                                       Q1 20
                                                                       Q4 20
                                                                       Q3 20
                                                                       Q2 20
                                                                       Q1 20
                                                                       Q4 20
                                                                       Q3 20
33
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics,Core Plan Enrollees vs. Waitlisted Applicants

                                             Core Plan Enrollees        Waitlisted Applicants
Ever applied
Age                                                 43.63                       38.87
Female                                               0.50                        0.43
Percent employed, Q209                               0.43                        0.48
Average quarterly earnings, Q209                   1247.45                     1827.60
County unemployment rate, 2009                       9.21                        9.13
Average employment, Q409-Q411                        0.43                        0.48
Average earnings, Q409-Q411                        1509.49                     1723.90
Observations                                        42401                       60507

Applied within 30 days of October 9, 2009
Age                                                 42.18                       39.10
Female                                               0.47                       0.45
Percent employed, Q209                               0.45                       0.48
Average quarterly earnings, Q209                   1449.45                     1624.53
County unemployment rate, 2009                       9.17                       9.11
Average employment, Q409-Q411                        0.44                       0.49
Average earnings, Q409-Q411                        1561.60                     1815.92
Observations                                        10528                       3396

Source: Authors' calculations from WI Administrative Data
Notes: Age and sex are from application data. Average employment and earnings are from
unemployment data.




Table 2. Summary of Regression Discontinuity Results

                                                                            Specification
                                        All Dates                     Excludes Oct 5 - Oct 14               Excludes Oct 5 - Oct 9
Outcome                      No Covariates      Covariates         No Covariates       Covariates       No Covariates     Covariates

Average Employment             0.0659***           0.037**            0.055*            0.0524**           0.105***          0.0763***
Rate, Q42009-Q42011             0.0194             0.0171             0.0292             0.0256            0.0235             0.0201

Average Earnings,               248.4**              148              314.2*             319.3**           445.8***           367.3***
Q42009-Q42011                    101.8              97.47              164                151.6              123               114.5

Total Annual Earnings,
2010                             977**               584              1170*              1214**            1604***            1338***
                                 397.9              375.2             629.8              588.6              486                447.2

Ever Employed, 2010            0.0752***           0.0397*            0.0588             0.058*           0.0939***           0.06**
                                0.0221             0.0224             0.0358             0.0332            0.0291             0.0265

Number of Observations           11278            11278               6064               6064               6084               6084
Notes: Table displays regression discontinuity estimates of effect of not getting the Core Plan, with robust standard error in italics. All
results calculated at a bandwidth of 20 days. Bandwidth robustness is included in Figure 1. Bandwidths defined as distance from
October 9 in "All Dates" or distance from excluded interval in other specifications. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%,
***1%. Covariates include age, sex, day of week of application, and earnings and employment in the second quarter of 2009.




                                                             34
Table 4. Summary of Difference-in-Differences Results, Employment

All Application Dates                  (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                 Post*Core Plan     -0.059***   -0.059***     ***-0.059    -0.059***    -0.024***     -0.024***    -0.024***     -0.024***
                                     0.0023      0.0023        0.0023       0.0023       0.0025        0.0025       0.0025        0.0025
                  Demographics                      X              X                                      X            X
           County Fixed Effects                                    X                                                   X
         Individual Fixed Effects                                              X                                                     X
                    PS Weighted                                                             X             X             X            X
        Number of Observations                         2932804                                                2908556
           Number of Individuals                        104743                                                 103877

Within 30 days of Oct 9
                Post*Core Plan      -0.050***   -0.050***     -0.051***    -0.050***    -0.033***     -0.032***    -0.033***     -0.033***
                                     0.0073      0.0073        0.0073       0.0073       0.0076        0.0076       0.0076        0.0076
                  Demographics                      X             X                                       X            X
           County Fixed Effects                                   X                                                    X
         Individual Fixed Effects                                              X                                                     X
                    PS Weighted                                                             X             X             X            X
        Number of Observations                          406364                                                406028
           Number of Individuals                        14513                                                 14501

Notes: The "pre" period includes Q1 2005 to Q2 2009 and the "post" period includes Q4 2009 to Q4 2011. Standard errors are clustered at
the individual level. Demographic variables include sex, age, and county of residence. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%, ***1%.
Table 5. Summary of Difference-in-Differences Results, Earnings

All Application Dates                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                 Post*Core Plan     19.80        16.43         17.47        19.80        71.62***     70.92***      71.62***     71.62***
                                    15.75        15.85         15.83        15.75         15.54        15.56         15.54        15.54
                  Demographics                     X             X                                        X            X
           County Fixed Effects                                  X                                                     X
         Individual Fixed Effects                                              X                                                     X
                    PS Weighted                                                             X             X             X            X
        Number of Observations                         2932804                                                2908556
           Number of Individuals                        104743                                                 103877

Within 30 days of Oct 9
                 Post*Core Plan -209.94***     -210.21***    -211.95***   -209.94***    -125.91**     -122.95**    -125.91**     -125.91**
                                  50.44          50.84         50.72        50.44         50.85         51.07        50.86        -125.91
                  Demographics                     X             X                                        X            X
           County Fixed Effects                                  X                                                     X
         Individual Fixed Effects                                              X                                                     X
                    PS Weighted                                                             X             X             X            X
        Number of Observations                           406364                                               406028
           Number of Individuals                         14513                                                14501

Notes: The "pre" period includes Q1 2005 to Q2 2009 and the "post" period includes Q4 2009 to Q4 2011. Standard errors are clustered at
the individual level. Demographic variables include sex, age, and county of residence. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%, ***1%.




                                                                                       36
Table 5. Regression Discontinuity Results, by Subsample

                                      Outcome
                              Average         Average
                            Employment,      Earnings,
                           Q42009-Q42011 Q42009-Q42011           Observations

         All (Benchmark)       0.055*             314.2*              6064
                               0.0292              164

                 Women         0.0689             419.7*              2806
                               0.0449             254.8

                     Men       0.0519              248.8              3258
                               0.0374              213.2

                Age < 35       -0.0732*           -268.3              2541
                                0.042             226.6

               Age 35-55       0.119**            666.3**             2367
                                0.048              265.6

                Age > 55       0.173**            815.7*              1156
                               0.0733             471.2

   Employed in Q2 2009         0.0468              433.3              2725
                               0.0387              269.5

 Unemployed in Q2 2009         0.0717**            262.7              3339
                                0.0345             172.6

    High Unemployment          0.00675             11.37              1445
         County (>10%)         0.0623              343.4

     Low Unemployment          0.0684**            399**              4567
        County (<=10%)          0.0333             189.4

Notes: Table displays regression discontinuity estimates of effect of not getting
the Core Plan, with robust standard error in italics. All results calculated at
bandwidth of 20 days, for specification excluding Oct. 5 - Oct. 14. * indicates
significance at 10% level, ** 5%, ***1%



                                                                                    37
          For Online Publication



          Appendix Figure 1. Density of Applications by Day



                                     Density of Applications by Day
            .15
              .1
Density


            .05
                  0




                      -30      -20         -10            0          10   20   30
                                                 Days From October 9




                                                                               38
Appendix Figure 2. Common Support Graphs for Propensity Score Analysis

                                All Applications




   0                .2               .4                .6                .8
                                  Propensity Score

                     Untreated                       Treated: On support
                     Treated: Off support



                          Applications Within 30 Days




   .2                    .4             .6                   .8                1
                                  Propensity Score

                     Untreated                       Treated: On support      39
                     Treated: Off support
Appendix Table 1. Covariate Tests
                                                 Bandwidth (Days)
                             5          10        15         20           25         30
All dates
            Age (Months) -41.57*** -54.84*** -59.33*** -54.48*** -51.83*** -49.55***
                           15.59     11.98     8.777     7.65      6.942     6.309

                 Female -0.00883      -0.026     -0.0443    -0.0465* -0.0492** -0.0469**
                          0.049       0.0383     0.0282      0.0245   0.0221     0.02

 Employment Q2 2009       0.0606      0.0514     0.0376     0.0287      0.0229     0.0211
                          0.0493      0.0386     0.0284     0.0247      0.0223     0.0202

     Earnings Q2 2009      161.5       107         42.9      30.28      0.447      -2.446
                           220.7      175.7       135.8      120.5      111.1      101.7

Excludes Oct. 5 - Oct. 14
         Age (Months) -23.85          -34.32     -24.46*    -23.05**   -22.82**   -24.11***
                          43.16       21.54       14.22      11.64       9.78       8.55

                 Female -0.0574      -0.0365     -0.0355    -0.0378    -0.0286     -0.0209
                         0.137       0.0679      0.0448     0.0366     0.0306      0.0267

 Employment Q2 2009 -0.0611          -0.0448     -0.0278    -0.0154    -0.0021     0.00845
                     0.136           0.0678      0.0448     0.0366     0.0306      0.0268

     Earnings Q2 2009      561.5      185.3       82.67      49.87      75.51        106
                           749.3      361.5       241.4      201.1       168        145.9

Excludes Oct. 5 - Oct. 9
         Age (Months) -40.34         -55.01*** -49.48*** -48.18*** -46.33*** -43.06***
                         28.3          16.31     10.93     9.336     8.366     7.56

                 Female    0.017     -0.0183     -0.0353    -0.0383     -0.044*    -0.043*
                          0.0884     0.0517      0.0348     0.0297      0.0266     0.0239

 Employment Q2 2009       0.0667      0.0591     0.0457     0.0412       0.039     0.0364
                          0.0883      0.0518     0.035      0.0298      0.0267     0.024

     Earnings Q2 2009      -173.1     17.32       74.76       43.3      19.82       26.31
                           457.3      266.5       176.1      148.2      134.2       122.8

Notes: Table displays regression discontinuity estimates of effect of not getting the Core
Plan on pre-treatment covariates, with robust standard error in italics. * indicates
significance at 10% level, ** 5%, ***1%
Appendix Table 2. Placebo Tests for Alternate Cutoff Days

                                                                                                  Cutoff
All dates                           t-14           t-12     t-10           t-8        t-6     t-4        t+4    t+6         t+8       t+10     t+12       t+14
              Average Employment, -0.0189        -0.0248 -0.0267*        -0.017    -0.0144 -0.00974 0.0535*** -0.0157     -0.037*   -0.0382* -0.0328    -0.0142
                   Q42009-Q42011 0.0161          0.0173 0.0151           0.0138    0.0136 0.0123       0.017  0.0199      0.0217     0.0227 0.0214      0.0208

                  Average Earnings,    -72.88    -79.71     -102.9       17.28     -18.95   -49.18   298.9***    -0.414   -43.4     -27.95    -265.5*     -119
                   Q42009-Q42011       93.09     100.7      86.08        80.51     79.97     71.9     99.44       119     140.8      141       143.5     134.3

                       Observations 12146  11968   11493   11621    11635   11187   10501                        10649    10566     10118      9832      10129
Excludes Oct. 5 - Oct. 14
             Average Employment, -0.00377 0.00617 -0.0106 -0.0306* -0.0221 -0.00978 0.0254                      -0.00629 -0.00358 -0.0148     -0.0344   0.0127
                   Q42009-Q42011 0.0172 0.0172 0.0165 0.0165 0.0175          0.016  0.0227                       0.0218 0.0216 0.0216         0.0209    0.0214

                  Average Earnings,    -157.4    -60.61     -117.5       -163.9*   -83.88   -41.94   272.7*      -152.1   -71.55    -159.9    -162.3     -86.99
                   Q42009-Q42011       109.4     101.8       96.5         96.17    101.3    90.84    140.9       147.7    139.5     136.2     128.9      130.4

                       Observations 6971    6698    6362     6564     6484    6170    5492     5698      5422     5199                         5078      5007
Excludes Oct. 5 - Oct. 9
             Average Employment, -0.00606 0.00221 -0.0163 -0.0373** -0.0235 -0.00827 0.0157 -0.0467** -0.0524** -0.047**                      -0.0293 -0.00349
                   Q42009-Q42011 0.0172 0.0172 0.0166 0.0165 0.0175 0.0161 0.0216 0.0218 0.0227 0.0232                                        0.0216 0.0213

                  Average Earnings,    -158.4    -66.05     -125.5   -188.5**      -96.56   -57.83    95.18      -173.7   -147.5      -111    -271.3*    -74.27
                   Q42009-Q42011       109.1     101.5      96.45     95.68        101.5    91.24     128.7      130.1    144.4      142.5     145.5     137.5

                       Observations     6972      6631       6226         6570      6460     6054     5340       5683      5431      5078      5089      4982

Notes: Table displays regression discontinuity estimates of effect of not getting the Core Plan on pre-treatment covariates, with robust standard error in
italics. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%, ***1%. All estimates at bandwidth of 20 days.




                                                                    41
Appendix Table 3. Propensity Score Estimation Results
                                All Applicants           Applied Within 30 Days of Oct 9
      Variable           Estimate        Standard Error     Estimate      Standard Error
  Employed Q12005           0.045            0.015            -0.054           0.042
  Employed Q22005           0.013            0.017            0.080            0.048
  Employed Q32005           0.046            0.016            -0.084           0.047
  Employed Q42005           0.031            0.016            0.023            0.047
  Employed Q12006           0.032            0.016            0.089            0.047
  Employed Q22006           0.019            0.016            -0.014           0.048
  Employed Q32006           0.071            0.016            0.086            0.047
  Employed Q42006           0.025            0.016            -0.011           0.046
  Employed Q12007           0.000            0.016            0.045            0.046
  Employed Q22007           0.046            0.016            0.024            0.046
  Employed Q32007           0.013            0.016            0.046            0.046
  Employed Q42007           0.000            0.016            -0.053           0.045
  Employed Q12008           0.024            0.016            -0.030           0.045
  Employed Q22008           0.012            0.016            -0.018           0.045
  Employed Q32008           0.031            0.015            -0.001           0.045
  Employed Q42008           0.010            0.015            0.044            0.044
  Employed Q12009           0.066            0.015            -0.010           0.044
  Employed Q22009           0.024            0.014            -0.042           0.039
   Earnings Q12005          0.005            0.003            0.011            0.009
   Earnings Q22005         -0.006            0.003            0.000            0.010
   Earnings Q32005          0.000            0.003            0.000            0.009
   Earnings Q42005         -0.007            0.003            -0.010           0.008
   Earnings Q12006          0.004            0.003            0.008            0.010
   Earnings Q22006         -0.004            0.003            0.001            0.010
   Earnings Q32006         -0.004            0.003            -0.010           0.009
   Earnings Q42006         -0.005            0.003            -0.001           0.008
   Earnings Q12007          0.001            0.003            -0.004           0.008
   Earnings Q22007         -0.005            0.003            -0.013           0.008
   Earnings Q32007         -0.001            0.003            0.007            0.008
   Earnings Q42007         -0.003            0.003            0.000            0.008
   Earnings Q12008         -0.004            0.003            -0.002           0.008
   Earnings Q22008          0.002            0.003            0.010            0.008
   Earnings Q32008         -0.013            0.003            -0.014           0.008
   Earnings Q42008         -0.008            0.003            -0.006           0.007
   Earnings Q12009         -0.015            0.003            -0.006           0.009
   Earnings Q22009         -0.059            0.003            0.000            0.007
                 Age        0.001            0.000            0.001            0.000
             Female         0.090            0.008            0.025            0.024
           Constant        -1.159            0.052            -0.121           0.142
Notes: Regression also includes dummy variables for county of residence. Earnings in
thousands of dollars.




                                                      42
Appendix Table 4. Propensity Score Balancing Test
                                         All Applicants                          Applied Within 30 Days of Oct 9
       Variable           Waitlist      Core        %bias          t       Waitlist      Core         %bias           t
    Employed Q12005         0.50        0.50         -0.60      -0.88        0.49        0.49          0.00        0.02
    Employed Q22005         0.53        0.53         -0.90      -1.28        0.53        0.53          0.10        0.06
    Employed Q32005         0.54        0.55         -0.90      -1.32        0.54        0.54         -0.20        -0.18
    Employed Q42005         0.54        0.54         -0.90      -1.31        0.54        0.53          0.30        0.21
    Employed Q12006         0.52        0.53         -1.00      -1.44        0.52        0.52          0.10        0.08
    Employed Q22006         0.55        0.56         -1.10      -1.62        0.55        0.56         -0.30        -0.22
    Employed Q32006         0.56        0.57         -1.20      -1.83        0.57        0.57         -0.50        -0.35
    Employed Q42006         0.56        0.56         -1.20      -1.82        0.56        0.56         -0.50        -0.40
    Employed Q12007         0.53        0.54         -1.00      -1.42        0.53        0.54         -0.50        -0.38
    Employed Q22007         0.56        0.56         -1.10      -1.57        0.56        0.56         -0.90        -0.67
    Employed Q32007         0.56        0.57         -1.20      -1.73        0.56        0.57         -1.00        -0.77
    Employed Q42007         0.55        0.56         -1.00      -1.40        0.55        0.56         -1.10        -0.80
    Employed Q12008         0.53        0.54         -1.10      -1.67        0.53        0.54         -1.20        -0.93
    Employed Q22008         0.55        0.55         -1.40      -2.01        0.55        0.56         -1.50        -1.13
    Employed Q32008         0.54        0.55         -1.40      -2.05        0.55        0.56         -1.70        -1.29
    Employed Q42008         0.52        0.52         -1.20      -1.77        0.52        0.53         -1.60        -1.18
    Employed Q12009         0.45        0.46         -1.00      -1.54        0.46        0.47         -1.50        -1.10
    Employed Q22009         0.43        0.44         -1.10      -1.62        0.44        0.45         -1.30        -0.95
     Earnings Q12005        1.92        1.97         -1.60      -2.43        1.97        1.96          0.30         0.24
     Earnings Q22005        2.13        2.18         -1.60      -2.44        2.18        2.18          0.00         0.03
     Earnings Q32005        2.29        2.35         -1.60      -2.46        2.36        2.36          0.00         0.00
     Earnings Q42005        2.22        2.28         -1.70      -2.57        2.30        2.28          0.40         0.30
     Earnings Q12006        2.07        2.14         -1.90      -2.98        2.16        2.16          0.00         0.01
     Earnings Q22006        2.21        2.27         -2.00      -3.11        2.32        2.33         -0.20        -0.15
     Earnings Q32006        2.27        2.34         -2.10      -3.26        2.38        2.40         -0.60        -0.46
     Earnings Q42006        2.26        2.33         -2.00      -3.16        2.37        2.39         -0.50        -0.41
     Earnings Q12007        2.08        2.15         -2.10      -3.32        2.18        2.21         -0.80        -0.61
     Earnings Q22007        2.20        2.28         -2.20      -3.47        2.32        2.36         -1.20        -0.89
     Earnings Q32007        2.23        2.31         -2.20      -3.51        2.37        2.41         -1.10        -0.84
     Earnings Q42007        2.21        2.29         -2.40      -3.72        2.33        2.37         -1.30        -0.98
     Earnings Q12008        1.99        2.07         -2.50      -4.07        2.12        2.17         -1.30        -0.99
     Earnings Q22008        2.06        2.15         -2.70      -4.28        2.23        2.27         -1.10        -0.87
     Earnings Q32008        2.02        2.11         -2.60      -4.32        2.19        2.25         -1.90        -1.44
     Earnings Q42008        1.85        1.94         -2.80      -4.57        1.99        2.05         -1.80        -1.45
     Earnings Q12009        1.37        1.44         -2.50      -4.23        1.52        1.55         -1.30        -1.04
     Earnings Q22009        1.24        1.32         -2.80      -4.95        1.44        1.48         -1.50        -1.12
                   Age    521.72       521.31        0.30        0.38       505.17      499.11         3.80        2.80
                Female      0.49        0.49         -0.20      -0.25        0.47        0.46          0.80        0.61
Notes: Regressions also include 70 county of residence indicators; none has a statistically significant difference
between waitlist and core or standardized bias greater than 10. Earnings in thousands of dollars.




                                                               43
