                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         HEALTH, DISABILITY INSURANCE AND RETIREMENT IN DENMARK

                                           Paul Bingley
                                        Nabanita Datta Gupta
                                         Michael Jorgensen
                                          Peder Pedersen

                                        Working Paper 20114
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20114


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




This paper is part of the International Social Security project at the NBER. The authors are grateful
to the other participants of that project for useful comments and advice. We are also grateful to the
Danish Strategic Research Council (dsf-09-070295) for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Paul Bingley, Nabanita Datta Gupta, Michael Jorgensen, and Peder Pedersen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health, Disability Insurance and Retirement in Denmark
Paul Bingley, Nabanita Datta Gupta, Michael Jorgensen, and Peder Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 20114
May 2014
JEL No. H55,I1,J14

                                              ABSTRACT

There are large differences in labor force participation rates by health status. We examine to what
extent these differences are determined by the provisions of Disability Insurance and other pension
programs. Using administrative data for Denmark we find that those in worse health and with less
schooling are more likely to receive DI. The gradient of DI participation across health quintiles is almost
twice as steep as for schooling – moving from having no high school diploma to college completion.
Using an option value model that accounts for different pathways to retirement, applied to a period
spanning a major pension reform, we find that pension program incentives in general are important
determinants of retirement age. Individuals in poor health and with low schooling are significantly
more responsive to economic incentives than those who are in better health and with more schooling.
Similar gradients in outcomes and behavior by health and schooling partially reflects the less educated
having poorer health on average, but also that the less educated have worse job prospects and higher
replacement rates due to a progressive formula for DI and other pension benefits.


Paul Bingley                                          Michael Jorgensen
The Danish National Centre for Social Research        The Danish National Centre for Social Research
Herluf Trollesgade 11                                 Stradellasvej 26 1. TH
1052                                                  2450 København SV
Copenhagen                                            Denmark
DENMARK                                               mic@sfi.dk
pab@sfi.dk
                                                      Peder Pedersen
Nabanita Datta Gupta                                  School of Economics and Management
Department of Economics and Business                  B 1322, Bartholins Alle 10
University of Aarhus                                  Arhus University- 8000 Arhus C
Fuglesangs Allé 4, 2621, 5                            DENMARK
8210 Aarhus V                                         ppedersen@econ.au.dk
Denmark
ndg@asb.dk
    1. Introduction

Labor force participation of older persons varies greatly both between countries and within countries over
time. Individual health status, labor market conditions and social security program provisions all play a role in
this. Disability Insurance (DI) programs are at the interface between social security provision, labor market
conditions and health, and may play an important role for many persons as they move from employment to
retirement from the labor market. In principle, it may be the case that changes in DI participation rates reflect
changing health and changing labor market conditions. However, trends in DI participation appear to be
unrelated to changes in mortality and health. Differences in health between countries would need to be much
larger than those revealed in comparable survey data in order to account for differences in DI participation
(Milligan and Wise, 2011). In many countries DI effectively provides early retirement benefits before eligibility
for other social security programs begins. This begs the main question: given health status, to what extent are
the differences in labor force participation for seniors across countries determined by the provisions of DI
programs? Answering this question is a challenge because measuring health is notoriously difficult and DI
programs interact with social security provisions in different ways across countries.

Social security programs in general have been shown to provide strong incentives for older workers to exit
from the labor market at certain ages (Gruber and Wise, 2004). In the 2004 volume, incentives were
characterized by an option value model that allows the expected future consequences of current work
decisions to be accounted for (Stock and Wise, 1990). This was implicitly an inclusive option value, in the sense
that different pathways to retirement were included in a single summary measure of expected future
consequences. Several countries with extensive DI programs, such as Sweden (Palme, et. al., 2004) and
Denmark (Bingley, et. al., 2004) included a DI retirement pathway probabilistically as part of the inclusive
option value. In the current volume, because DI programs are of primary interest, for the sake of greater
comparability, DI pathways contribute to inclusive option values in a similar way across all countries.

In order to control for health one needs to follow individuals over time either with repeated survey questions
about self‐assessed health or administrative data about health care usage. Different countries have different
health data sources. Even the European countries participating in SHARE which follow a survey protocol to
maximize comparability across countries might have different modes of response between populations, which
makes comparison response‐by‐response difficult. Most other countries in the volume use self‐assessed health
from surveys, whereas Sweden and Denmark use administrative records of health care usage, for the sake of
much greater sample sizes. Each of the studies calculates a single health index on the basis of the first principal
component of their own sets of health measures. Most of the analyses are conducted on the basis of quintiles
of these indices.

Identification of incentive effects requires variation in pension program provision between individuals, and
ideally within individuals over time by way of pension program changes or reform. We choose an observation
period 1996‐2008. That is from the first year that we can observe health care usage spanning the population
based on administrative records, through the announcement of a major pension program reform in 1998 and
beyond full enactment of the new law in 2006.


                                                         1
From our descriptive analyses we can see clear gradients in DI participation rates by health quintile and by level
of completed schooling. Those in worse health and with less schooling are more likely to receive DI at some
point from age 50. The gradient of DI participation across health quintiles is almost twice as steep as across
levels of schooling. We find that pension program incentives in general are important determinants of
retirement age. Individuals in poor health are significantly more responsive to economic incentives than those
in better health, and those with low schooling are significantly more responsive to economic incentives than
those with long schooling. Hence low schooling and poor health are associated with greater DI participation,
and those with low schooling and poor health are also most responsive to economic incentives.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows background trends in labor force and DI
participation over time by schooling and health. Section 3 presents the empirical approach, describing
pathways to retirement, how they are weighted, describing the health index and the option value calculations.
Section 4 presents results from estimating option value models of retirement controlling for health in various
ways. Section 5 shows goodness‐of‐fit measures and conducts counterfactual simulations to illustrate some
implications of the results. Section 6 summarizes and concludes.

    2. Background

Previous studies have shown how trends in labor force participation for seniors have only a weak relationship
with changes in mortality and other measures of health over time and across countries (Milligan and Wise,
2012). Neither did there appear to be any relationship between the development of DI programs and changes
in mortality and measures of health. These findings were on the basis of a broad view of disaggregated data
covering a dozen countries and spanning several decades. In the current paper we want to analyze how
individual retirement behavior in Denmark is related to DI provisions, when controlling for individual variations
in health and other characteristics. As background for this micro‐analysis, in this section we describe trends
over time in DI participation, labor force participation and employment by age, and correlate these with
individual characteristics: gender, health status and educational attainment.

In the population 18‐64 years old the share receiving DI has been fairly constant at around 7 percent since
1990, (OECD, 2008). This is quite low and stable relative to the situation in neighboring Nordic countries (OECD,
2009). However, relatively low DI participation rate in Denmark needs to be viewed in the context of
competing transfer programs. Between 1992 and 1996 an early pension benefit (overgangsydelse) was
available for the long term unemployed aged 50‐59. This program removed many from the labour market who
might otherwise have applied for DI. In 1998 an existing wage subsidy program for the disabled was expanded
and re‐launched (flexjob). The disabled with some remaining work capacity were thus encouraged to stay in the
labour market rather than exit on DI.

Another relevant aspect in the development of DI in Denmark over recent years is the rather stable overall
participation rate, with a growing proportion of new young claimants entering the program with psychiatric
diagnoses (OECD, 2013). A final aspect of DI in Denmark is that only very few re‐enter the labour market having
once received DI (Høgelund and Holm, 2006). This is surprising in light of Jonassen et al. (2009), who find that
of those with functional disabilities in 1995, 50 percent had improved functional ability in 2008. This was
especially the case for the young and those starting out with a psychiatric functional disability.


                                                        2
Time series of DI participation rates are shown in Figure 1 for different age groups 50‐54, 55‐59 and 60‐64
separately for men in the upper pane and women in the lower pane. Women have higher mean DI participation
rates than men and older groups have higher DI participation rates than younger. The youngest group has
stable DI participation throughout the period for both genders, at 8 percent for men and 12 percent for
women. DI participation has declined markedly for those aged 60‐64, falling from 21 to 13 percent for men and
a dramatic 36 to 17 percent for women. In the post 2008 years not shown in Figure 1 DI shares are stable for
the 50 and older group until 2013.

The DI participation rates of Figure 1 are now set alongside employment rates in Figure 2 which shows time
series for different age groups, 50‐54, 55‐59 and 60‐64, separately for men and women. A high degree of
symmetry is evident, especially in the older group in the lower panes, whereby falls in DI participation are
about two thirds of the size of employment increases. Indeed, for women aged 60‐64, from 1999 employment
is more common than DI participation. Overall, the share in retirement in this age group is however higher than
the share in employment as the share of women in a SS program for early retirement is 40 percent of the age
group by the end of the period we analyze.

Associations with health status and schooling levels are shown in the next three figures. Figure 3 shows DI
participation rates for age group 55‐64 by schooling for selected years, separately for men in the upper pane
and women in the lower pane. There is a clear gradient in schooling in that those with lower education have
higher rates of DI participation. Graduating high school approximately halves the DI rate, falling from 24 to 13
percent for men and from 35 to 17 percent for women in 1996. Subsequent educational attainment is
associated with an approximately 3 percent reduction in DI rates for those with some college and another 3
percent reduction for graduating college. There is no discernible change in the educational gradient over time.

In the following illustrations and for most of the econometric analysis, health status is characterized by
quintiles of a health index. Calculation of the index is described in Section 3.c. Figure 4 shows DI participation
rates for age group 55‐64 by health quintile for selected years, separately for men in the upper pane and
women in the lower pane. There is a clear gradient in health in that those with worse health have higher rates
of DI participation. Our quintile grouping resolves into three different DI rates, the worst quintile followed by
quintiles 2 and 3 together with a lower DI rate, followed by better health quintiles with almost no DI recipients.
The fall in DI rate from best health quintile to 2 and 3 is more marked than for schooling, falling from 48 to 25
percent for men and from 61 to 37 percent for women in 1996. There is no discernible change in the health
gradient over time.

The joint distribution of DI participation rates by schooling and health quintile together is shown in Table 1 for
age group 55‐64, separately for men in the upper pane and women in the lower pane. Sub‐populations with
worst health and lowest schooling have highest DI participation rates, at 46 percent for men and 55 percent for
women. At the opposite corner of the table, men and women in the best health and with a college degree both
have a DI rate of less than one percent. Within each health quintile there is still a marked schooling gradient in
DI participation rates. Similarly, within each educational level there is still a marked health gradient. Health is
the most important marginal distribution, with 17% of men and women receiving DI of those in worst health
with a college degree, whereas only 2% of men and women in best health and less than high school participate
in DI.

                                                        3
Information from Table 1 is further split by selected years in Figure 5 which presents DI participation rates for
the age group 55‐64 jointly by schooling and health, separately for men in the upper pane and women in the
lower pane. The joint gradient in DI participation rates by health and schooling is maintained proportionally
throughout, with worst health and lowest schooling men and women in 1996 at 57% falling to 37% by 2008.
The fall of one third for this group over the 12 years is similar in magnitude to the DI participation rate
difference for those in worse health between some high school and some college.

In the final two sets of background figures, employment rates are associated with schooling and health. Figure
6 shows employment rates for age group 60‐64 by schooling over time, separately for men in the upper pane
and women in the lower pane. Men have higher employment rates than women. Indeed, men with some
college have similar employment rates to women with a college degree, and men with a high school degree
have similar employment rates to women with some college. There are similar upward trends in employment
rates for the three education groups without a college degree. The range of mean employment rates across
levels of schooling is narrower for men, ranging from 48 to 80 percent, than for women, ranging from 26 to 70
percent, in 2008 for example.

Figure 7 shows employment rates for age group 60‐64 by health quintile over time, separately for men in the
upper pane and women in the lower pane. There is a clear health gradient in employment rates, with those in
worst health having lowest employment rates, and those in the best two health quintiles having highest
employment rates. Employment rates across all health quintiles for men and women increase uniformly over
the sample period. The increase in employment rates 1995‐2008 by about 20 percent points is similar to the
difference moving from the two worst health quintiles to the second best.

In summary, our years of observation 1995‐2008 covers a period of falling DI participation, increasing labor
force participation and increasing employment for seniors, especially those aged 60‐64. There are steep
gradients in health, with those in worse health more likely to participate in DI and less likely to be in
employment. There are similar almost as steep gradients across the schooling distribution, with those without
a high school diploma more likely to participate in DI and less likely to be in employment.

    3. Empirical Approach

Our goal is to estimate the relationship between DI provisions and retirement age, given health status. In order
to do this we need to consider all transfer programs relevant for the transition from work to retirement for
seniors. These different pathways to retirement need to be combined in a weighted average measure which
summarizes their relative potential importance. An inclusive option value framework will be introduced to
characterize incentives implicit in the programs to retire at different ages. Finally we need to condition on
health in a way which is comparable across datasets and countries. The following four subsections present
these elements of our empirical approach.

            a. Pathways to retirement

There are three main pension programs supporting income in retirement which are relevant for our analysis.
First is a disability insurance program (førtidspension, hereafter DI) available for those aged 18‐66 and later 18‐
64 who have permanent social and/or health impairments that reduce work capacity. Second is a contribution‐

                                                         4
based but largely tax financed Post Employment Wage program (efterløn, hereafter SS) which is essentially
unemployment insurance benefit without a job search requirement available for ages 60‐66 and after 2006
from 60‐64. Third is Old Age Pension (folkepension, hereafter OAP) which is a demogrant available from age 67
and after 2006 from age 65, based on years of residence. Our period of analysis 1995‐2008 is chosen to span
reforms in DI stringency and SS/OAP incentives in order to provide variation by which to identify the effects of
program provisions on the retirement age for older workers.

SS was introduced in 1979 for ages 60‐66 and existed largely unchanged until reforms in 1992 and 1999. The
1992 rules are relevant for the first part of our sample period. Eligibility from 1992 to 1995 required
membership of an unemployment insurance fund for at least 20 of the last 25 years. An individual was allowed
to work for a maximum of 200 hours. If the 200 hours was exceeded, it resulted in a permanent disqualification
from the program. The political motivation for the 200 hours restriction was the idea that youth
unemployment would be reduced by cutting the labor supply. This, however, turned out not to be the case as
shown in Bingley et al. (2010). For individuals claiming SS at ages 60‐62, the benefits for the first two years
were at the level of unemployment insurance and reduced to 80% for the last 4 years. Delaying SS until age 63
or older gave benefits at 100% of the maximum unemployment insurance benefit level until age 66. This policy
obviously incentivized retiring at age 63 rather than at younger or older ages. In 1995 unemployment insurance
fund membership history requirements were increased to 25 out of the previous 30 years. Until 1999 only
payouts from life annuities in occupational pensions were means tested.

An SS reform was announced in March 1999 and enacted in July 1999. Means testing of payouts or returns
from all contributory pensions–whether they were actually paid out or not–was introduced for those claiming
SS at age 60 and 61 . Those eligible for SS and not retiring now accumulate a quarterly USD2200 bonus
beginning age 62. This reform shifted the retirement age incentive spike from age 63 down to age 62. The
previous limitation of working at most 200 hours per year was removed and replaced by a high effective
marginal tax rate. UI fund membership history requirements were further increased to 30 out of the last 35
years. Contributions were unbundled from UI and became separately elective.

An important element of the 1999 reform was the reduction in OAP age from 67 to 65. Those aged 60 and
above at enactment (born before July 1939) were unaffected and could first claim OAP at age 67, whereas
those born later could claim OAP from age 65. The change in OAP age was implemented from July 2004
through June 2006 and the maximum age for claiming SS benefits changed accordingly. This policy change was
obviously running against the trend of pension reforms typically increasing the age of eligibility. The
interpretation is fiscal considerations, in that the great majority of the 65 and 66 years old were in the DI or the
SS program with benefits significantly higher than in OAP.

DI has existed in essentially the same institutional form in the period 1984‐2002 but with some stringency
tightening in the 1990’s. It was available to those with permanent social or physical work impairments
depending on three levels of severity/generosity. During this period, benefit levels were closely linked to the
overall level of wages, but several stringency measures were introduced at different times. Three stringency
reforms can be distinguished. First, during 1995‐2002 a series of selective municipal award audits were
undertaken, whereby each year two out of Denmark’s fifteen counties were chosen and a random sample of
new benefit awards was drawn for re‐assessment of eligibility. Second, in 1997 central government refunds to

                                                         5
municipalities were reduced for expenditure on DI to individuals aged 60 and above, bringing refunds into line
with those for younger age groups. Third, in 1998 municipalities were required to first consider whether other
locally administered programs, such as work re‐habilitation or a program with disability wage subsidies, might
be relevant before processing an application for DI.

In 2003, the government simplified DI for new awards, by reducing the number of levels from three to one but
also introduced an array of condition‐and needs‐specific financial additions. These additions make net changes
to incentives due to the reform difficult to characterize for systematic analysis.

Other relevant related programs for those in short‐term poor health, with short‐term or permanent work
impairments but some remaining work capacity are sickness benefits (sygedagpenge), rehabilitation benefits
(revalidering) and disability wage subsidies (fleksjobs) respectively. We do not consider these programs as
pensions financing retirement because they involve some degree of attachment to the labor market.
Nevertheless, they are worth mentioning because of their relevance at the interface between health, work and
retirement. Work sickness absence benefits and rehabilitation are awarded temporarily. Disability wage
subsidies are a payment at the level of the minimum wage for permanently reduced work capacity. Individuals
in this program are classified as employed, or unemployed and seeking work, and therefore not retired for
modeling purposes.




            b. Calculating the probabilities of different pathways

An option value incentive measure needs to combine provisions across different potential pathways to
retirement. In order to integrate DI we need to impute to each person a probability that DI is a realistic option.
These probabilities can then be used as weights to combine pathways into a single inclusive option value
measure. We use a stock measure of calculating DI probabilities from the proportion participating in DI by
different cells combining individual characteristics. Cells are calculated for those aged 55‐64 by level of
schooling, gender and year. Selected years of these DI weights are presented in Figure 3.



            c. Health Index and Health Quintiles

A continuous health index needs to be created and divided into quintiles so as to be comparable with other
countries. Poterba, Venti and Wise (2011) propose such an index be calculated from the first principal
component of 27 health indicators from the HRS, the Health and Retirement Study. In the Danish
administrative registers we use the first principal component from hospital discharge records and prescription
medicine purchases. The principal components analysis is conducted on the population aged 50‐80 during the
years 1994‐2007.

From hospital records we consider all encounters, for both day patients and overnight stays. Each encounter
has a primary diagnosis code (ICD‐10) and duration. We aggregate diagnoses to the three‐digit level, giving 160


                                                        6
distinct diagnoses after 12 diagnoses with fewer than 100 cases are dropped. Durations of hospital stays are
summed over a two year period within each diagnosis for each person. In other words, hospitalization is
characterized for each person as length of hospital stay over the previous two years with each of 160 primary
diagnoses.

From prescription medicine records we consider all purchases from high street pharmacies. Each purchase has
a drug code (ATC‐5) and dosage. We aggregate drug codes to the three‐digit level, giving 170 distinct drug
types after 8 drug types with fewer than 100 persons purchasing are dropped. Dosages are normalized
according to WHO defined daily dosages and summed over a two year period within each drug type for each
person. In other words, drug consumption is characterized for each person as number of standard daily doses
over the previous two years for each of 170 drug types.

Principal components are calculated over hospitalizations and prescriptions together in two year periods. For
example, when modeling retirement behavior in 1996, principal components would be calculated for 1994‐5;
for behavior in 1997, principal components would be based on 1995‐6, etc. The first principal component forms
our health index. Figure 8 shows mean centile of the health index over age by gender in the upper pane and by
schooling level in the lower pane. By convention a higher centile is taken to indicate better health. Men have a
higher mean health centile than women. Note that it is conventional to observe that men have better self‐
reported health, less health care usage, but higher mortality than women of a similar age. Health declines with
age and the gender health gap narrows from 5 centiles at age 50 to 1 centile at age 70. The gender health gap
at age 60 corresponds to the mean health decline over 4 to 5 years. According to our health index, based on
health care usage, a woman age 60 is as healthy as a man age 64. This is in spite of her having higher expected
longevity.The right pane of figure 8 shows a health centile gradient in schooling with those with lowest
schooling having worst health. The schooling health gradient narrows from 10 centiles at age 50 to 6 centiles
by age 70, however the 3 health centile difference moving from high school graduation to some college
persists.



            d. Option Value Calculation

The goal of our analysis is to estimate the relationship between pension program provisions and age of
retirement. Incentives implicit in pension program provisions can be characterized by the potential gain from
postponing retirement until future ages. In order to do this we follow the option value approach of Stock and
Wise (1990) and extend this to explicitly allow for different potential pathways to retirement in the form of an
inclusive option value measure.

From the vantage point of each age a while in work, there are several possible pathways (pa=1,..., PA) to
retirement, each with an associated utility stream V dependent upon age of retirement time r. A pathway
constitutes a number of years of continued work, denoted in the first summation of equation (1), followed by
the number of years receiving pension benefits specific to that pathway until death at age A, denoted by the
second summation of equation (1). Expected utility at each future age s from the vantage point of each age Ea is
weighted by the probability of survival to that age ps|a and discounted βs‐t back to the present. While working,
wage income ω(s) is received at each age, while retired benefit income Brk(s) is received at each age dependent

                                                        7
upon pathway and age of retirement. The utility function includes a parameter for leisure κ, which scales
retirement benefits relative to earnings. Both incomes in work and retirement are raised to the power γ
representing risk aversion:

(1)                     ∑       |                   ∑       |


For each retirement pathway pa, the future age of retirement at which the expected discounted utility stream
is maximized is denoted r*. The comparison is between expected utility streams associated with all retirement
ages until maximum age of retirement R. The option value of staying in work at the present age a compared to
following eventual retirement pathway pa is defined as the difference between the maximum of expected
utilities from future retirement ages along that pathway compared to retiring now:
                                        ∗
(2)           ≡ max       ∗



Having defined the OV of staying in work from the vantage point of each age a for each retirement pathway pa,
it remains to weight each pathway with the probability Pk so that it represents a set of relevant alternatives for
each individual. An inclusive OV measure combines routes weighted by the probabilities that they are relevant
as follows:

(3)             ∑

This inclusive option value measure makes explicit the extension to the Stock and Wise (1990) option value
approach that allows us to incorporate several different routes to retirement. This can be cast in a regression
framework further allowing for differences in health status. Consider retirement status R for person i of age a
in health quantile j. This is assumed to be a function of exogenous individual characteristics Xia and a
function δj of inclusive option value OVia. Hj is a measure of health and εiaj is an error term:

(4)             ∑

Equation 4 is estimated as a probit model for year‐to‐year retirement. Retirement behavior is characterized as
an optimal stopping problem in that an individual remains out of the labor force once retired. Benefit collection
and retirement are assumed to be synonymous. Pathways from the labor force to OAP could be direct or via DI,
SS, or a private pension drawdown. Individuals are selected at ages 57‐66 and must be working in first year of
observation. We assume a maximum age of retirement R at 67 and force those who are still working at age 66
to retire at 67 on OAP. We use population life tables for survival probability s from age a published in 2009 by
age and gender for ages 58‐99 and impose zero survival probability at age 100. After retirement, an individual
leaves the dataset. Exits from the dataset due to death, migration or change of marital status are treated as
missing at random. Observations for individuals who leave the dataset are used in estimation until the year
before exit and the last observation is classified as working. Potential earnings profiles are assumed to be flat
from age 57 with 1% real growth. Option value calculations assume knowledge of the pension and tax system
as in place at the vantage point of observation. Individuals form expectations on the basis of that system and
any future changes which had already been announced at that time. For the sake of comparison with other
countries, preference parameters are fixed at the levels found in US data as discount rate β=0.97, utility of
leisure κ=1.5 and risk aversion γ=0.95.

                                                        8
It is informative to present examples of these option values in order to fix ideas. Figure 9 shows mean option
value for the 1941 cohort by age for each retirement path as well as for inclusive option value combining all
pathways, separately for men in the upper pane and women in the lower pane. Option value falls with age. The
fall is from a higher base for men compared to women, but the proportional fall over age is similar. DI option
value declines smoothly, whereas SS option value slows its decline just for age 61 and resumes a decline
thereafter more slowly. This reflects an absence of age related conditions for DI, but a post‐reform penalty for
SS at age 61 due to means testing of private pension wealth, followed by bonus payments for delaying SS
retirement for each quarter beyond age 62. The ranking between OV profiles differs between women and men.
For women the DI OV is lower than SS while the opposite is found for men. The 1941 cohort of men typically
have higher occupational pension wealth than women. As a consequence, benefits from SS are means tested to
a higher degree for men than for women. Women, however, have a higher prospective rate of compensation
from SS than men due to lower wages on average in a setting where benefits do not depend on pre‐entry
wages.



    4. Results

In this section we present estimates of the models constructed in the previous section. Option value is the
main explanatory variable of interest and it is informative first to see how this evolves over age alongside
retirement age to understand how it is driving the retirement decision modeling. Figure 10 shows the percent
of men or women having reached maximum utility, or minimum option value, by age, separately for the pre‐
reform 1938 cohort in the upper pane and for the post‐reform 1941 cohort in the lower pane. Also shown is
the percent retired by age for men and women. The percent having reached minimum option value is higher
for men than women and rises faster over age for women. The pattern is similar pre‐ and post‐reform, but with
a bigger share reaching minimum option value by each age pre‐reform.

The remainder of the section presents estimates of option value coefficients and controls for different
specifications and samples. Table 2A shows estimates from retirement probit regressions with option value as
the key explanatory variable and health measures as controls. Each column is for a separate regression to
check sensitivity of results to the inclusion of linear age versus age dummies, inclusion of additional covariates,
and to different ways of controlling for health, by quintiles in the health index. Option value has a negative and
statistically significant effect on retirement. Estimates are similar regardless of how health is controlled for. OV
coefficients are somewhat smaller with inclusion of additional covariates and considerably smaller with age
dummies rather than linear age controls. Other covariates are significant with expected signs. Compared to the
reference group in worst health, the healthier are less likely to retire. However, among the four healthy
quintiles there is no gradient in retirement. There is a clear gradient in schooling whereby those with more
schooling are less likely to retire early.

An alternative parameterization of option values is as percent gain in option value from delaying retirement.
Table 2B shows estimates from retirement probit regressions with this as the key explanatory variable and
health quintiles as controls. These show the effect of the utility gain from waiting to retire until the optimal
age, scaled by the utility available by retiring immediately. Coefficients of interest are negative and statistically


                                                          9
significant. Robustness across specifications is similar to that from Table 2A, with somewhat smaller
coefficients when including covariates and considerably smaller coefficients when controlling for age with
dummies rather than a linear term.

The most flexible specifications run models separately by different cuts of the data. Table 3A shows estimates
from retirement probit regressions with option value as the key explanatory variable, run separately by health
quintile. Each cell of the table corresponds to a separate regression, with specifications differing by column and
health quintile sample differing by row. Estimates differ across specifications according to a similar pattern
seen in Tables 2A and 2B. Those in worst health have the most negative option value coefficients, followed by
those in the second worst health quintile, and the remainder in better health quintiles 3‐5 have smaller sized
coefficients but exhibit not obvious pattern between each other. So those in worse health are more responsive
to pension incentives.

Using a more flexible specification than those presented in Table 2B, Table 3B shows estimates from retirement
probit regressions with percent gain in option value from delaying retirement as the key explanatory variables,
split by health quintiles. Each cell is the coefficient of interest from a separate regression. There is a familiar
pattern of sensitivity across specifications, but no systematic differences in coefficients across health quintiles.

Table 3C shows estimates from retirement probit regressions with option value interacted with the health
index as the key explanatory variables. This is the continuous health index version of Table 3A, but further
imposes that other covariates do not vary according to health whereas they were allowed to vary in Table 3A
(not presented). Estimates of the interaction of option value with health index are negative, implying
individuals in better health are more responsive to incentives. This is the opposite finding from Table 3A and is
likely due to the restriction that other controls are not allowed to also vary by health.

Analogously to splitting the sample by health quintile, the next two tables split the population by level of
educational attainment. Table 4A shows estimates from retirement probit regressions with option value as the
key explanatory variable, for samples split by schooling. Each cell of the table corresponds to a separate
regression, with specifications differing by column and schooling level sample differing by row. Once again,
estimates differ across specifications according to a similar pattern seen in Tables 2A and 2B. There is a clear
gradient in coefficients across schooling samples, with those having least schooling having most negative
option value coefficients, and gradually coefficients become less and less negative for samples with more and
more schooling. OV coefficients for those without a high school degree are about five times as large as OV
coefficients for those with a college degree. The biggest difference in coefficients is at the high school
graduation margin.

Finally, Table 4B shows estimates from retirement probit regressions with percent gain in option value from
delaying retirement as the key explanatory variables, for different samples split by level of schooling. This
shows a similar gradient to that presented in Table 4A.

            a. Model fit

Estimates from Table 2A specification 4 are based on the full sample with option values, health quintiles, age
dummies and a full set of controls. The first two panes of Figure 11 show goodness‐of‐fit from this model in

                                                        10
terms of observed and predicted hazard rates, separately for men and women. Hazard rate spikes at ages 60
and 62 are fitted well for both men and women. Estimates from Table 3A specification 4 are based on samples
split by health quintile, with option values, age dummies and a full set of controls. Predictions by health
quintile are presented in Figures 11C and 11D and track the average hazard rate quite closely, with worst
health always clearly more likely to retire at all ages and a more modest gradient in predicted retirement
hazard across the better health quintiles. Estimates from Table 4A specification 4 are based on samples split by
schooling level, with option values, age dummies and a full set of controls. Predictions by schooling are
presented in Figures 11E and 11F and track the average hazard rate closely for those with less than some
college, but predicted hazards are more damped for those with some college and especially for college
graduates.



            b. Implications of the results

Counterfactual simulations help us understand how the provisions of DI and SS programs differentially affect
retirement ages. Figure 12 shows survival rates in work by age for simulating that only the DI retirement
pathway is available or only the SS retirement pathway is available, separately for everyone in the upper pane
and for only those ever receiving DI in the lower pane. Survival in work declines faster for simulations based on
individuals who have ever received DI. For both the full population and those ever on DI, there is less survival in
work simulating only the DI pathway.

A useful summary measure of the retirement consequences of our counterfactual simulations is the number of
expected years of work after age 57. Figure 13 shows this together with two additional intermediate
simulations which are also conducted and presented, for those ever receiving DI. The two new simulations
involve first a random one third assignment to DI pathway and two thirds assignment to the SS pathway, and
second a two thirds random assignment to DI pathway and one third to the SS pathway. For the full population
SS pathway has 4.8 expected remaining years in work and the DI pathway has 4.5. For the sample of those who
have ever received DI, the number of expected work years beyond 57 for the SS pathway is 3.8 compared with
3.6 for the DI pathway. Simulated changes in DI stringency are shown in the other two sets of bars in Figure 13.
By randomly assigning first one third and then two thirds from the DI pathway to the SS pathway we tighten
access to the DI program, and remaining work years increases from 3.60 first to 3.67 and then 3.73. This is a
rather modest employment effect from making DI harder to access for a sample who have received DI.



    5. Conclusion

We have examined the extent to which differences in labor force participation rates by health status are
determined by the provisions of Disability Insurance and other pension programs. Using population‐based
administrative data for Denmark over the period 1996‐2008 we identify incentive effects from a pension
reform enacted 1999‐2006 while controlling for health care usage measured by hospitalization and prescription
medicine purchase.



                                                        11
Descriptive analyses show that there is a gradient in DI participation rates by health status, with those in worse
health being more likely to receive DI. A similar pattern is found for schooling, with those having less schooling
being more likely to receive DI. The gradient of DI participation across health quintiles is almost twice as steep
as across levels of schooling – when moving from having no high school diploma to graduating college. While
the relationship between health status and DI participation is to be expected, the relationship with schooling is
less well recognized, though it may largely be due to those who are in better health having more schooling.

In order to capture the incentives implicit in pension program provision, we characterize the potential gains
from postponing retirement in an option value model that allows for different pension pathways to retirement.
We find that pension program incentives in general are important determinants of retirement age. In order to
understand how the provisions of DI and social security programs interact, we simulate increases in DI
stringency by randomly allocating one third, then two thirds, of DI recipients to a social security pathway.
These simulations show only rather modest changes in expected number of remaining work years, largely
because of the availability of social security benefits for most people already at age 60.

In our most flexible specifications, we estimate option value models of retirement age separately by health
quintile and educational level, in order to measure differential incentive effects. We find that individuals in
poor health are significantly more responsive to economic incentives than those in better health. Similarly,
those with less schooling are significantly more responsive to economic incentives than those with more
schooling. The schooling effect partly reflects that the less educated have worse job prospects and therefore
higher replacement rates from pension programs.

Our main finding is the existence of similar gradients in DI participation across health and education, and
corresponding gradients in behavior in response to retirement incentives across health and education. Those in
worse health and with less schooling participate more in DI and are more responsive to pension incentives. This
suggests that reducing pension incentives to retire early will delay retirement most for those currently retiring
earliest.

        References

Bingley, Paul, Nabanita Datta Gupta and Peder J. Pedersen (2004) The impact of incentives on retirement in
Denmark, in Jonathan Gruber and David Wise (eds.) Social Security and Retirement Around the World: Micro‐
estimates, 2004, University of Chicago Press.

Bingley, Paul, Nabanita Datta Gupta and Peder J. Pedersen (2010) Social Security, retirement and the
Employment of the Young in Denmark, in J. Gruber and D.A. Wise (eds.) Social Security Programs and
Retirement Around the World: The Relationship to Youth Employment, 2010, University of Chicago Press.

Høgelund, Jan and Anders Holm (2006) Case Management Interviews and the Return to Work of Disabled
Employees. Journal of Health Economics, vol.25, No. 3, 500‐519.

Jonassen, Anders Bruun, Brian Larsen and Jan Høgelund (2009) Personer med handicap. Helbred, beskæftigelse
og førtidspension 1995‐2008. (Individuals with Disabilities: Health, Employment and Disability Insurance) SFI –
The Danish National Centre for Social Research, Report 09:21.

                                                        12
Milligan, Kevin S. and David A. Wise (2012) Health and work at older ages: Using mortality to assess
employment capacity across countries. NBER Working Paper 18229

OECD (2008) Sickness, disability and work: Breaking the barriers (vol 3) – Denmark, Ireland, Finland and the
Netherlands. OECD Paris.

OECD (2009) Employment Outlook. OECD Paris.

OECD (2013) Mental health and work: Denmark. OECD Paris.

Palme, Mårten and Ingemar Svensson (2004) Income Security Programs and Retirement in Sweden. in Jonathan
Gruber and David Wise (eds.) “Social Security and Retirement Around the World: Micro‐estimates”, 2004,
Chicago University Press: Chicago.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise (2011) The Asset Cost of Poor Health. NBER Working
Paper 16389

Stock, James H. and David A. Wise (1990) Pensions, the option value of Work, and Retirement. Econometrica
58:5, 1151‐1180.




                                                       13
                Figure 1A. DI Participation by Age Group
                                   Men
          40
          35
          30
          25
Percent




          20
          15
          10
           5
           0
               1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
                    Men 50‐54    Men 55‐59    Men 60‐64


                Figure 1B. DI Participation by Age Group
                                 Women
          40
          35
          30
          25
Percent




          20
          15
          10
           5
           0
               1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
               Women 50‐54      Women 55‐59     Women 60‐64


                                 14
                Figure 2A. DI and Employment for Men 50‐54
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0


                                             Year

                  Employment ‐ age 50‐54 ‐ Men      DI ‐ age 50‐54 ‐ Men


                Figure 2B. DI and Employment for Women 50‐54
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0


                                             Year

                Employment ‐ age 50‐54 ‐ Women      DI ‐ age 50‐54 ‐ Women

                                            15
                Figure 2C. DI and Employment for Men 55‐59
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0


                                             Year

                  Employment ‐ age 55‐59 ‐ Men      DI ‐ age 55‐59 ‐ Men




                Figure 2D. DI and Employment for Women 55‐59
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0


                                             Year

                Employment ‐ age 55‐59 ‐ Women      DI ‐ age 55‐59 ‐ Women

                                            16
                Figure 2E. DI and Employment for Men 60‐64
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0


                                             Year

                  Employment ‐ age 60‐64 ‐ Men      DI ‐ age 60‐64 ‐ Men


                Figure 2F. DI and Employment for Women 60‐64
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0


                                             Year

                Employment ‐ age 60‐64 ‐ Women      DI ‐ age 60‐64 ‐ Women



                                            17
                Figure 3A. Men 55‐64 who have Received DI
                           by Education and Year
          40
          35
          30
percent




          25
          20
          15
          10
           5
           0
                  1996           2000         2004         2008           2011
                                              Year

                1 Less than HS    2 HS Grad    3 Some College     4 College


               Figure 3B. Women 55‐64 who have Received DI
                           by Education and Year
          40
          35
          30
percent




          25
          20
          15
          10
           5
           0
                  1996           2000         2004         2008           2011
                                              Year

                1 Less than HS    2 HS Grad    3 Some College     4 College



                                              18
                Figure 4A. Men 55‐64 who have Received DI
                            by Health and Year
          70
          60
          50
percent




          40
          30
          20
          10
          0
                     1996             2000             2004             2008
               1 Quantile (lowest)   2 Quantile            3 Quantile
               4 Quantile            5 Quantile(highest)


               Figure 4B. Women 55‐64 who have Received DI
                            by Health and Year
          70
          60
          50
percent




          40
          30
          20
          10
          0
                     1996             2000             2004             2008
               1 Quantile (lowest)   2 Quantile            3 Quantile
               4 Quantile            5 Quantile(highest)



                                              19
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60




                                                            0
                                                           10
                                                           20
                                                           30
                                                           40
                                                           50
                                                           60
                                     1 Quantile (lowest)                                                                                         1 Quantile (lowest)

                                             2 Quantile                                                                                                  2 Quantile

                                             3 Quantile                                                                                                  3 Quantile

                                                                                                                                                         4 Quantile




                                                                                                                                1 Less than HS
                                             4 Quantile




                    1 Less than HS
                                     5 Quantile(highest)                                                                                         5 Quantile(highest)

                                     1 Quantile (lowest)                                                                                         1 Quantile (lowest)

                                             2 Quantile                                                                                                  2 Quantile

                                             3 Quantile                                                                                                  3 Quantile




     1996
                                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                        2 HS Grad




                    2 HS Grad
                                             4 Quantile                                                                                                  4 Quantile




     2000
                                                                                                                                  2000
                                     5 Quantile(highest)                                                                                         5 Quantile(highest)




                                                                                                                   Men




20
            Women
                                     1 Quantile (lowest)                                                                                         1 Quantile (lowest)




     2004
                                                                                                                     2004
                                             2 Quantile                                                                                                  2 Quantile

                                             3 Quantile                                                                                                  3 Quantile




     2008
                                                                                                                             2008
                                             4 Quantile
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Quintile, Age 55‐64 Men




                                                                                                                                                         4 Quantile




                    3 Some College
                                                                                                                         3 Some College




                                                                           Quintile, Age 55‐64 Women
                                     5 Quantile(highest)                                                                                         5 Quantile(highest)
                                     1 Quantile (lowest)                                                                                         1 Quantile (lowest)
                                             2 Quantile                                                                                                  2 Quantile
                                             3 Quantile                                                                                                  3 Quantile
                                                                Figure 5B. DI Recipients by Education and Health
                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5A. DI Recipients by Education and Health




                    4 College
                                                                                                                                4 College




                                             4 Quantile
                                                                                                                                                         4 Quantile
                                     5 Quantile(highest)
                                                                                                                                                 5 Quantile(highest)
                Figure 6B. Employment by Education
                           Age 60‐64 Men
          100

          80
Percent




          60

          40

          20

           0



                  Men Less than HS        Men HS Grad
                  Men Some College        Men College


                Figure 6B. Employment by Education
                         Age 60‐64 Women
          100

          80
Percent




          60

          40

          20

           0



                Women Less than HS        Women HS Grad
                Women Some College        Women College



                                     21
                Figure 7A. Employment by Health Quintile
                             Age 60‐64 Men
          100
          80
Percent




          60
          40
          20
           0
                 1995
                         1996
                                1997
                                       1998
                                              1999
                                                     2000
                                                            2001
                                                                   2002
                                                                          2003
                                                                                 2004
                                                                                        2005
                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                             2008
                           Men 1 Quantile (lowest)               Men 2 Quantile
                           Men 3 Quantile                        Men 4 Quantile
                           Men 5 Quantile



                Figure 7B. Employment by Health Quintile
                            Age 60‐64 Women
          100
           80
Percent




           60
          40
          20
           0
                 1995
                         1996
                                1997
                                       1998
                                              1999
                                                     2000
                                                            2001
                                                                   2002
                                                                          2003
                                                                                 2004
                                                                                        2005
                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                             2008




                        Women 1 Quantile (lowest)                Women 2 Quantile
                        Women 3 Quantile                         Women 4 Quantile
                        Women 5 Quantile



                                                            22
                    Figure 8A. Health Index Mean by Gender
             65
             60
             55
Percentile




             50
             45
             40
             35
                  50   52   54    56   58    60       62   64      66     68    70
                                             Age

                                   Men        Women


                  Figure 8B. Health Index Mean by Education
             65
             60
             55
Percentile




             50
             45
             40
             35
                  50   52   54    56   58     60      62   64      66     68    70
              1 Less than HS     2 HS Grad        3 Some College        4 College


                                             23
         Figure 9A. Mean OV by Age for 1941 Cohort
                           Men
20,000

16,000

12,000

 8,000

 4,000

    0
         58     59        60         61          62   63   64
                     DI        SS         Inclusive


         Figure 9B. Mean OV by Age for 1941 Cohort
                          Women
20,000

16,000

12,000

 8,000

 4,000

    0
         58     59        60         61          62   63   64
                     DI        SS         Inclusive



                                    24
                 Figure 10A. Percent Having Reached Minimum OV and
                            Retired by Age, for 1938 cohort
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0
                   58     59        60    61    62       63     64        65   66
                         men retired                men minimum OV
                         women retired              women minimum OV


                Figure 10B. Percent Having Reached Minimum OV and
                           Retired by Age, for 1941 Cohort
          100

          80

          60
Percent




          40

          20

           0
                    58         59        60     61         62        63        64
                         men retired                men minimum OV
                         women retired              women minimum OV



                                               25
        Figure 11A. Actual vs. Predicted Retirement Age
                              Men
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
       58    59    60     61        62     63     64   65   66
                        Predicted        Actual


        Figure 11B. Actual vs. Predicted Retirement Age
                            Women
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
       58    59    60     61        62     63     64   65   66
                        Predicted        Actual



                                    26
                Figure 11C. Predicted Retirement Age
                       by Health Quintile, Men
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
       58        59       60        61       62        63       64       65    66
       Men 1 Quantile (lowest)   Men 2 Quantile               Men 3 Quantile
       Men 4 Quantile            Men 5 Quantile(highest)



                Figure 11D. Predicted Retirement Age
                     by Health Quintile, Women
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
       58        59       60        61       62        63       64       65    66
                 Women 1 Quantile (lowest)        Women 2 Quantile
                 Women 3 Quantile                 Women 4 Quantile
                 Women 5 Quantile(highest)




                                             27
                Figure 11E. Predicted Retirement Age by Education
                                       Men
         0.40
         0.35
         0.30
         0.25
Hazard




         0.20
         0.15
         0.10
         0.05
         0.00
                   58     59      60     61         62     63       64   65   66
                          Men 1 Less than HS        Men 2 HS Grad
                          Men 3 Some College        Men 4 College


                Figure 11F. Predicted Retirement Age by Education
                                      Women
         0.40
         0.35
         0.30
         0.25
Hazard




         0.20
         0.15
         0.10
         0.05
         0.00
                   58     59      60     61         62     63       64   65   66
                        Women 1 Less than HS        Women 2 HS Grad
                        Women 3 Some College        Women 4 College



                                               28
           Figure 12A. Simulated Survival Probabilities in
                   Work by Pathway, for Everyone
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
      57      58    59    60    61         62   63   64   65   66

                                 SS        DI



           Figure 12B. Simulated Survival Probabilities in
           Work by Pathway, for those having received DI
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
      57      58    59    60    61         62   63   64   65   66

                                 SS        DI




                                      29
                 Figure 13. Expected Years of Work After 57
                             on DI versus SS Path
5.0


4.5


4.0


3.5


3.0
      full sample ‐ all face one   DI sample ‐ all face one    DI sample ‐ 2/3 face SS   DI sample ‐ 1/3 face SS
               option                     option

                                                       DI     SS




                                                              30
Table 1. Percent DI receipt age 55-64 by heath quintile and education

                 Men ‐ health quintile
                  1 (low)          2        3           4           5      All
1 Less than HS     45.58         25.63     22.84       4.03        2.14   20.63
2 HS Grad          30.16         12.97     9.25        1.81        0.94   10.70
3 Some College     22.75         8.56      6.08        1.81        1.10   7.01
4 College          17.22         6.98      4.11        1.23        0.73   4.71
All                34.11         16.06     12.72       2.41        1.30   12.83


                 Women ‐ health quintile
                  1 (low)          2        3           4           5      All
1 Less than HS     55.11         35.59     33.46       7.32        2.50   28.91
2 HS Grad          32.92         15.63     11.96       2.44        0.86   12.66
3 Some College     25.78         11.43     8.30        1.83        0.69   9.51
4 College          16.98         7.28      5.05        1.33        0.49   5.66
All                42.12         23.55     20.72       4.25        1.48   19.02




                                            31
Table 2A. Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement

                                                                      Specification
                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)

OV_Inclusive              -0.0907*** -0.0591*** -0.0775*** -0.0433*** -0.0903*** -0.0589*** -0.0773*** -0.0434***
                             (0.0006)   (0.0005)   (0.0007)   (0.0005)   (0.0006)   (0.0005)   (0.0007)   (0.0005)

Health Quint 2            -0.0033*** -0.0190***         -0.0007 -0.0162***
(Second Lowest)              (0.0008)   (0.0006)       (0.0008)    (0.0006)

Health Quint 3            -0.0101*** -0.0256*** -0.0089*** -0.0249***
                             (0.0008)   (0.0006)   (0.0008)   (0.0006)

Health Quint 4            -0.0098*** -0.0228*** -0.0116*** -0.0250***
                             (0.0008)   (0.0007)   (0.0008)   (0.0007)

Health Quint 5               -0.0020* -0.0150*** -0.0047*** -0.0180***
(Highest)                     (0.0008)   (0.0007)   (0.0008)   (0.0007)

Health Index                                                                    -0.0060*** -0.0063*** -0.0061*** -0.0064***
                                                                                    (0.0005)  (0.0005)   (0.0005)    (0.0005)

Age                                 X                         X                          X                         X


Age Dummies                                 X                         X                         X                         X

Female                                                  0.0016*    0.0051***                                 -0.0001   0.0024***
                                                       (0.0006)      (0.0005)                               (0.0006)     (0.0005)

Married                                              -0.0198*** -0.0184***                                -0.0198*** -0.0188***
                                                        (0.0010)   (0.0008)                                  (0.0010)   (0.0008)

Spouse retired                                       0.0542***     0.0428***                              0.0543***    0.0432***
                                                       (0.0006)      (0.0005)                               (0.0006)     (0.0005)

Total Assets                                         -0.0000*** -0.0000***                                -0.0000*** -0.0000***
                                                        (0.0000)   (0.0000)                                  (0.0000)   (0.0000)

Occup Dummies                                            X            X                                       x           x

Educ: <High School                                   -0.0024*** -0.0045***                                -0.0025*** -0.0046***
                                                        (0.0006)   (0.0005)                                  (0.0006)   (0.0005)

Educ: High School                                    -0.0194*** -0.0154***                                -0.0195*** -0.0156***
                                                        (0.0008)   (0.0006)                                  (0.0008)   (0.0006)

Educ: Some College                                   -0.0509*** -0.0362***                                -0.0510*** -0.0367***
                                                        (0.0011)   (0.0008)                                  (0.0011)   (0.0008)


# of Observations           1,296,332    1,296,332    1,296,332    1,296,332      1,296,332   1,296,332    1,296,332   1,296,332
Pseudo R2                       0.081        0.207        0.103        0.229          0.081       0.205        0.103       0.228

Mean Ret. Rate                  0.120        0.120        0.120        0.120         0.120       0.120         0.120       0.120
Mean of OV                      9,898        9,898        9,898        9,898         9,898       9,898         9,898       9,898
Std. Dev. of OV                10,110       10,110       10,110       10,110        10,110      10,110        10,110      10,110


Note:
1) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000 unit change in OV from probit models. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                              32
Table 2B. Effect of Percent Gain in Inclusive OV on Retirement
                                                Specification
                                (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
% Gain in OV                 -0.2180*** -0.1236*** -0.1836*** -0.0806***
                                (0.0018)   (0.0014)   (0.0020)   (0.0015)


Linear Age                        X                           X
Age Dummies                                     X                           X
Health Quintiles                  X             X             X             X
Other Xs                                                      X             X

# of Observations              1,368,865      1,368,865     1,296,332     1,296,332
Pseudo R2                          0.071          0.194         0.099         0.223

Mean Ret. Rate                        0.120         0.120         0.120         0.120
Mean of % Gain in OV                  0.356         0.356         0.356         0.356
Std. Dev. of % Gain in OV             0.365         0.365         0.365         0.365
Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 2A.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                 33
Table 3a: Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement
by Health Quintile

                              # of Obs    Mean       Mean    Std. Dev.                     Specification
                                          Ret.
                                          Rate
                                          pct.       of OV        of OV      (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)

OV: Lowest Quintile             273,552   14.363     8,862        9,392   -0.1055*** -0.0798*** -0.0966*** -0.0639***
       (Worst Health)                                                        (0.0016)   (0.0014)   (0.0018)   (0.0015)
                                                                             [0.0566]   [0.0423]   [0.0499]    [0.065]
                              R2                                                0.045      0.142      0.064      0.161

OV: 2nd Quintile                273,876   12.642    10,095     10,556     -0.0857*** -0.0665*** -0.0722*** -0.0490***
                                                                             (0.0015)   (0.0012)   (0.0017)   (0.0014)
                                                                              [0.053]   [0.0476]   [0.0405]   [0.0285]
                              R2                                                0.063      0.159      0.087      0.185

OV: 3rd Quintile                273,816   10.524    10,738     11,049     -0.0772*** -0.0510*** -0.0594*** -0.0342***
                                                                             (0.0011)   (0.0009)   (0.0015)   (0.0011)
                                                                             [0.0673]   [0.0501]   [0.0436]   [0.0256]
                              R2                                                0.104      0.217      0.131      0.246

OV: 4th Quintile               273,827    11.073     9,571        9,960   -0.0800*** -0.0428*** -0.0628*** -0.0282***
                                                                             (0.0012)   (0.0008)   (0.0015)   (0.0009)
                                                                             [0.0629]   [0.0387]   [0.0418]   [0.0186]
                              R2                                                0.120      0.269      0.144      0.293

OV: Highest Quintile           273,794    11.249    10,217        9,381   -0.0897*** -0.0509*** -0.0765*** -0.0372***
        (Best Health)                                                        (0.0011)   (0.0009)   (0.0014)   (0.0010)
                                                                             [0.0835]   [0.0487]    [0.065]   [0.0283]
                              R2                                                0.127      0.266      0.147      0.286

Linear Age                                                                    X                         X
Age Dummies                                                                               X                          X
Other Xs                                                                                                X            X


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 2A, but are estimated separately by health quintile; each coefficient on the
   table is from a different regression.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000 unit change in OV from probit models. Standard errors are shown in
   parentheses. The effect of a one standard deviation change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated as the effect of
   increasing inclusive OV from the current value - 0.5 std. dev to the current value + 0.5 std dev).




                                                             34
Table 3B. Effect of % Gain in Inclusive OV on Retirement
by Health Quintile

                               Mean               Std.                    Specification
                                        Mean
                       # of     Ret               Dev.
                                        of %
                       Obs     Rate               Of %
                                         OV
                                pct                OV        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)

OV: Lowest Quintile    273,552 14.363      0.34    0.36 -0.2128*** -0.1310*** -0.1897*** -0.0924***
  (Worst Health)                                           (0.0047)   (0.0039)   (0.0053)   (0.0042)

                       R2                                      0.032       0.127        0.056       0.153

OV: 2nd Quintile       273,876 12.642      0.40    0.44 -0.1851*** -0.1295*** -0.1632*** -0.0931***
                                                           (0.0038)   (0.0031)   (0.0042)   (0.0032)

                       R2                                      0.053       0.146        0.084       0.179

OV: 3rd Quintile       273,816 10.524      0.39    0.36 -0.2043*** -0.1235*** -0.1538*** -0.0744***
                                                           (0.0033)   (0.0026)   (0.0037)   (0.0026)

                       R2                                      0.094       0.204        0.128       0.240

OV: 4th Quintile       273,827 11.073      0.30    0.29 -0.2352*** -0.1155*** -0.1839*** -0.0678***
                                                           (0.0031)   (0.0022)   (0.0037)   (0.0024)

                       R2                                      0.117       0.261        0.145       0.290

OV: Highest Quintile   273,794 11.249      0.31    0.27 -0.2321*** -0.1145*** -0.1930*** -0.0739***
   (Best Health)                                           (0.0036)   (0.0027)   (0.0041)   (0.0029)

                       R2                                      0.118       0.253        0.144       0.280
Linear Age                                                    X                        X
Age Dummies                                                               X                        X
Other Xs                                                                               X           X

Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 2A, but are estimated separately by health quintile; each
2) Coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                   35
Table 3C. Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement with health interaction

                                                         Specification
                                       (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)

OV_Inclusive                        -0.0842***       -0.0492***    -0.0714***    -0.0348***
                                       (0.0012)          -0.0009       -0.0012       -0.0009
                                       [0,0643]         [0,0446]      [0,0502]      [0,0263]

Health Index                        -0.0003***       0.0002***     -0.0003***    -0.0002***
                                       (0.0000)        (0.0000)       (0.0000)      (0.0000)

OV_Inclusive*Health Index           -0.0001***       -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***
                                       (0.0000)         (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)


Linear Age                               X                             X
Age Dummies                                             X                           X
Other Xs                                                               X            X


# of Observations                       1296332         1296332       1296332       1296332
Pseudo R2                                 0.081           0.205         0.103         0.228

Mean Ret. Rate                         0.119697        0.119697      0.119697      0.119697
Mean of OV                              9897.63         9897.63       9897.63       9897.63
Std. Dev. of OV                        10109.82        10109.82      10109.82      10109.82


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 5-8 on Table 2A, with the addition of an
   OV*health index interaction.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000 unit change in OV from probit models.
   Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The effect of a one standard deviation
   change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated as the effect of increasing
   inclusive OV from the current value - 0.5 std. dev to the current value + 0.5 std dev).




                                                36
Table 4A. Effect of Inclusive OV on Retirement
By Education Group

                    # of Obs      Mean     Mean      Std. Dev.                  Specification
                                  Ret.     of OV       of OV      (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)
                                  Rate
                                  pct.

OV: < High School    428,140        14.2     7,559      7,346 -0.1030*** -0.0659*** -0.1026*** -0.0549***
                                                                 (0.0016)   (0.0013)   (0.0021)   (0.0016)
                                                                 [0.0605]   [0.0375]   [0.0596]   [0.0266]
                    R2                                              0.058      0.204      0.078      0.227

OV: High School      580,931        12.4     9,576      8,768 -0.0913*** -0.0548*** -0.0863*** -0.0463***
                                                                 (0.0010)   (0.0008)   (0.0012)   (0.0009)
                                                                 [0.0683]   [0.0417]   [0.0608]   [0.0304]
                    R2                                              0.093      0.219      0.107      0.234

OV: Some College     268,381         8.9   11,798      11,554 -0.0614*** -0.0374*** -0.0595*** -0.0328***
                                                                 (0.0010)   (0.0007)   (0.0012)   (0.0008)
                                                                 [0.0454]   [0.0292]   [0.0452]    [0.024]
                    R2                                              0.079      0.181      0.097      0.198

OV: College              86,920      4.1   17,979      17,053 -0.0218*** -0.0150*** -0.0191*** -0.0123***
                                                                 (0.0006)   (0.0005)   (0.0007)   (0.0005)
                                                                  [0.023]   [0.0186]   [0.0186]   [0.0137]
                    R2                                              0.086      0.142      0.104      0.163

Linear Age                                                         X                          X
Age Dummies                                                                      X                          X
Health Quintiles                                                   X             X            X             X
Other Xs                                                                                      X             X


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 2A, but are estimated separately by education group; each
   coefficient on the table is from a different regression.
2) Coefficients are marginal effects of a 10,000 unit change in OV from probit models. Standard errors are shown
   parentheses. The effect of a one standard deviation change in OV is shown in brackets (this is estimated
   as the effect of increasing inclusive OV from the current value - 0.5 st. dev to the current value + 0.5 st dev).




                                                         37
Table 4B. Effect of % Gain in Inclusive OV on Retirement
By Education Group

                    # of Obs         Mean           Mean         Std. Dev.                           Specification
                                 Ret. Rate pct     of % OV       of % OV           (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
OV: < High School        428,140         14.21           0.31           0.31    -0.2269***      -0.1229***    -0.2241***      -0.0935***
                                                                                   (0.0035)        (0.0027)      (0.0044)        (0.0031)

                         R2                                                           0.055           0.199          0.075          0.223
OV: High School          580,931          12.38           0.36           0.34   -0.2182***      -0.1113***     -0.2053***     -0.0861***
                                                                                   (0.0026)        (0.0020)       (0.0030)       (0.0022)

                         R2                                                           0.088           0.209          0.103          0.228
OV: Some College         268,381           8.94           0.38           0.41   -0.1544***      -0.0844***     -0.1419***     -0.0679***
                                                                                   (0.0032)        (0.0023)       (0.0036)       (0.0025)

                         R2                                                           0.074           0.173          0.091          0.192
OV: College               86,920           4.10           0.49           0.61   -0.0537***      -0.0322***     -0.0442***     -0.0246***
                                                                                   (0.0044)        (0.0033)       (0.0045)       (0.0032)

                         R2                                                             0.067          0.121          0.091          0.149
Linear Age                                                                          X                             X
Age Dummies                                                                                        X                             X
Other Xs                                                                                                          X              X


Notes:
1) Models are the same as models 1-4 on Table 2A, but are estimated separately by education group; each coefficient on the table is from
2) Coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                                  38
