NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SMALL VICTORIES:
CREATING INTRINSIC MOTIVATION IN SAVINGS AND DEBT REDUCTION
Alexander L. Brown
Joanna N. Lahey
Working Paper 20125
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20125
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

This paper benefitted from helpful comments at the 2012 North American Economic Science Association
Meetings, especially Martin Dufwenberg and John Kagel, the 2013 National Bureau of Economic
Research Summer Institute, and the Bush School Methods Brown Bag. We also received helpful comments
from Gary Charness, Catherine Eckel, Pablo Brañas-Garza and Brandon Schmeichel. We especially
thank José Gabriel Castillo, Gregory Cohen, Luke Franz, Matthew Liu, Laura Lombardo, Daniel Stephenson,
Britnee Warmerdam, J. Forrest Williams, and Xiaoyuan Wang for help running, designing and transcribing
data from experiments. We thank the International Foundation for Research in Experimental Economics
for financial support for subject payments under their Small Grants Program. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alexander L. Brown and Joanna N. Lahey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Small Victories: Creating Intrinsic Motivation in Savings and Debt Reduction
Alexander L. Brown and Joanna N. Lahey
NBER Working Paper No. 20125
May 2014
JEL No. C91,D03,D14
ABSTRACT
Saving when faced with the immediate option to spend is an unpleasant but not conceptually difficult
task. One popular approach contradicts traditional economic theory by suggesting that people in debt
should pay off their debts from smallest size to largest regardless of interest rate, to realize quick motivational
gains from eliminating debts. We more broadly define this idea as “small victories” and discuss, model,
and empirically examine alternative behavioral theories that might explain it. Using a laboratory computer
task, we test the validity of these predictions by breaking down this approach into component parts
and examining their efficacy. Consistent with the idea of small victories, we find that when a mildly
unpleasant task is broken down into parts of unequal size, subjects complete these parts faster when
they are arranged in ascending order (i.e, from smallest to largest) rather than descending order (i.e.,
from largest to smallest). Yet when subjects are given the choice over three different orderings, subjects
choose the ascending ordering least often. Given the magnitude of our results, we briefly discuss the
possible efficacy of these alternative methods in actual debt repayment scenarios.
Alexander L. Brown
Department of Economics
TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843
abrown@econmail.tamu.edu
Joanna N. Lahey
The Bush School
Texas A&M University
Mailstop 4220
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jlahey@nber.org

I.

Introduction
Savings provides for consumption in retirement, helps households smooth consumption

after unexpected job loss, and lowers the utilization of public assistance programs. Despite its
importance over the lifecycle, the accumulation of savings is far from universal. According to
Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates, personal saving as a percent of disposable personal
income dropped to a low of 1.4% in 2005, increasing to 4.2% in 2014 (Bureau of Economic
Analysis 2010, 2014). Consumer debt compounds this problem; before many households can
make progress on retirement savings, they must first reduce or eliminate personal debt.
According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, in 2010, even those nearing the end of their
earning years hold significant debt; over 75% of families with heads aged 55-64 held debt, and
over 40% held credit card debt. Similarly, for families with heads age 65-74 more than 65%
hold any debt and more than 30% hold credit card debt (Bricker et al. 2012).
There are two potential components to suboptimal savings. First, individuals have
difficulty comprehending the basic principles of the dynamic optimization and financial markets
(“financial literacy” see Lusardi and Mitchell 2007a, b). Second, they have self-control problems
and succumb to the immediacy of short term consumption (e.g. Raab et al. 2011, Rick et al.
2008); even when subjects are capable of understanding the complexity of a savings problem, the
temptation of immediate rewards can cause them to make sub-optimal longer-term decisions
(Brown et al. 2009).

With debt-reduction, the need for self-control should be even more

pronounced. Unlike optimal saving decisions which require an understanding of economic
principles, the underlying concept behind getting out of debt is simple—spend less than you earn
and apply the excess towards debt. For individuals with significant debt, behavioral techniques
may provide an effective approach towards optimal savings.
This paper explores one method of increasing motivation towards task completion such
as debt repayment. We focus on a concept we term “small victories,” the idea that people can
motivate themselves to greater task completion by first completing an easier related task. That is,
a larger project is not only broken up into smaller tasks, but the tasks are ordered to become
progressively larger or more difficult. In relation to debt-reduction, this principle suggests there
may be an additional motivational benefit for a person paying off his or her smallest debt first,
and then paying the rest of his or her debts from smallest to largest. The popular press terms this
1

method of debt reduction the “debt snowball”. This economically sub-optimal strategy has been
advocated by self-help books for debt-reduction, including those by radio personality and author
Dave Ramsey (1998, 2009).
“The reason we list [debts from] smallest to largest is to have some quick
wins…When you start the Debt Snowball and in the first few days pay off a
couple of little debts, trust me, it lights your fire…When you pay off a nagging
$52 medical bill or that $122 cell-phone bill from eight months ago, your life is
not changed that much mathematically yet. You have however, begun a process
that works, and you have seen it work, and you will keep doing it because you
will be fired up about the fact that it works.” (Ramsey, 1998, p. 114-117)
Gal and McShane (2012) provide suggestive evidence on the efficacy of this method.
Using data on 6000 debtors from a leading debt settlement company, they find that people who
use the debt snowball were more likely to eliminate their debt balance controlling for debt size in
comparison to other methods. Although they cannot control for selection effects (e.g. who
chooses this method) or omitted variables bias (e.g. taking a financial class that encourages debt
snowball use), their findings suggest that further study of this method is merited.
In comparison, standard economic models advocate paying off debts in order from
highest to lowest interest rates because mechanically this method results in the least amount of
money paid to interest, assuming no motivational boost from small victories. Amar et al. (2011)
suggest that, when given a choice, individuals reject this economically optimal method in favor
of the economically sub-optimal debt snowball approach, paying off their small debts first
regardless of interest rate and then progressing to larger debts, even though doing so means that
they pay more money in interest.

Because their experimental set-up does not allow for

motivational boosts, their participants lose money by choosing the snowball approach over the
economically optimal approach.
Rather than demonstrating that people are making mistakes, we hypothesize that debtreduction strategies that utilize “small victories” are more effective at reducing debt and
increasing savings than are strategies dictated by traditional economic theory in some situations.
The literature on goal setting and task motivation in the field of psychology provides competing
theories on how motivation may improve with task completion. One predominant theory, often
2

termed the “goal-gradient” hypothesis or “discrepancy theory,” proposes that the closer one gets
to completing a goal, the more motivated one is to complete it (Hull 1932; Heilizer 1977).1 A
second competing theory, termed “proximal-distal” or “social-cognitive,” advocates that
successful past task completion provides an emotional boost that pushes one to the next task
(Bandura, 1977; 1986).2 Numerous experiments have supported the predictions of these theories
in different settings (e.g. Bandura and Simon, 1977; Bandura and Schunk, 1981; Morgan, 1985;
Stock and Cervone, 1990; Latham and Seijts, 1999; Kivetz, Urminsky and Zheng, 2006; Nunes
and Dreze, 2006).
To directly connect the small victories approach to these psychological theories, it is
important to pinpoint exactly how these theories might cause the small victories approach to
work. With this aim in mind, in Section II we develop a formalized model of task completion
that allows us to make general predictions about how dividing and ordering tasks into small
subtasks will affect overall task completion. Our first Proposition validates the small victories
approach: if a task is already divided into a predetermined subtasks (like with many debt
situations), as long as social-cognitive theory holds, optimal performance is achieved by
completing subtasks in ascending order. If we relax the assumption of predetermined subtasks
and allow any configuration of subtasks, a configuration of all subtasks of equal size could be
optimal, provided goal-gradient factors are strong enough. Thus, of the two theories, only the
social-cognitive theory is necessary for the small-victories approach to work, but both theories
have implications on what type of order of subtasks might be optimal for task completion.
To test these predictions, and ultimately the affirm the validity of the small-victories
approach, we develop a laboratory experiment that allows us to isolate the underlying mechanics
of small victories. Unlike previous laboratory work, we abstract away from the debt repayment
scenario in order to make sure that our subjects are uncontaminated with popular suggestions on
1

Recent research suggests that for certain tasks performance is U-shaped (Bonezzi et al. 2011). That is, individuals
exhibit the best performance at the beginning and end of a task, performing worse in the middle. We discuss the
implications of this research in more detail in our results section.
2
This approach is especially beneficial with complex tasks. Completing a small proximal goal before a large distal
one can aid people by providing feedback about their current performance, affording individuals an opportunity to
learn while completing the task (Lantham and Seijts, 1999). Two studies suggest conditions in which this approach
may be detrimental to overall performance. Amir and Ariely (2008) find that having proximal goals may hinder task
completion if the task will be completed with near certainty. Koo and Fishbach (2010) find that focusing on past
success may cause individuals to be more likely to repeat that past success rather than challenge themselves with a
more difficult task. Neither situation corresponds to our stylized debt-repayment scenario or to our experimental
environment.

3

how to repay debt. To simulate the elements of debt repayment, we chose a task that is
unpleasant but not conceptually difficult. In 30 minutes, subjects attempt to retype 150 tencharacter strings in a Microsoft Excel workbook. The strings are divided over 5 columns where
the length of the columns is ascending, descending or even throughout as subjects progress. The
completion of each column is framed as a distinct event for each subject. This provides a sterile
test for our motivational framework. If, as we find, subjects perform better with the ascending
ordering, this provides evidence for the small victories approach in general and underlying
social-cognitive theories in particular.
Our results show that subjects complete a tedious task faster when it is broken up into
parts in order of ascending length compared to descending or equal lengths. Further analysis—
which shows subjects speed up as they approach the end of columns and slow down at the
beginning of columns—provides support for goal-gradient theories. However, the fact that
ascending length orderings are completed faster than orderings of equal lengths, something that
our experimental set-up allows us to test, demonstrates that social-cognitive factors dominate
goal-gradient effects in our environment.
In a second study we find when subjects are given the opportunity to choose among all
three orders they choose the ascending ordering, the one that provides the most motivational
benefit, least often. Additionally, regression results suggest there is subject heterogeneity in the
benefits of the small victories approach. Those with higher self-control, better critical reasoning
skills, and higher risk aversion, as measured by survey results, benefit more from having chosen
ascending. We argue a plausible extension of this result suggests the people least in need of this
intervention are the ones most likely to benefit from it.
Taken at face value, our results suggest there is some benefit in the form of intrinsic
motivation in taking the small victories approach to debt-reduction. While it will take substantial
investigation to determine the exact magnitude of this benefit in field situations, we show in
Section VI that it will only be useful to borrowers in specific cases of debt-reduction where
interest rates between loans do not differ greatly. In the event of large differences in interest rates
on loans, it will be best for consumers to pay off debts from largest interest rate to smallest,
despite the additional motivational benefit from the small victories approach.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides an overview of a
4

theoretical framework that explains the small victories phenomenon. Section III describes our
experiment. Section IV applies our model to our laboratory environment and gives the resulting
theoretical predictions. Section V provides results, Section VI adds greater context to our main
result, and Section VII discusses and concludes. A mathematical appendix provides the full
formalization and complete proofs of the ideas presented in Section II.
II.

Theory
We develop a formalized, theoretical model of task-competition. Our aim is to

demonstrate how psychological theories may create a motivational boost like small victories.
Our theoretical propositions will provide testable predictions about how these theories will work
and whether they may be responsible for the (potential) efficacy of small victories. We illustrate
the intuition of the formal theory in the framework of a debt-repayment problem. The full
formalization is available in the appendix. It is important to note that even though this discussion
is framed in terms of debt repayment, the theory is relevant to any type of task completion where
the main task can be perceived as having separate discrete subtasks.3
We view the main task as X, the removal of all debt. X is a set consisting of individual
payments of x. The individual payments are grouped and ordered by α, a partition of X that
divides the payments into individual debts and orders the debts in the order in which they will be
paid.
The function τi(x, α) determines the amount of time that it takes an individual, i, to
complete an individual debt payment, x. This function is a linear combination of two functions:
h(.), a function of how many payments are left in the current individual debt, and v(.) how many
individual debts have been completed. These components, h(.) and v(.), effectively represent the
goal-gradient and social cognitive theories. Recall, goal-gradient theories suggest individuals
speed up as they near the end of a task; this can be represented as h increasing. Similarly, socialcognitive theories suggest that individuals increase performance after past success; this can be
represented as v decreasing.
Variation in performance in the time to make a payment depends on the grouping and
ordering of the individual debts. The partition α=(α1,…,αk,…,αm) is made up of m ordered sets,
each set can be thought of representing an individual debt. Each set αk (k=1,…,m) is composed of
3

Whether the task is physically divided may not be important. What is important is that the person completing the
task recognizes the task’s division into subtasks.

5

|αk| debt payments where l=1,…, |αk| represents the lth payment in debt k. Then individual i’s
performance in making payment x given debt order α is

 i  x,     i  kl    i  h   k  l   v  k    i

kl

where µi represents individual i’s baseline performance,  k  l represents the number of
payments to the end of the current debt, k, and k-1 is the number of previous debts successfully
paid. The total time it takes to remove all debts under α, Ti(α), is the sum of all τi (x, α),
m

k

Ti      i  x,     i  h   k  l   v  k    i kl .
xX

k 1 l 1

For our first proposition, we will incorporate social-cognitive theory into our model. We
will do this by assuming that v, the social-cognitive function, is non-increasing. In other words,
after an individual debt is paid off, the debtor is motivated to pay off future individual debts
faster or at least as fast as previous debts. If this assumption is true, then the debtor would want
to get a quick boost immediately in order to benefit from the increased productivity. If one can
only re-order debts, but is unable to change the structure of any debts (i.e., the number of
payments inside a debt), then ordering debt from smallest to largest, something we are terming
an ascending ordering, would result in the fastest debt repayment, while ordering debts from
largest to smallest would be the slowest.
To formalize this idea we define A(X) as the set of all subtask partitions that could be
formed from X. We define a class of subtask partitions as a subset of A(X) where all terms differ
by only the re-ordering of subtasks. Each possible re-ordering is included in the set. Using this
terminology, Proposition 1 demonstrates the superiority of an ascending ordering in this case, the
central tenant of the small victories approach.
Proposition 1. For any i, for a given class of subtask partitions, βA(X). Define an ascending
ordering, α’ where
|

|

...

|

|

...

|

|,

|

|

...

|

|

...

|

|.

and a descending ordering where
Then for any α β,
.
If v is non-constant and α’≠α”, Ti(α’)<Ti(α”).
6

Proposition 1 shows that all that is required for the small victories approach to be
effective in our framework is that the assumptions of social cognitive theory hold. It requires no
assumptions about goal-gradient theories; conditions on function h are irrelevant in the proof of
Proposition 1 available in the appendix. Thus, under social cognitive theory, the small victories
approach works: arranging subtasks in ascending order leads to better performance.
Given that ascending orderings are optimal when the assumptions of social-cognitive
theories hold, a remaining question is what structures might be ideal for task completion under
the competing goal-gradient theory. If goal-gradient theory holds and the effect of social
cognitive theories is zero, then an even ordering, that is, a main task divided so that all subtasks
are of the same length, will be ideal. In the context of debt-repayment this is equivalent to having
our m debts have exactly the same number of payments.4 If we enact the general assumptions of
goal-gradient theory,5 this ordering is optimal relative to any other possible ordering (Proposition
2) with the same number of debts.
Proposition 2. Suppose v is constant. Then for any X, i, and m, if there exists an even ordering
α’A(X) such that |α’k|=c for all 1≤k≤m then
where | |

| |

.

Further, if all the subtasks in α are not of the same length and h is strictly increasing,
Ti(α’)<Ti(α).
In other words, we assume the goal-gradient hypothesis holds and social-cognitive
theories have no impact. Here, what is important to debt-repayment productivity is how close
you are to paying each individual debt—how close you are to the end of the task.6
Unlike Proposition 1, which places no restrictions on its competing theory, Proposition 2
requires the effects of social-cognitive theory to be zero. This added assumption allows
Proposition 2 to apply to a much greater domain.7 It is possible to make equivalent assumptions
4

This type of ordering may be impossible to construct in an actual debt-repayment situation. One of the benefits of a
laboratory setting is our ability to test the components of this theory.
5
That is we assume h is non-decreasing, meaning motivation increases or at least does not decrease the closer one
gets to the end of a debt. We also hold v constant because that term is not involved with goal-gradient theory.
6
This conclusion is more obvious using another task completion example. If instead of debt repayment, we think of
port-a-potties at an amusement park, where the distance to the end is the only thing that matters, optimally all lines
will be the same size. (Similarly you could think of sorting into “10 items or less” lines at the grocery store.)
7
Proposition 2 shows an even ordering with m subtasks is optimal over any arrangement of elements into m
subtasks. Proposition 1 shows that an ascending ordering with m subtasks is optimal over any arrangement of those
subtasks. The domain in Proposition 2 necessarily contains the domain of Proposition 1.

7

(i.e., make the goal-gradient effects zero) and show an ascending ordering is optimal across a
similar domain. The result is Proposition 3.
Proposition 3. Suppose h is constant. Then for any X, i, and m, there exists a subtask partition
α’A(X), in ascending order, |α’1|≤…≤|α’k|≤…≤|α’m|, for all 1≤k≤m, such that
where | |

| |

.

Further, if α is not ascending and v is strictly decreasing, Ti(α)<Ti(α’).
Propositions 2 and Proposition 3 are based on different assumptions. With Proposition 2,
only the goal-gradient theory holds, meaning completion of past subtasks does not matter, and
only distance to the end of those subtasks matters. In such case the even ordering will feature
better subject performance than either ascending or descending orderings. Alternatively under
social cognitive theory, only successful completion of past subtasks matters, meaning distance to
the end of subtasks does not matter. In such case the ascending ordering will feature better
subject performance than either even or descending orderings.
Both factors may be present in subject behavior, therefore we would like to have a way to
talk about the relative strength of each factor. To this end, we develop the concept of
“dominance.” For any two subtask partitions, we say the social-cognitive factors dominate the
goal-gradient if the total differences across the social-cognitive term are greater in magnitude
than the total differences across the goal-gradient term.8 Alternatively, we say the goal-gradient
factors dominate the social-cognitive if the previous relation is reversed. If both magnitudes are
equal, then there is no dominance.
Proposition 4 shows that our definition will be useful in explaining results. Over a given
three orderings, ascending, descending and even, subject performance in the ascending ordering
will be faster than even if and only if social-cognitive factors dominate goal-gradient. Subject
performance in the even ordering will be faster than ascending if and only if goal-gradient factors
dominate social-cognitive. If there is no dominance, the performance of subjects on ascending
and even orders should be the same.
Proposition 4. For a given -set, {αa, αd, αe} where all the subtasks in αa are not of the same
length, for any i,
1. Ti(αa)<Ti(αe) if and only if social-cognitive factors dominate goal-gradient factors.
8

See Appendix for a formal definition of dominance.

8

2. Ti(αa)>Ti(αe) if and only if goal-gradient factors dominate social-cognitive factors.
3. Ti(αa)=Ti(αe) if and only if there is no dominance between social-cognitive and goalgradient factors.
Our theoretical framework is agnostic on whether ascending or even orders will lead to
optimal task performance—it depends entirely on the relative strength of the social-cognitive and
goal-gradient factors. However, it does have a clear result about the descending ordering in the
corollary to Proposition 4.
Corollary. For a given -set, and any i, Ti(αd)≥Ti(αa), Ti(αe). Provided all the subtasks of αd are
not of the same length, Ti(αd)>Ti(αa) if v is non-constant; Ti(αd)>Ti(αe) if either v is non-constant
or h is strictly increasing.
Proposition 1 already tells us that a descending ordering should be completed more
slowly than the ascending ordering. The corollary shows that provided either the v function is
non-constant or the h function is strictly increasing (either social cognitive factors exist or goal
gradient factors exist under certain conditions), the even ordering should be completed faster
than the descending ordering. To frame this in terms of debt repayment, completing one’s debts
in descending order leads to the least motivational gains.9 Our experiments will compare
ascending, descending, and even-length orders to test these predictions. Section IV will discuss
this theory in the context of our experiment.
III.

The experiment
a. Design
In the experiment, subjects typed ten-character lines of text in a Microsoft Excel

worksheet. Subjects would type a line of text in a cell and then click a button on their worksheet.
If they typed the line correctly, they would move to the next cell; if they typed it incorrectly,
nothing would happen until they typed the line of text correctly. The lines of text included upper
and lower case letters, numbers and their shifts10 (e.g., !#) and had been randomly constructed
before so that each subject encountered the same order and same lines of text in cells.

9

Note that the existence of goal-gradient factors make no prediction on whether ascending or descending should
have greater performance. Any superiority of ascending compared to descending comes from social-cognitive
factors.
10
To avoid confusion the characters “I,” “l,” and “|” were excluded. The sign “@”, which produces a hyperlink in
Excel, was also excluded.

9

The experiment had two main parts: a practice session, and one large typing task.
Subjects would either complete their tasks or reach the time limits.11 The practice session had a
5-minute time limit, and the large typing task had a 30-minute time limit. The practice task was
the same for all subjects. It consisted of each subject typing ten lines of text. It was designed to
familiarize subjects with the experiment as well as to get an estimate of their general skill in
these typing tasks.
The larger, 30-minute, tasks varied depending on the environment, but all tasks featured
subjects encountering 150 lines to type divided into 5 columns. In the initial study (as opposed to
the “choice” study described later), subjects were randomly assigned to three orders. In the
“ascending ordering,” the columns increased in size. The columns had 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50
cells respectively. In the “descending order,” the columns decreased in size and had the reverse
ordering of the ascending (50, 40, 30, 20, and 10). In the “even ordering” all columns had 30
cells. Figures 1(a-c) provide screenshots of the initial worksheet under each of the three orders.
Subjects completed their columns in order, left to right. Unless completing a column,
every time a subject finished a cell he or she would move down to the next cell below the current
cell. To frame column completion as a distinct event, the experimental interface would open a
message box every time a subject completed a column. For all columns but the last column, the
message said “You have completed X columns. Only 5-X to go!” Once subjects clicked ok on
that message, they moved to the cell at the top of the next column to the right. When subjects
finished the last column, a similar message informed them informed they had finished the task.
Subjects were paid $10 if they could complete the task in under 30 minutes, plus an
additional $0.50 for every minute they finished early, rounded up to the nearest minute. Subjects
that did not complete the task were paid $10 minus $0.05 for every cell they left uncompleted.
Because this structure guarantees a minimum payment for subjects, there were no additional
payments given to subjects (i.e., show up fees).
After examining the results of the initial study of subjects, one remaining question was
how subjects might have chosen among the orders if given that choice. This question led to the
creation of a second, “choice” study. The study featured the same task and basic design as the
11

After the typing tasks, subjects had a ten-minute break and then participated in various pilots of future typing
tasks. Subjects were aware of this second 30-minute session at the beginning of their experiments. The results of the
pilot sessions are not presented here and are not relevant to the data analysis or conclusions of this paper.

10

first, except that before the experiments began, subjects were allowed to choose whether they
would encounter the ascending, descending or even ordering. The experimenter showed pictures
(nearly identical to those shown in Figure 1) of each ordering on a screen with randomized
names (i.e., “a”, “b” and “c”) and subjects would click on any of three icons corresponding to
those names. After the subjects clicked on the icon, they would have a five-minute practice
session and a 30-minute typing task. Again, the second half of the experiments was used for
piloting other effort tasks.
It is important to reiterate that these experiments were not designed to mimic debt
repayment scenarios, but rather to test the underlying psychological theories of motivation that
might affect debt repayment. Like debt repayment, these experiments involve tasks that are
mildly unpleasant but not conceptually difficult. However, in order to focus on the most basic
features of the “small victories” scenario, the experiment did not feature the full debt-repayment
scenario including interest rates, minimum payments, and so on.
b. Procedure
Both studies took place at the Economic Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University.
Subjects were recruited from the econdollars website (econdollars.tamu.edu) that uses ORSEE
software (Greiner, 2004). Subject earnings averaged $11.25 for the 35-minute session, with
subjects in the initial study averaging $10.95 and subjects in the choice study averaging $11.63.12
Ninety-one subjects participated in the initial study between December 6, 2011 and
March 7, 2012. Subjects completed a demographic survey (from Eckel and Grossman, 2008), the
Barratt Impulsivity Test (BIS 11) (Patton et al., 1995), the Zuckerman Sensation-Seeking Scale
(SSS-V) (Zuckerman, 1994) and a five-factor personality assessment (John et al., 2008).13
Seventy subjects participated in the choice study between January 30-31, 2013. Because
the first set of surveys had little explanatory power and helpful suggestions brought other surveys
to the attention of the authors of this paper, a second set of surveys was used in the choice study.
Subjects completed a demographic survey and non-incentivized risk-preference choice to elicit
risk attitudes (both from Eckel and Grossman, 2008), financial literacy questions from the Health
12

Including the second pilot task, subject earnings averaged $21.67 for 75 minutes, with initial study subjects
averaging $20.01 and choice study subjects averaging $23.83.
13
None of these three personality tests in the initial study were correlated with any subject performance measures
(see Appendix, Table 1). We will not discuss these tests in relation to our results. In retrospect, it would have been
preferable to replace these surveys with the surveys used in the choice study (see below).

11

and Retirement Survey (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007b), the Tangney-Baumeister-Boone Scale
(Tangney et al. 2004), and the Cognitive Reflection Task (Frederick, 2005).
IV.

Theoretical Predictions
Our theoretical framework shows that an ascending ordering is the idea structure for task

completion if only social-cognitive factors matter (Proposition 3), an even ordering is the ideal
structure if only goal-gradient factors matter (Proposition 2), and as long as social-cognitive
factors exist an ascending ordering should do better than a descending ordering (Proposition 1).
Proposition 4 ties these three propositions together in an environment where both social
cognitive and goal gradient theories may hold. It uses the term “dominance” to classify whether
social-cognitive or goal-gradient factors have greater influence on results. Its corollary also
shows that the descending ordering should have the worst performance regardless of the relative
strength of these factors. Because it is much like a cumulative proposition in this way, the
predictions for this experimental environment can be found entirely in Proposition 4 and its
corollary.
Prediction 1a (Proposition 4). If social-cognitive factors dominate goal-gradient factors across
our orders, subjects in the ascending orders will finish faster than those in the even orders, and be
more likely to complete their tasks in the time allowed. Formally,
tA<tE,

pA>pE.

where t is the time to completion and p is the probability of completion.
Prediction 1b (Proposition 4). If instead goal-gradient factors dominate social-cognitive factors,
subjects in the even orders should finish faster than those in the ascending orders, and be more
likely to complete their tasks in the time allowed. Formally,
tE<tA,

pE>pA.

Prediction 2 (Corollary to Proposition 4). Regardless of dominance, subjects in both ascending
and even orders should finish faster than those in descending orders, and be more likely to
complete their tasks in the time allowed. Formally,
tA,tE <tD,

pA,pE>pD.

Combining these predictions we have one of two possible predicted orderings,
1a.

tA <tE <tD if social-cognitive factors dominate,
12

1b. tE <tA <tD if goal-gradient factors dominate.
Because small-victories (or in relation to debt, the debt-snowball, Ramsey 1998, 2009)
recommends ordering tasks in ascending order to create maximum motivational gains, the advice
is most consistent with environments where social-cognitive theories dominate. Thus the greatest
validation of small-victories (and social-cognitive theory) would be if prediction 1a held. If,
instead, even orderings are faster than both ascending and descending, then goal-gradient factors
dominate social cognitive factors. However, in most cases of debt repayment arranging one’s
debt in an even ordering is not possible, while paying debt in ascending and descending orders is
possible. So as long as ascending orders are faster than descending orders we would find
validation of the concepts behind the small victories approach (and Proposition 1).14
Our underlying psychological theories also make predictions about subject performance
in specific columns throughout the experiment. If our assumptions based off social-cognitive
theories are valid, we should see subjects speed up as they complete more columns. If our
assumptions about goal-gradient theories are valid, subjects should perform faster as they reach
the end of each column.
V.

Results
a.

Time to Completion and Probability of Completion (Predictions 1a and 1b)

In experiment 1, consistent with Prediction 1a and the small-victories approach, subjects
performed in the ascending ordering 1.42 seconds per cell faster on average than in the
descending ordering (significant at the 5% level), as shown in Table 1 (Panel I). This relationship
does not substantially change when ascending is compared to the pooled results of both
descending and even orders (1.23 seconds per cell faster on average, two-sided p-value: 0.019).
Even subject performance falls between ascending and descending, which is inconsistent with
Prediction 1b, but is consistent with Prediction 1a, suggesting social-cognitive factors dominate
in this environment. A Kruskal-Wallis test indicates the differences for all three orders are
significant at the 10% level (two-tailed p-value: 0.084). Both the Cuzick trend test and the
Jonckheere-Terpstra test for ordered alternatives find the ascending-even-descending ordering to

14

If even orderings do lead to the best subject performance, one could still question the wisdom of the small
victories approach. The result would suggest an alternative approach that applies goal-gradient theory rather than
social cognitive theory to debt-reduction would likely be more effective. Of course, it is not clear whether such
alternative approach could be plausibly applied to these scenarios.

13

be significant, with p-values of 0.0260 and 0.0265 respectively.15 As a robustness check, a
regression (see Table 3) which controls for subject practice time does not appreciably change
results. Additionally, time to complete each cell in seconds during the practice time is strongly
correlated with actual time in seconds with a coefficient of 0.133 and a standard error of 0.045
(results not tabled).
Table 1 (Panel II) shows the number of subjects that completed the full task, that is, those
who copied all 150 cells in the 30-minute limit. A higher percentage of subjects (71%, 22 of 31)
complete the task in ascending than descending (48%, 14 of 29) or even (58%, 18 of 31). A
Pearson’s chi-square test reveals this difference is meaningful at the 10% level. As before, this
result is consistent with Prediction 1a, and the idea of social-cognitive factors dominating in this
environment, but not consistent with Prediction 1b and the idea of goal-gradient factors
dominating.
b.

Relative cell speed during task completion

A crucial assumption behind both predictions 1a and 1b is that subjects complete cells at
different speeds depending on their position within the columns that make up the general task.
The validity of this assumption can be examined directly. Figure 2 shows subject performance
for each ordering relative to average performance. Consistent with the goal-gradient hypothesis,
subjects complete cells at a faster rate as they near the completion of a column. While subjects
do not appear to start columns immediately faster, their time per cell greatly decreases over the
course of completing columns, which is consistent with the social-cognitive theories. Further,
note that this decrease is inconsistent with fatigue; subjects are speeding up over time.16
To test whether this apparent speed-up shown in the figures is statistically significant, we
use t-tests comparing the speed in the first five cells to that in the last five cells. In order to
control for a potential effect of subjects performing faster over the course of the experiment,17 we
15

We report two-tailed values whenever possible. Literally interpreting our predictions (ascending<even<
descending) would result in the one-tailed p-values of 0.0130 and 0.0132 for the Cuzick trend test and the
Jonckheere-Terpstra test for ordered alternatives, respectively.
16
Bonezzi et al. (2011) find that for certain tasks performance is U-shaped: individuals exhibit the best performance
at the beginning and end of a task, performing worse in the middle. As a quick look at Figure 2 demonstrates, there
is little support for this finding in our results. We do not see an upside-down U-shape either overall or within each
column. If anything, the only support for this idea is that subjects appear to slow-down around cell 75, the middle of
the task, regardless of treatment modality.
17
The apparent slow-down around cell 75 (see footnote 13) and the potential for subjects performing faster over the
course of the experiment are elements of performance that are not captured in our theory. Because they are

14

control for a linear acceleration trend by using the residuals from a corrected equation on time.
Thus, our coefficients indicate distance from the population mean for each environment across
all orders. Next, we created a new variable that indicated a “1” if the cell completed was in the
first five cells of a column and a “0” if in the last five cells of a column. Cells that were neither
in the first nor last five of any column were coded as missing. These results are presented in
Table 2.
As shown in Table 2, participants complete the last five cells of each column on average
1.11 seconds faster than they complete the first five cells of each column. The pattern is similar
for descending, but not significant, and attenuated for equal. To bound for a non-linear effect of
subjects performing faster over the course of the experiment, we repeated these t-tests with the
first five and last five cells overall removed from the analysis. That is, we stared with the last
five cells of the first column and ended with the first five cells of the last column. Results,
though attenuated compared to the bound in the other direction, were same-signed and still
significant and are available from the authors.18
Additionally, there may be some concerns that we are over-stating our power, depending
on the assumptions of independence of columns or individuals. Therefore, we also present more
conservative t-tests and regressions that assume that each set of five cells should be treated as
one observation, assume that the first 5 cells across all columns should be treated as one
observation per person as should the last 5 cells, or group all orders together. Even the most
conservative t-tests only reduce previously significant results from 5% to 10% with magnitudes
largely unchanged, as shown in Table 4. We also provide regression results in Table 5 with
clustering at the subject, cell, and subject*column levels, allowing for different assumptions
about the standard errors. Again, these results are consistent with our t-test results.
As an overall trend, the results presented here are consistent with both goal-gradient and
social-cognitive theories. While the results supported prediction 1a and not prediction 1b, this
independent of ordering, incorporating such elements would not affect any theoretical propositions or experiment
predictions. To see this, note that an extra term, say γj, could be added to equation τi(x, α) where 1≤j≤|X| indicates
the jth element completed in the global task X. Since γj does not depend on subtask partition it will cancel out in all
proofs, much like terms μi and ikl already do.
18

A related worry is that some participants do not finish the experiment and thus these slower participants may be
completing fewer “last” cells than “first” cells depending on where in the sheet they stop. A robustness check that
cuts first and last cells until there are an even number of cells on either end (or as close as possible to an even
number of cells) finds remarkably similar results to our main results.

15

only means that the social-cognitive factors were able to dominate the goal-gradient factors in
this environment. The relative support for the Corollary to Proposition 4 (descending orders
being the worst performing) also is consistent with either theory. Our separate results on
speeding up at the end of columns provide support for the validity of goal-gradient theories. The
support of prediction 1a gives credence to the idea of the small victories strategy in generalized
task completion environments.
c. Choice Study
In a second study, 70 subjects were given the opportunity to choose their ordering. Table
6 shows the results of this choice. Of the 70 subjects, 16 chose ascending, 31 chose even and 23
chose descending. A Pearson’s chi-square test reveals these results are different from a random
distribution at the 10% level.19 Strikingly, the ascending ordering—the method that follows the
small-victories theory and is shown to lead to the best performance among subjects in the initial
study—is the least preferred. Less than one fourth of all subjects (22%) choose that method.20
This general trend is in contrast to Amar et al. (2011), who find that subjects prefer to pay debts
from smallest to largest without considering interests rates, albeit in a very different choice
problem. Their environment, unlike ours, transparently resembles debt-repayment. This
difference may cause subjects familiar with the debt-snowball strategies to follow the advice
directly. Our environment was designed specifically to abstract from the debt-repayment
problem so as not to use popular debt-snowball heuristics.
Regression estimates suggest that the choice of ascending would help some participants
more than others.21 Table 7 explores the effects of order on performance in the choice study for
participants interacted with their answers to survey questions on self-control, critical reasoning

19

One surprising difference is that subjects complete cells faster in the choice study than with random assignment,
and that practice times are faster in the choice experiment. Because the practice time occurred after the choice
decision, it is possible that being offered a choice improves efficiency, but we do not have enough evidence to test
this possibility and doing so would be outside the scope of this paper. These experiments occurred with the same
subject pool in the same lab roughly a year apart. So it is possible the difference in practice time results are due to a
year effect but t-tests find no substantial or significant differences between basic demographic characteristics
collected for both samples and the authors have no reason to believe anything changed in the subject pool during
that time.
20
The result is, however, reminiscent of Loewenstein and Prelec (1993) who find subjects prefer outcomes that
improve over time provided those outcomes are explicitly defined as sequences.
21
Although participants only participate in one condition, randomization allows us to use interaction terms in the
regression analysis to present counterfactuals.

16

skills, and risk aversion.22 Participants with higher measures of self-control benefit more from
ascending than from equal with a one point increase in the self-control scale leading to a 0.139
second decrease in average cell time compared to those who chose equal, as shown in column
(1). Similarly, participants with higher critical reasoning skills benefit more from the ascending
choice than do other participants; a one-point increase in critical reasoning skills leads to a one
second decrease in average cell time, with significance at the 10% level in column (2). Finally,
the interaction between risk aversion and the choice of ascending is also negative; a one-point
increase in risk aversion leads to a drop of 0.71 seconds on average cell time, also significant at
the 10% level in column (3).
VI.

Extension to Field Debt-Reduction Environments
Our main result is that individuals increase their performance in tedious tasks when those

tasks are broken down and put in ascending rather than descending order. When directly applied
to the field, this suggests there is some benefit in using the small victories approach to debt
reduction. While it will take substantial investigation to determine the actual magnitude of this
benefit in the field, we can project in what types of debt situations the small victories approach
would be effective using the estimated benefit from our experiments.
In the initial study, subjects in the ascending ordering, on average, complete a cell in
11.08 seconds compared to 12.50 seconds in the descending ordering (as seen in Table 1, Panel
I). Converted to rates, these values are 325 and 288 cells/hour, for ascending and descending,
respectively. Thus, in terms of total performance, our results suggest subjects in the ascending
ordering are about 13% more productive than descending.
We caution that these results should not be used to make definitive conclusions about
debt-reduction situations without further analysis. The 13% figure is for illustrative purposes in
order to show that there will be limits to the small victories approach. The actual number used is
unimportant; for any number, there exists a difference in interest rates in which the small victory
approach will not be beneficial. Field experiments may provide an exact number in specific
22

We also control for practice time to make sure that the results are not being driven by differences in ability among
the different choice orderings. There is little evidence this is the case. With the exception of suggestive evidence that
types that choose ascending over descending are slightly more proficient at the typing task (10% level), we find no
other significant correlations in the data. Another issue would be if survey answers were correlated with choice.
With the exception of our risk aversion measure, which may predict the choice of ascending over equal at the 10%
level in a multinomial logit, there is no significant difference between those who choose ascending and those who
choose other orderings.

17

contexts, but that number could also vary tremendously across different contexts and individuals.
We hope that the following exercise can illustrate how such a number could be used to determine
the magnitude of the benefits of small victories for faster debt repayment compared to the drawbacks of a higher interest rate.
Suppose an individual has two $10,000 outstanding loans. The first loan is at 10%, and
the second has a rate between 10% and 20%. She may make monthly repayments of $30023 on
either loan. Suppose repaying the first loan first triggers the psychological motivations of small
victories,24 and this individual is able to come up with 13% more on each payment, for a total
payment of $369.
Figure 3 shows the total difference in months to repay the two loans when following the
small victories approach compared to the conventional method. In this example for all interest
rates 16% and below, this individual would pay back both loans faster following the small
victories method than the conventional economic method. But for rates 17% and higher, the
conventional economic method of paying down debts with a higher rate of interest still produces
faster debt repayment even though one is paying less per month.
Figure 4 shows the total amount spent on loans in both these cases. For rates 12% and
lower, the additional psychological boost of the small victories and subsequent increase in debt
repayment leads to a lower amount spent on loans than under the standard economic strategy.
For rates between 13% and 16% inclusive, more is spent in total using the small victory method,
but that is only when one includes the assumed $69 boost each month from following that
method. Depending on whether one believes that money would have been wasted or put to good
use, the small victories method may or may not achieve a greater benefit for this individual. For
values 17% and above, it is clear the individual is spending more on loans following the small
victories method than the conventional method.
While the preceding is only an illustrative example—actual parameters in debt-repayment
situations vary greatly—the general lesson should be clear. Even if the small victories approach

23

While this number was chosen somewhat arbitrarily, note that values much smaller than this (e.g., $100) will
never pay off either loan. Values much larger than this (e.g., $1000) pay off the loan too quickly for interest to make
much of a difference.
24
Without significantly changing our results, we could make the first loan worth $9,999.99 and the second loan
$10,000.01 just to be consistent with the idea of ascending and descending orderings and the small-victories
approach.

18

can give individuals the ability to save x% more on average, there is a limited range around x%
in which the difference between interest rates is overcome by the motivational boost. In general,
this method works best when individuals have debts with similar interest rates.
VII.

Discussion and Conclusion

We have examined a non-traditional approach to debt payment, advocated by personal
finance gurus such as Dave Ramsey, by developing the psychological theories that underlie it
into a formal model. We find that if the effects of one set social-cognitive theories (Bandura
1977; 1986) dominate, ordering subtasks in ascending order of difficulty should produce optimal
performance. Instead, if the effects of a competing, goal-gradient theory (Hull 1932; Heilizer
1977) dominate, then dividing the task into equal lengths will produce optimal performance, an
approach that Ramsey does not advocate (though it may not be possible in a debt-repayment
situation). In the initial study of this experiment, subjects who are randomly assigned to the small
victories treatment (i.e., the ascending ordering), perform significantly faster and complete a
higher percentage of tasks on average than in other orders. This result is supportive of socialcognitive psychological theories of motivation; it also provides support for the debt snow-ball
approach provided this increase in motivation overcomes differences in interest rates.
We find additional evidence for both of sets of psychological theories by directly
examining our data. Subjects speed up at the ends of columns relative to their performance at the
beginning of those columns, consistent with the goal-gradient hypothesis. Additionally, our
estimations find that past columns completed is positively correlated with performance,
consistent with social-cognitive effects. If both factors are present, Proposition 1 shows that in
our environment subjects in ascending ordering should outperform those in the descending
ordering. Further, the Corollary to Proposition 4 shows subjects in the even ordering should
outperform those in the descending ordering. With both factors present, Proposition 4 shows that
ascending subjects will outperform even subjects in this environment if and only if socialcognitive factors dominate goal-gradient. We conclude in our environment this must be the case.
Interestingly, when we allow a new set of subjects to choose which of the three orders
they prefer, the ascending ordering is chosen least often. Our regression results indicate that the
subjects who benefit most from the ascending ordering are subjects with the highest self-control
and reasoning ability. This last finding may suggest a flaw with the debt-snowball approach: the
19

people who would benefit most from small victories may be the ones least likely to be in debt.
Obviously, future research will need to look at the issue more carefully, perhaps in more stylized
debt-repayment scenarios or with surveys and actual field data.
To conclude, the strength of the small victories effect could be strong enough to
overcome small deviations in loan interest rates. However, we must caution those who advocate
the debt-snowball strategy. Our results indicate that the “small victory” of paying off the smallest
debt first may increase motivation in debt repayment. However, this increase in motivation may
not offset the additional interest accrued by not paying off the highest-interest-rate debts first if
there are relatively different interest rates across debts.
Future research can determine the full effects of framing debt in these situations. Adding
additional factors to our experimental design, commonly found in debt-repayment scenarios,
such as interest rates, minimum payments, and actual cash values may aid in determining the
appropriate bounds on the motivational improvement of the small victories method. Field
experiments that randomly assign repayment strategies to consumers with debt are also a
promising future direction.

References
Amar, Moty, Dan Ariely, Shahar Ayal, Cynthia E. Cryder and Scott I. Rick. (2011) “Winning the
Battle but Losing the War: The Psychology of Debt Management.” Journal of Marketing
Research, 48(SPL): S38-S50.
Amir, On and Dan Ariely. (2008). “Resting on Laurels: The Effects of Discrete Progress
Markers as Subgoals on Task Performance and Preferences.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 34(4): 1158-1171.
Bandura, Albert. (1986). Social Foundations of Thought and Action. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Bandura, Albert. (1977). Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, Albert and Dale H. Schunk. (1981). “Cultivating Competence, Self-Efficacy, and
Intrinsic Interest through Proximal Self-Motivation.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 41(3): 586-598.
Bandura, Albert and Karen M. Simon. (1977). “The Role of Proximal Intentions in SelfRegulation of Refractory Behavior.” Cognitive Therapy and Research, 1(3): 177-193.
Bonezzi, Andrea, C. Miguel Brendl and Matteo De Angelis. (2011). “Stuck in the Middle: The
Psychophysics of Goal Pursuit.” Psychological Science, 22(5): 607-612.
20

Bricker, Jesse, Arthur B. Kennickell, Kevin B. Moore, and John Sabelhaus. (2012). “Changes
in the U.S. Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer
Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 98(2): 1-80.
Brown, Alexander L., Zhikang Eric Chua, and Colin F. Camerer. (2009). “Learning and Visceral
Temptation in Dynamic Saving Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1):
197-231.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, United States Department of Commerce. (2010). “Comparison of
Personal Saving in the National Income and Product Accounts with Personal Saving in
the
Flow
of
Funds
Accounts.”
Washington
D.C.:
http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/Nipa-Frb.asp#Foot
---------.
(2014).
“Personal
Income
and
Outlays.”
http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/national/pi/pinewsrelease.htm
4/18/2014.

Retrieved
from
Last accessed

Eckel, Catherine. C. and Phillip J. Grossman (2008). “Forecasting Risk Attitudes: An
Experimental Study Using Actual and Forecast Gamble Choices.” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 68(1): 1-17.
Frederick, Shane. (2005) “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 19(4): 25-42.
Gal, David G. and Blakeley B. McShane (2012), “Can Fighting Small Battles Help Win the
War? Evidence from Consumer Debt Management.” Journal of Marketing Research,
49(4): 487-501.
Greiner, Ben. (2004). “The Online Recruitment System ORSEE 2.0.” Working Paper Series in
Economics, University of Cologne.
Hadar, Josef and William R. Russell (1969). “Rules for Ordering Uncertain Prospects,”
American Economic Review, 59(1): 25-34.
Heilizer, Fred. (1977). “A Review of Theory and Research on the Assumptions of Miller’s
Response Competitions Models: Response Gradients.” The Journal of General
Psychology, 97(1): 17–71
Hull, Clark L. (1932). “The Goal Gradient Hypothesis and Maze Learning,” Psychological
Review, 39(1): 25-43.
John, Oliver P., Laura P. Naumann, and Christopher J. Soto. (2008). “Paradigm Shift to the
Integrative Big-Five Trait Taxonomy: History, Measurement, and Conceptual Issues.” In:
John, Oliver. P., Richard.W. Robins, and Lawrence A. Pervin (Eds.). Handbook of
Personality: Theory and Research. Guilford Press, New York, NY, 114-158.
Kivetz, Ran, Oleg Urminsky, and Yuhuang Zheng. (2006). “The Goal-Gradient Hypothesis
Resurrected: Purchase Acceleration, Illusionary Goal Progress, and Customer Retention.”
Journal of Marketing Research, 43(1): 39-58.
Koo, Minjung and Ayelet Fishbach. 2010. “Climbing the Goal Ladder: How Upcoming Actions
Increase Level of Aspiration.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(1): 1-13.
21

Latham, Gary P. and Gerard H. Seijts. (1999). “The Effects of Proximal and Distal Goals on
Performance on a Moderately Complex Task.” Journal of Organizational Behavior,
20(4): 421-429.
Loewenstein, George F, and Drazen Prelec. (1993). “Preferences for Sequences of Outcomes.”
Psychological Review, 100(1): 91-108.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2007a). “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 54(1): 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2007b). “Financial Literacy and Retirement
Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education.” Business Economics,
42(1): 35-44.
Morgan, Mark. (1985). “Self-Monitoring of Attained Subgoals in a Private Study.” Journal of
Educational Psychology, 77(6): 623-630.
Nunes, Joseph C. and Xavier Drèze. (2006). “The Endowed Progress Effect: How Artificial
Advancement Increases Effort.” Journal of Consumer Research, 32(4): 504-512.
Patton, Jim. H., Matthew. S. Stanford, and Ernest S. Barratt. (1995). “Factor Structure of the
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale.” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51(6): 768-774.
Raab, Gerhard, Christian E. Elger, Michael Neuner, and Bernd Weber. (2011). “A Neurological
Study of Compulsive Buying Behavior.” Journal of Consumer Policy, 34(4): 401-413.
Ramsey, Dave. (1998). The Financial Peace Planner: A Step-by-Step Guide to Restoring Your
Family's Financial Health. New York: Penguin Books.
Ramsey, Dave. (2009). The Total Money Makeover: A Proven Plan for Financial Fitness.
Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson.
Rick, Scott I., Cynthia E. Cryder, and George Loewenstein. (2008). “Tightwads and
Spendthrifts.” Journal of Consumer Research, 34(6): 767-782.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz. (1970). “Increasing Risk: I. A Definition.” Journal of
Economic Theory, 2(3): 225-243.
Stock, Jennifer and Daniel Cervone. (1990). “Proximal Goal Setting and Self-Regulatory
Processes.” Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14(5): 483-489.
Tangney, June P., Roy F. Baumeister and Angie Luzio Boone. (2004). “High Self-Control
Predicts Good Adjustment, Less Pathology, Better Grades and Intrapersonal Success.”
Journal of Personality, 72(2): 272-322.
Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral Expressions and Biosocial Bases of Sensation Seeking.
Cambridge, Cambridge, University Press.

22

Figures 1(a‐c): The experiment interface featured a task of typing 150 lines of ten character text in a Microsoft
Excel Spreadsheet. Figures (a, top),(b, middle), and (c, bottom) show the task with five columns in ascending,
descending, and even orderings, respectively.

23

Figures 2(a)‐(c): Average Cell Completion Time by Cell. Note: each group of five cells has been given the average
completion time for that group for legibility purposes.

24

Stylized Example of Time to Payment: Conventional vs. Small
Victories by Second Loan Interest Rate
20

difference in months

15
10
5
0
‐5

10%

11%

12%

13%

14%

15%

16%

17%

18%

19%

20%

‐10
‐15
‐20

second loan interest rate (%)

Figure 3: Difference in total time to pay off two loans with one loan at 10% interest and the other at 10%‐20%. The
standard monthly payment is $300, but the small victories method produces a 13% boost corresponding to a $369
monthly payment.

25

Stylized Example of Total Payment: Conventional vs. Small
Victories by Second Loan Interest Rate
$12,000
Difference in total payment

$10,000
$8,000
$6,000
$4,000
$2,000
$0
‐$2,000

10%

11%

12%

13%

14%

15%

16%

17%

18%

19%

20%

‐$4,000
‐$6,000

second loan interest rate (%)
excluding 13% boost
total amount paid

Figure 4: Difference in total amount spent to pay off two loans with one loan at 10% interest and the second at
10%‐20%. The standard monthly payment is $300, but the small victories method produces a 13% boost
corresponding to a $369 monthly payment. One line shows the total amount spent on the loan, the other shows
that amount without the 13% boost (i.e., the extra $69 each month.).

26

Table 1: Main Results
Panel I: Time to completion

Ascending
Not Ascending
Even
Descending

Mean (in sec)

N

Asc
Difference

p (two‐sided)

11.08
12.31
12.13
12.50

31
60
31
29

1.23
1.05
1.42

0.019
0.078
0.015

Kruskal Wallis

0.084
Panel II: Completion as an outcome

0.13248
(0.1222)
‐0.0963
(0.1280)

Ascending
Descending

Observations
Asc‐desc chi squared p‐value

91
0.08

Notes: Results in Panel I from separate t‐tests on the time to complete each cell in
seconds. Panel II provides marginal effects results from a probit regression on
whether or not the participant completed the 150 cell task. In Panel II the omitted
variable is even.
Table 2: Comparing first 5 cells in each column to last 5 cells
Mean (residual)

N

Difference

Ascending
In First Five Cells
‐0.2660
775
In Last Five Cells
‐1.3763
730
‐1.11
Descending
In First Five Cells
1.6540
635
In Last Five Cells
0.3443
570
‐1.31
Equal
In First Five Cells
0.2144
740
In Last Five Cells
‐0.1965
685
‐0.41
Notes: Magnitudes are measured as difference from the population average.

27

p (two‐sided)

0.0000

0.2307

0.1307

Table 3
Average time to complete cells

Ascending
Descending

(1)
‐1.0522*
(0.5862)
0.3718
(0.6496)

Practice average
Observations
Asc‐desc F‐test

91
0.01

(2)
‐0.9640*
(0.5518)
0.0464
(0.5888)
0.1266***
(0.0439)
90
0.05

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. F‐
test value given is for the p‐value of the F‐statistic.
Omitted ordering is equal. One student had
technical difficulties with the practice session and
is dropped from regressions that control for
practice average. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

28

Table 4: Comparing first 5 cells in each column to last 5 cells
Mean (residual)

N

Difference

p (two‐sided)

Panel I: Collapsed to First/Last
Ascending
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells
Descending
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells
Equal
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells
Ascending
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells
Descending
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells
Equal
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells
In First Five Cells
In Last Five Cells

‐0.2660
‐1.3763

155
146

‐1.11

0.0011

1.6705
0.3443

128
114

‐1.33

0.2335

0.2144
148
‐0.1711
138
‐0.39
Panel II: Collapsed to Person

0.2730

‐0.2660
‐1.2599

31
31

‐0.99

0.0699

2.3895
0.7737

29
29

‐1.62

0.2948

0.4238
31
0.1144
31
‐0.31
Panel III: Collapsed all Firsts/Lasts Initial Study
0.8153
91
‐0.96
‐0.1437
91

0.6242

0.0973

Notes: Panel III groups all firsts and lasts as one observation per person. Magnitudes are
measured as difference from the population average for each environment.
Table 5: Initial ascending regression results for residual cell time with clustering

In First Five Cells

Observations

Cluster on subject
(1)
1.11
(0.30)

Cluster on cell
(2)
1.11
(0.46)

Cluster on
column*subject
(3)
1.11
(0.25)

1505

1505

1505

Notes: Robust clustered standard errors in parentheses. Omitted term is "in last five cells".

29

Table 6: What they chose
Ascending
Not Ascending
Even
Descending

N
16
54
31
23

Mean (in sec)
10.85
11.20
11.03
11.44

chi‐squared p‐value 0.09
Notes: Results from the choice study.

Table 7: Effect of choice interactions with survey data on average cell time

X*ascending
X*descending
ascending
descending
X
practice average

Observations

Self‐control
(1)
‐0.139*
(0.070)
‐0.026
(0.062)
6.333*
(3.280)
1.241
(2.600)
‐0.011
(0.046)
0.257***
(0.068)

Cognitive Reflection
(2)
‐1.060*
(0.586)
‐0.735*
(0.401)
0.825
(0.793)
0.935
(0.663)
0.073
(0.231)
0.253***
(0.070)

Risk Aversion
(3)
‐0.710*
(0.390)
‐0.410
(0.317)
2.495
(1.599)
1.178
(1.013)
0.188
‐0.174
0.274***
(0.069)

64

64

64

Notes: Outcome is average time to complete one cell in seconds. X is the Tangney‐
Baumeister measure of self‐control in column (1) and the Cognitive Reflection Task
in Column (2). Robust standard errors in parentheses. Omitted ordering is "equal".
Six people with random survey malfunctions were eliminated from these
regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

30

A

Theoretical Appendix

Let us define a task, X, that consists of individual discrete elements x ∈ X. Each
task X can be framed into subtasks using a partitition α.1
Definition. The subtask partition α ∈ A(X) is a list of m ordered sets α = (α1 , . . . , αk , . . . , αm )
where m ≤ |X|. For each 1 ≤ k ≤ m, αk = (αkl ) for 1 ≤ l ≤ |αk |, such that
m
X

|αk | = |X| and

k=1

m |α
k|
[
[

αkl = X.

k=1 l=1

Note that this implies that no two x’s are repeated in α.
The time it takes each individual i ∈ N to complete a task, X, will be the sum
of the time it takes to complete each element, x.2 This time will strictly depend on
each element’s position in the subtask partition. The two factors that may matter
in the subtask partition are the number of remaining elements in the subtask, and
the number of previously completed subtasks. These factors will additively affect
time performance for each individual. The function τi (x, α) gives the time it takes
individual i to complete element x under subtask partition α.
τi (x, α) = τi (αkl ) = µi + h(|αk | − l) + v(k) + iαkl .
where x = αkl and k and l indicate element x’s position in subtask partition α.
Time to complete an element depends on an individual’s characteristics µi and
personal idiosyncratic error with element x, ix = iαkl . Before we continue it is helpful
to impose some conditions on this error term, namely it does not vary by partition.3
Assumption A.1. The personal idiosyncratic error term for element x is independent of partition. That is, for any element in any task, x ∈ X, for any α, α0 ∈ A(X),
if x = αkl = αk0 0 l0 , then iαkl = ix = iαk0 l0 .
Assumption A.1 requires that any variation in performance due to an element’s
position in subtask partition is expressed in the terms h and v. Function h expresses
how the position of an element within a subtask affects performance, specifically its
position from the end of a subtask. Function v expresses how previously completed
1

In debt-repayment, one could think of each x as a monthly payment, and each subtask as an
individual debt. The task X would be the removal of all debt. In our experiment each element is a
cell, each subtask in a column, and X is a session.
2
Alternatively one could say the total cost to complete task X is the sum of the individual costs
paid to complete each element x.
3
A weaker assumption that would work for the analysis in this paper would be that in expectation
errors for the same element are equal.

31

subtasks affect performance. Note that the total time it takes individual i to complete
a task under subtask partition α is given by
Ti (α) =

X

τi (x, α) =

x∈X

|αk |
m X
X

µi + h (|αk | − l) + v(k) + iαkl .

k=1 l=1

Using the social-cognitive (Bandura, 1977; 1986) and goal-gradient theories (Heilizer
1977; Hull 1932) within psychological literature as our guide, we will impose restrictions on functions h and v.
Assumption A.2 (social-cognitive). After completing a subtask, individual performance does not decrease. That is, costs or time do not increase with successive
subtasks. Formally, v is non-increasing.
Often subtasks may be already defined, and one may be concerned with the question of how to order the subtasks in a way that will increase performance. For
instance, a consumer may have multiple debts owed, and can choose in which order
to repay them, but cannot restructure the debts. To fit such cases, we define a class of
subtask partitions, or all subtask partitions that have the same structure of elements
in each subtask, but the order of the subtasks has been changed.
Definition. For any given X, the subtask partitions α0 and α00 are said to be in the
same class of subtask partitions, β ⊆ A(X), if and only if |α0 | = |α00 | = m and for all
k, 1 ≤ k ≤ m, there exists a k 0 such that αk0 = αk000 . That is, β is the set of all subtask
partitions that differ by at most the ordering of subtasks.
Under assumption A.2 we can deduce a general result about the aggregate performance of tasks under subtask partitions of the same class. To prove the result
a helpful lemma is necessary. The lemma is very similar to a standard result of expected utility theory involving first-order stochastic dominance. The proof follows the
work of Hadar and Russell (1969), and the more well-known, Rothschild and Stiglitz
(1970).
Lemma. Suppose there are a finite number of distinct values, j = 1, 2, . . . n, yj 0 > yj
if and only if j 0 > P
j. Define functions
f and g so f (yj ) = aj and g(yj ) = bj , where
P
0 ≤ aj , bj ≤ 1 and nj=1 f (yj ) = nj=1 g(yj ) = 1. Further define
F (yj ) =

j
X

f (yr )

and

G(yj ) =

r=1

j
X

g(yr ).

(A.1)

r=1

For any non-increasing function, u : R → R, where u is continuous over [y1 , yn ], and
differentiable over all open intervals (yj , yj+1 ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ n − 1. If G(yj ) ≤ F (yj )
for 1 ≤ j ≤ n then
n
n
X
X
u(yj )g(yj ) ≤
u(yj )f (yj ).
(A.2)
j=1

j=1

32

The conditions, u is non-constant and G(yj ) < F (yj ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ n − 1, or u is
strictly decreasing and g and f are different, both imply (A.2) with strict inequality.
Proof. This proof is largely derived from Hadar and Russell (1969), Theorem 1, and
is similar to many others involving first-order stochastic dominance.
For every interval [yj , yj+1 ] for 1 ≤ j < n, the Mean Value Theorem shows there
exists a yj < ξj < yj+1 such that
u(yj ) = u(yj+1 ) − u0 (ξj )∆yj

where ∆yj = yj+1 − yj .

Then
n
X
j=1

u(yj )f (yj ) −

n
X

u(yj )g(yj ) =

j=1

=

n
X
j=1
n
X

"
u(yn ) −

n−1
X

#
u0 (ξr )∆yr (f (yj ) − g(yj ))

r=j

u(yn ) (f (yj ) − g(yj ))

j=1

−

n X
n−1
X

u0 (ξr )∆yr (f (yj ) − g(yj ))

j=1 r=j

"
= u(yn )

n
X

f (yj ) −

j=1

−

n
X

#
g(yj )

j=1

"
(f (yj ) − g(yj ))

j=1

= −

n
X

n−1
X

#
u0 (ξr )∆yr

r=j

n−1 X
r
X

(f (yj ) − g(yj )) u0 (ξ)∆yr

r=1 j=1

= −

n−1
X

u0 (ξr ) (F (yr ) − G(yr )) ∆yr

r=1

≥ 0.
By definition, ∆yr > 0. Non-increasing implies u0 (ξr ) ≤ 0. With G(yr ) ≤ F (yr ), our
final result is greater than or equal to 0. If instead, u is strictly decreasing and g and f
are different, this implies u0 (ξr ) < 0 and that there is some j 0 where G(yj 0 ) < F (yj 0 ). In
such case, we have strict inequality. Similarly, if u is non-constant and G(xj ) < F (xj )
for all for 1 ≤ j < n, there is some j 0 where u0 (ξj 0 ) < 0. In such case we also would
have strict inequality.
Proposition 1 (small victories). For any i, for a given class of subtask partitions,
β ⊆ A(X). Define an ascending ordering, α0 where
0
|,
|α10 | ≤ . . . ≤ |αk0 | ≤ . . . ≤ |αm

33

and a descending ordering where
00
|α100 | ≥ . . . ≥ |αk00 | ≥ . . . ≥ |αm
|.

Then for any α ∈ β,
Ti (α0 ) ≤ Ti (α) ≤ Ti (α00 ).
If v is non-constant, and all the subtasks in β are not of the same length, Ti (α0 ) <
Ti (α00 ).
Proof. Choose any α, α0 , α00 ∈ β. First
show that for a class of subtask
Pm we
P|αwill
k|
partitions, for any α ∈ β, the value k=1 l=1 h(|αk | − l) is equal. Consider any
x∗ ∈ X. Since all subtask partitions defined on X must contain one unique x∗ , let us
define αkl = x, αk0 0 l0 = x, and αk0000 l00 = x, where αkl ∈ α, αk0 0 l0 ∈ α0 , αk0000 l00 ∈ α00 . Since
α, α0 , α00 are all in the same class of subtask partitions, by definition the ordered sets
αk , αk0 0 , αk0000 must be equal. It follows that
|αk |
m X
X

00

0

h(|αk | − l) =

k=1 l=1

|αk |
m X
X

h(|αk0 | − l) =

|αk |
m X
X

h(|αk00 | − l).

k=1 l=1

k=1 l=1

Next we will define the following functions.
(
v(y)
if y ∈ Z,
v̄(y) =
(dye − y) v (byc) + (y − byc) v (dye) otherwise.
.P
(
m
if k = 1, 2, . . . , m,
|αk |
j=1 |αj |
fα (k) =
0
otherwise.

(A.3)

(A.4)

fα0 (k), fα00 (k) ≤ 1 for k = 1, 2, . . . , m. Additionally
Pm 0 ≤ fα (k),P
PmIt follows that
m
k=1 fα00 (k) = 1. Note also that v̄ is continuous. It is
k=1 fα0 (k) =
k=1 fα (k) =
differentiable over every open interval between integers. It is also non-increasing by
Assumption A.2.
Pn
Define Fα (n) =
k=1 fα (k) and Fα0 , Fα00 in the same way. Note that for any
1 ≤ n < m, Fα0 (n) and Fα00 (n) contain the sums of the lengths of the n shortest
subtasks and the n longest subtasks, respectively. Thus Fα0 (n) ≤ Fα (n) ≤ Fα00 (n). If
all the subtasks are not
Pm of the same length,
Pm Fα0 (n) < Fα00 (n).
P
By our Lemma, j=1 fα0 (j)v̄(j) ≤ j=1 fα (j)v̄(j) ≤ m
j=1 fα00 (j)v̄(j) which implies
|α0k |
|α00
|αk |
m X
m X
m X
k|
X
X
X
0
v(|αk |) ≤
v(|αk |) ≤
v(|αk00 |).
k=1 l=1

k=1 l=1

k=1 l=1

Since the other terms in Ti are independent of the subtask partition or already shown
to be constant in summation, we have Ti (α0 ) ≤ Ti (α) ≤ Ti (α00 ). If all the subtasks
are not of the same length, we would have Fα0 (n) < Fα00 (n) for 1 ≤ n < m, so by our
Lemma, we would have Ti (α0 ) < Ti (α00 ).
34

Proposition 1 states that if people perform better after completing a subtask,
and only the ordering of subtasks can be changed, putting subtasks in ascending
order leads to optimal performance (or, equivalently, minimal costs), while descending
order leads to the worst performance (or, equivalently, maximal costs). As long as
all subtasks are not of equal length there should be a difference between these two
extremes.
Note that Proposition 1 requires no structure on function h, the function that
concerns performance relative to the end of the subtask. Thus, the findings of socialcognitive theories, when applied to our model, suggest an optimal debt-repayment
(or any general task-completion strategy) that is consistent with the debt snowball
(or small victories) approach.
We now consider the goal-gradient hypothesis and corresponding restrictions it
places on function h. The theory suggests distance to the end of a subtask affects
performance.
Assumption A.3 (goal-gradient). As individuals move closer to the end of a subtask,
their performance does not decrease. That is, costs or time do not increase the closer
one comes to the end of a subtask. Formally, h is non-decreasing.
If the goal-gradient term, h is all that matters, and the social-cognitive term v is
constant (effectively zero), we have a much different result about the optimal structure
of subtask partitions.
Proposition 2. Suppose v is constant. Then for any X, i, and m, if there exists an
even ordering, α0 ∈ A(X) such that |α0 | = c for all 1 ≤ k ≤ m, then
Ti (α0 ) ≤ Ti (α) ∀α ∈ A(X) where |α0 | = |α| = m.
Further, if all the subtasks in α are not of the same length and h is strictly increasing,
Ti (α0 ) < Ti (α).
Proof. Choose any α ∈ A(X). If v is constant, the only term in Ti that changes with
α is h. We must show
0

|αk |
m X
X

h(|αk0 |

− l) ≤

k=1 l=1

|αk |
m X
X

h(|αk | − l),

(A.5)

k=1 l=1

with strict inequality if all the subtasks in α are not of the same length and h is
strictly increasing. Next we will define the following functions.
(
h(y)
if y ∈ Z,
h̄(y) =
(A.6)
(dye − y) h (byc) + (y − byc) h (dye) otherwise.
(
|{αkl ∈ α : |αk | − l = n}| /|X| if n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
gα (n) =
(A.7)
0
otherwise.
35

Let l∗ be the length of the longest subtask in eitherPα∗ or α0 . It follows
Pl∗ −1 that 0 ≤
l −1
∗
0
gα (n), gα (n) ≤ 1 for n = 1, 2, . . . , l − 1. Additionally n=0 gα (n) = n=0 gα0 (n) =
1. Note also that −h̄ is continuous. It is differentiable over every open interval
between integers. The
P function, −h̄, is also non-decreasing by Assumption A.3.
Define Gα (n) = nk=1 gα (k) and Gα0 in the same way. Note that for every n =
0, 1, 2, . . . , c − 1, the function gα0 (n) = m /|X| . Since there are only m subtasks, we
must have gα (n) ≤ m /|X| . Then Gα (n) ≤ Gα0 (n) for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , c − 1. Since
Gα0 (c − 1) = 1, Gα ≤ Gα0 . If α contains subtasks of different lengths, let l0 be the
length of the shortest
in α. Then
(l0 )∗ < m /|X|, so gα and gα0 are different.
 gαP
Psubtask
l∗ −1
−1
By our Lemma, n=1 gα0 (j) −h̄(j) ≤ ln=1
gα (j) −h̄(j) which implies (A.5).
If all the subtasks in α are not of the same length, we have already
gα and gα0 are
Pl∗shown
−1
different. If in addition, h is strictly increasing, then we have n=1 gα0 (j) −h̄(j) <

Pl∗ −1
g
(j)
−
h̄(j)
which implies (A.5) with strict inequality.
α
n=1
An similar statement can be made about ascending orderings.
Proposition 3. Suppose h is constant. Then for any X, i, and m, there exists a
0
subtask partition α0 ∈ A(X), in ascending order, |α10 | ≤ . . . ≤ |αk0 | ≤ . . . ≤ |αm
|, for
all 1 ≤ k ≤ m, such that
Ti (α0 ) ≤ Ti (α) ∀α ∈ A(X) where |α0 | = |α| = m.
Further, if α is not ascending and v is strictly decreasing, Ti (α0 ) < Ti (α).
Proof. Choose any α ∈ A(X). Consider the ascending subtask partition α̂ where
|α̂k | = 1 for all k < m and |α̂m | = |X| − m + 1. Define functions v̄(y) and fα (k)
as in (A.3) and
Pm that 0 ≤ fα (k), fα̂ (k) ≤ 1 for k = 1, 2, . . . , m.
Pm(A.4). It follows
Additionally k=1 fα (k) = k=1 fα̂ (k) = 1. Note also that v̄ is continuous. It is
differentiable over every open interval between integers. It is also non-increasing by
Assumption A.2. P
Define Fα (n) = nk=1 fα (k) and Fα̂ in the same way. Note that for any k < m,
fα̂ (k) = 1 /|X|. Since every subtask must contain at least one element and there are
m subtasks, 1 /|X| ≤ fα (k) ≤ (|X| − m + 1) /|X| . It follows that Fα̂ ≤ Fα . If α is
not ascending, there exist k 0 and k 00 such that k 0 < k 00 and |αk0 | > |αk00 |. We have
k 0 < m and |αk0 | > 1. Then fα (k 0 ) > fα̂ (k 0 ), and fα and fα̂ are different.
P
Pm
Pm P|α̂k |
0
By our Lemma, m
l=1 v(|αk |) ≤
j=1 fα̂ (j)v̄(j) ≤
j=1 fα (j)v̄(j) which implies
k=1
Pm P|αk |
l=1 v(|αk |). Since the other terms do not differ from α̂ to α, it follows that
k=1
0
Ti (α ) ≤ Ti (α). If α is not ascending, we have already shown fα P
and fα̂ are differm
ent.
If
in
addition,
v
is
strictly
decreasing,
our
Lemma
implies
j=1 fα̂ (j)v̄(j) <
Pm
0
j=1 fα (j)v̄(j). By identical reasoning, we would have Ti (α ) < Ti (α).
It should be noted that the proceeding two Propositions, unlike Proposition 1,
apply to all subtasks partitions possible under X, not just rearrangements of subtasks. However, they require stronger restrictions about our functions h and v than
36

our Proposition 1. Specifically, each requires that one of the functions be constant.
Under such assumptions, Propositions 2 and 3 provide two different answers on which
ordering, ascending or even, is optimal.
The remainder of this section will be concerned with developing general definitions and a proposition about optimal orderings when both social-cognitive and
goal-gradient forces are present. First, we need a general way to compare the effects
of the two terms.
Definition. For any two subtask partitions α, α0 ∈ A(X), with |α| = |α0 | = m, for
the following relation,
m
X
k=1

(|αk | − |αk0 |) v(k) −

|αk |
m X
X

0

h(|αk | − l) −

k=1 l=1

|αk |
X

h(|αk0 | − l) T 0,

(A.8)

l=1

we say the social-cognitive factors dominate the goal-gradient factors if and only if
(A.8) is greater than 0. Alternatively the goal-gradient factors dominate the socialcognitive factors if (A.8) is less than 0. There is no dominance between goal-gradient
and social cognitive factors if and only if (A.8) is equal to 0.
Next, we need to restrict our focus to tasks where both types of orderings are
possible.
Definition. Consider any X with αe , αa , αd ∈ A(X) where αe , αa , αd are even,
ascending, and descending orderings, respectively. Further restrict αa and αd to be in
the same class of subtask partitions, and αe to have the same number of ordered sets as
αa and αd . That is, there exists a β such that αa , αd ∈ β and |αe | = |αa | = |αd | = m.
We refer to any set {αe , αa , αd } as a ∆-set.
Note that a given ∆-set may not be unique for a given task X or even a given
number of subtasks m. Since our experiment involves a particular ∆-set, we find it
useful to make comparisons across the three subtask partitions.
Proposition 4. For a given ∆-set, {αa , αd , αe }, where all the subtasks in αa are not
of the same length, for any i,
1. Ti (αa ) < Ti (αe ) if and only if social-cognitive factors dominate goal-gradient
factors.
2. Ti (αa ) > Ti (αe ) if and only if goal-gradient factors dominate social-cognitive
factors.
3. Ti (αa ) = Ti (αe ) if and only if there is no dominance between social-cognitive
factors and goal-gradient factors.
37

Proof. For a given i, Ti (αa ) − Ti (αe ) =
 a

|αk |
|αek |
m
m
X
X
X
X

h(|αka | − l) −
h(|αke | − l).
(|αka | − |αke |) v(k) +
k=1

k=1

l=1

(A.9)

l=1

Define fαa (k), fαe (k) and v̄(y) as in (A.3) and
Pm(A.4). It follows
Pm that 0 ≤ fαa (k),
fαe (k) ≤ 1 for k = 1, 2, . . . , m. Additionally k=1 fαa (k) = k=1 fαe (k) = 1. Note
also that v̄ is continuous. It is differentiable over every open interval between integers.
It is also non-increasing
Pn by Assumption A.2.
Define Fαa (n) = k=1 fαa (k) and Fαe in the same way. Since αa has subtasks of
a
|. Since |αa | has exactly |X| elements and
different lengths, we must have |α1a | < |αm
a
are its smallest and largest subtasks respectively, we must have |α1a | <
α1a and αm
a
|X|/m < |αm |. Let k 0 denote the smallest k where |αka | > |X|/m. We have fαa (k) ≤
0
0
fαe (k) for P
all k < k 0 , so Fαa (k) ≤ Fαe (k)
Pmfor all k < k . For k < k < m, the identity,
m
Fαe (k) + j=k+1 fαe (j) = 1, implies Fαa (k) ≤ Fαe (k)
Fαa (k) +P j=k+1 fαa (j) =
Pm
a
f
(j)
>
because m
j=k+1 fαe (j). Since Fαa (m) = Fαe (m), we have Fαa ≤ Fαe .
j=k+1 α
By our Lemma,
e

a

|αk |
m X
X

v(|αka |)

−

|αk |
m X
X

v(|αe |) ≤ 0

k=1 l=1

k=1 l=1
m
X

(|αka | − |αke |) v(k) ≤ 0.

(A.10)

k=1

Define gαa (k), gαe (k) and h̄(y) as in (A.6) and (A.7). An identical argument to the
proof of Proposition 2 reveals
 a

|αk |
|αek |
m
X
X
X

h(|αka | − l) −
h(|αke | − l) ≥ 0.
(A.11)
k=1

l=1

l=1

Thus (A.9) is negative if and only if the magnitude of (A.10) is greater than the
magnitude of (A.11), that is, when social-cognitive dominate goal-gradient factors.
Similiarly, (A.9) is positive if and only if the magnitude of (A.10) is less than the
magnitude of (A.11), that is, when goal-gradient dominate social-cognitive factors.
This leaves (A.9) equal to zero if and only if the magnitudes of the two parts are equal,
when there is no dominance between social-cognitive and goal-gradient factors.
Corollary. For a given ∆-set and any i, Ti (αd ) ≥ Ti (αa ), Ti (αe ). Provided all the
subtasks of αd are not of the same length, Ti (αd ) > Ti (αa ), if v is non-constant;
Ti (αd ) > Ti (αe ) if either v is non-constant or h is strictly increasing.
38

Proof. The relation Ti (αd ) ≥ Ti (αa ) and Ti (αd ) > Ti (αa ) if not all the subtasks of αd
are of the same length and v is non-constant follow directly from Proposition 1 since
αa and αd are in the same class of subtask partitions by definition of ∆-set.
The relation Ti (αd ) ≥ Ti (αe ) and Ti (αd ) > Ti (αe ) if not all the subtasks of αd are
of the same length and h is strictly increasing follow directly from Proposition 2 since
|αd | = |αe | = m by definition of ∆-set.
Now for a given i, Ti (αd ) − Ti (αe ) =
 d

|αk |
|αek |
m
m
X
X
X
X


|αkd | − |αke | v(k) +
h(|αkd | − l) −
h(|αke | − l) .
k=1

k=1

l=1

l=1

Define fαe (k), fαd (k) and v̄(y) as in (A.3) and
Pm that 0 ≤ fαe (k),
Pm(A.4). It follows
e
fαd (k) ≤ 1 for k = 1, 2, . . . , m. Additionally, k=1 fα (k) = k=1 fαd (k) = 1. The
function v̄ is continuous, differentiable over every open interval between integers, and
non-increasing by Assumption
A.2.
P
Define Fαe (n) = nk=1 fαe (k) and Fαd in the same way. Since αd has subtasks of
d
different lengths, we must have |α1d | > |αm
|. Since αd has exactly |X| elements
d
and α1d and αm
are its smallest and largest subtasks respectively, we must have
d
d
|. Let k 0 denote the largest k where |αkd | < |X|/m. We
|α1 | > |X|/m > |αm
0
have fαe (k) < fαd (k) for all k ≤ kP
, so Fαe (k) < Fαd (k) forPall k ≤ k 0 . For
0
= Fαe (k) + m
k < k < m, the identity, Fαd (k)P
+ m
j=k+1 fαe (j) = 1,
j=k+1 fαd (j) P
m
m
implies Fαd (k) > Fαe (k) because j=k+1 fαe (j) > j=k+1 fαd (j). Then Fαd > Fαe

P
e
d
for 1 ≤ k < m. By our lemma, m
k=1 |αk | − |αk | v(k) ≤ 0 with strict inequality if v
is non-constant.
Since an argument identical to thati used in the proof of Proposition
P|αek |
Pm hP|αdk |
e
d
e
d
2 shows k=1
l=1 h(|αk | − l) ≥ 0, we have Ti (α ) > Ti (α ) if
l=1 h(|αk | − l) −
v is non-constant.

39

Appendix Table 1: Effect of initial study interactions with survey data on average cell time

X*ascending
X*descending
ascending
descending
X

Observations

Barratt
(1)
0.1943
(1.2095)
‐1.1639
(1.3108)
‐1.2418
(0.8183)
0.9077
(0.8651)
0.399
(0.9592)

High SSH
(2)
0.3027
(1.1629)
‐0.6144
(1.3043)
‐1.5411*
(0.8609)
0.7421
(0.9751)
1.0843
(0.9070)

Extraversion
(3)
0.1582
(0.1176)
‐0.06990
(0.1472)
‐1.2023*
(0.6056)
0.1653
(0.6668)
‐0.06937
(0.0920)

Agreeableness
(4)
0.1429
(0.1354)
0.1686
(0.1647)
‐1.4210**
(0.6874)
‐0.09740
(0.7841)
‐0.1215
(0.1194)

Concientiousness
(5)
0.1329
(0.1500)
0.1850
(0.1851)
‐1.2196*
(0.6750)
‐0.006695
(0.8339)
‐0.1226
(0.1359)

Openness
(6)
‐0.03525
(0.1070)
‐0.05391
(0.1341)
‐1.0727*
(0.5807)
0.4927
(0.6859)
0.1045
(0.0634)

Neuroticism
(7)
‐0.2034*
(0.1217)
‐0.2247*
(0.1279)
‐2.1063**
(0.9536)
‐0.8077
(1.0452)
0.1408
(0.1072)

91

91

91

91

91

91

91

Notes: Outcome is average time to complete one cell in seconds. X is the Barratt Impulsivity measure in column (1), high sensation seeking in
Column (2), and columns (3)‐(7) are the five factors from the Big Five Inventory. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Omitted ordering is
"equal".

