                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     RESOURCE CONCENTRATION AND CIVIL WARS

                                         Massimo Morelli
                                         Dominic Rohner

                                       Working Paper 20129
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20129


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




An earlier version of this paper has circulated under the title "Natural Resource Distribution and
Multiple Forms of Civil War". We wish to thank Peter Van der Windt and David Schoenholzer for
excellent research assistance and Dawn Brancati, Lars-Erik Cederman, Oeindrila Dube, Tanisha
Fazal, Benedikt Goderis, Matt Jackson, Cathy Hafer, John Huber, Päivi Lujala, Egil Matsen, Guy
Michaels, Kalle Moene, Robert Powell, Rick van der Ploeg, Petros Sekeris, Jonathan Temple, Mathias
Thoenig, Ragnar Torvik, Nicolas van de Sijpe, Peter van der Windt, Fabrizio Zilibotti and seminar
and workshop participants in Washington University St. Louis, Geneva, Zurich, Columbia, Bristol,
Oxford, York, Purdue, London School of Economics, Gerzensee, Trondheim, UC Berkeley,
Mannheim, Namur, Rotterdam, Seattle (APSA), Milano Bicocca, Oslo, Barcelona Summer Forum,
and Montpellier for helpful discussions and comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Massimo Morelli and Dominic Rohner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Resource Concentration and Civil Wars
Massimo Morelli and Dominic Rohner
NBER Working Paper No. 20129
May 2014
JEL No. D74,O12,Q34

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper highlights the importance of natural resource concentration and ethnic group regional
concentration for ethnic conflict. A new type of bargaining failure due to multiple types of potential
conflicts (and hence multiple threat points) is identified. The theory predicts war to be more likely
when resource and group concentration are high, and the empirical analysis, both at the country level
and at the ethnic group level, confirms the essential role of geographic concentration variables for
civil war.


Massimo Morelli
Columbia University
Department of Economics
420 West 118th Street, 720 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mm3331@columbia.edu

Dominic Rohner
Department of Economics
University of Lausanne
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny
Internef 551
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
dominic.rohner@unil.ch
1    Introduction

This paper provides a novel theoretical explanation and novel empirical investigation of the impor-
tance of the geography of natural resources for civil war. We provide a new theoretical explanation
for why civil wars occur with greater frequency when resource rents and ethnic divisions are both
involved, and we do so without assuming any standard friction in the bargaining process. The pre-
diction of the theory is that civil wars should be more frequent when the homeland of a minority
group is particularly rich in resources, a prediction consistent with similar observations made before
in the literature, but never obtained as equilibrium prediction of a frictionless bargaining game.
The paper will then test the predictions and the mechanism of the theory on a number of data sets,
providing also novel results on the quantitative importance of such concentration variables.


Motivation and preview for the theory

Two things seem to matter in general for civil war incentives: balance of strength and balance of
control on resources. When trying to resolve a con‡ict between two groups over control of resources,
one di¢ culty is that the relative strength of the two groups may di¤er from the relative wealth of
natural resources of the territories they occupy. Pushing the power sharing towards making it
re‡ect relative strength (strength proportionality) eliminates the incentives to “all-out ” wars, but
“secessionist”wars could then materialize; on the other hand, making power sharing depend on the
groups’relative endowments of natural resources avoids secession tensions but may cause incentives
for the majority group to use their strength to gain more power.
    Recognizing this tension between the two most important determinants of bargaining power,
we have decided to focus attention on a connected observation about bargaining games: while in
a standard bargaining game there is a unique "threat point" (for example a unique type of war
that players could fall into if bargaining breaks down), in reality there are multiple threat points,
which depend on the balance of strength and geographic distribution of natural resources. If an
ethnic group is particularly in‡uential for the government of a country but another group has an
important presence (in terms of population size and rootage to the territory) in a region of the
country that is particularly rich in terms of natural resources, the tensions between the two criteria
of power sharing mentioned above are maximized, and are exacerbated by the fact that the two
groups have access to di¤erent threats: the powerful group controlling government forces should
typically be stronger in an all-out ethnic con‡ict, but the minority group could sustain the secession
threat with guerrilla war and focus its lower total strength on the defense of the area where it is
locally stronger.


                                                  2
       We model these tensions in the following way: in a country divided into two regions and
populated by two major groups, we assume that the stronger group nationally has a realistic
advantage in all-out con‡ict, while a minority group mostly concentrated in one region has a
probability of winning in a secessionist civil war that exceeds, for multiple reasons (discussed
below), the probability of winning in an all-out civil war. Even though there are no frictions limiting
bargaining on how to share the rents of natural resources, we show that peace may be impossible
to guarantee, due to the possibility for the two main players to trigger two di¤erent threats.1 The
characterization of the set of parameters where bargaining fails yields the prediction that the most
con‡ict prone situations are those in which the mineral resources of value are mostly concentrated
in the minority group region, and the risk is especially high in case of low State capacity, high
regional concentration of the minority group in question, and large geographic distance of the
minority region from the capital.


Anecdotal motivation and preview of the empirical analysis

When the presence of a local ethnic group coincides with large natural resource abundance con-
centrated in its region, this local ethnic group could be …nancially better o¤ if it were independent
and may under some conditions have incentives to start secessionist rebellion. This corresponds for
example to the separatist movement in the now independent Timor-Leste, and the recent turmoil in
the oil-abundant regions of Nigeria. Also the rebellion of the Aceh Freedom Movement in Indonesia
starting in 1976 and the armed …ght of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army beginning in 1983 can
to a large extent be explained by the abundance of natural resources in these separatist regions.2
Other countries where secessionist movements have been linked to large local natural resources
include Angola, Myanmar, Democratic Republic of Congo, Morocco and Papua New Guinea. In
all these cases an uneven natural resource distribution has been ampli…ed by ethnic divisions. In
contrast, if natural resources are absent or if natural resources (and political power) are evenly
dispersed in a country, there are typically fewer con‡ictual incentives, even when there are ethnic
divisions.3 Similarly, when there are large amounts of natural resources available, but the society
is ethnically homogeneous, war incentives are weak.4
   1
     It is easy to see – results available upon request – that if we add to our new source of bargaining failure one of
the traditional ones, like asymmetric information about the other player’s strength or on the probability of winning
in general, the main results on the role of resource concentration and group concentration are unaltered. However,
those traditional sources of bargaining frictions alone, without the multiplicity of threat points, do not su¢ ce to
explain the interaction e¤ect of resource concentration and group concentration explained below.
   2
     For a discussion of these cases see Ross (2004b).
   3
     This is for example the case of countries like Benin, which has only few natural resources, or of small oil-rich
countries like Brunei or Qatar, where natural resources are evenly spread.
   4
     Examples for this include Chile and Mongolia.



                                                          3
    In a country level empirical analysis, we study how the unevenness of geographical distribution
of petrol …elds across ethnic groups in a given country a¤ects the likelihood of con‡ict. For this
purpose we have put together a panel of 157 countries with sample period 1960-2008, and have
constructed a new variable, Oil Gini, which captures how unevenly oil holdings are spread between
di¤erent ethnic groups in a country.5           To the best of our knowledge we are the …rst ones to
have constructed such a measure of inter-ethnic inequality in abundance of petrol …elds. In the
regression analysis we include –in addition to our main, new variable of interest– the standard
battery of control variables, as well as country …xed e¤ects and annual time dummies. We …nd that
our novel Oil Gini measure has a statistically signi…cant and quantitatively strong positive e¤ect
on the likelihood of civil war onsets, as predicted by our theory.
    Next, we move to a more disaggregated level of analysis: we study the e¤ect of natural resource
unevenness on civil war with a panel dataset at the ethnic group level, covering 1120 ethnic groups
and spanning over the period 1960-2006. This has the advantage that unobserved heterogeneity
problems are reduced, and ethnic group level data allows us to better discriminate between our
theory and competing explanations: our model predicts that con‡icts are fuelled by non-governing
ethnic minority groups living in very oil rich regions, while alternative mechanisms (discussed below)
predict con‡ict onsets in the presence of oil-rich ethnic groups that control the government. While
our country level regressions only establish the link between inter-group oil unevenness and civil
war onset, the ethnic group level regressions will be able to distinguish such di¤erent mechanisms,
and show that it is indeed oil abundance in the regions mostly inhabited by powerless groups,
rather than in the homelands of governing ethnic groups, that drives civil wars.
    Our main, novel independent variable on the ethnic group level is the surface of an ethnic
group’s territory covered with petrol (i.e. oil and gas) as a percentage of the country’s total surface
covered with petrol. To the best of our knowledge we are the …rst ones to study civil con‡ict using
an ethnic group panel with natural resource variables that vary for di¤erent ethnic groups. We …nd
a statistically signi…cant and quantitatively strong positive e¤ect of the relative resource abundance
of a non-governing ethnic group on the likelihood that this group is involved in a civil war onset.
We also …nd that the interaction terms of an ethnic group’s relative resource abundance with its
group concentration are positive, very sizeable and statistically signi…cant, which is in line with our
theoretical predictions. The results are robust for very demanding speci…cations that control for
   5
     As discussed in detail in section 3.1.1, we have used the GIS-coordinates of all ethnic groups in the "Geo-
referencing of ethnic groups" (GREG) dataset (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010), and have merged them with
the geo-referenced petroleum dataset (PETRODATA) from Lujala, Rod and Thieme (2007), which allowed us to
construct a time-varying measure of how relatively petrol-rich the homelands of a given ethnic group are. Using this
information, we have been able to apply the Gini formula to capture geographical oil unevenness.




                                                         4
ethnic group …xed e¤ects, annual time dummies, time-varying ethnic group level controls and all
country-level control variables used in the country-regressions. These …ndings point out that indeed
civil war is likely when resource discoveries happen in regions that are signi…cantly populated by
groups that do not belong to the governing coalition in the country.


Related literature

Natural resources and ethnic divisions are known to be correlated with civil con‡ict in one way
or another (see e.g., Le Billon 2001, Collier and Hoe- er 2004, Ross 2004, Montalvo and Reynal-
Querol 2005, Fearon 2005, Lujala, Gleditsch and Gilmore 2005, Humphreys 2005, Lujala 2010,
Dube and Vargas 2013), but the theoretical literature does not shed su¢ cient light yet on the
independent and joint causal role of resource concentration and ethnic divisions. The existing
theoretical studies about the e¤ect of natural resources on con‡ict, by and large do not relate
to geographic concentration: Caselli and Coleman (2013) focus on the decision of the dominant
ethnic group to exploit or not the other groups in terms of the proceeds from extraction of natural
resources, but do not take into account how the geographic distribution and the economic features
of natural resources a¤ect the risk of ethnic con‡ict of di¤erent kinds; Reuveny and Maxwell (2001)
and Grossman and Mendoza (2003) use a dynamic framework to predict that present resource
scarcity and future resource abundance cause appropriative competition; Hodler (2006) …nds that
natural resources lead to more con‡icts in fractionalized countries; Rohner, Thoenig and Zilibotti
(2013) predict natural resources to have a particularly detrimental e¤ect if initial trust in a country
is low; Fearon (2005) argues that natural resources can foster con‡ict by weakening state capacity;
Besley and Persson (2011) and Bell and Wolford (2014) emphasize that weak institutions, low
income and large natural resources lead to a greater risk of civil war; van der Ploeg and Rohner
(2012) study the two-way interaction between natural resource extraction and civil war, focusing
on depletion speed. To repeat, none of these papers consider geographic concentration of resources
and how it overlaps with the geographic concentration of minority groups.
   Horowitz (1985) did make the anecdotal observation that backward concentrated minorities with
resource concentration may have the highest bene…t-cost ratio from rebellion, and Walter (2006b)
proposed a reputation building theory for why governments tend to repress rebellions in areas with
high value of land. However, Walter’s reputation theory predicts that the group secession attempts
that tend to be blocked are in countries where other groups could otherwise make similar attempts
for other resources in other areas. Thus, the explanatory variables with that type of theory would
be the number of other relevant groups in the country and the general value of land, more than



                                                  5
the value of land in that given group’s homelands speci…cally. Neither Horowitz nor Walter allow
for frictionless bargaining, whereas, by doing so, we can show that the cases with natural resources
concentrated in the homelands of ethnic minorities are exactly those where bargaining can break
down, even without any reputation building factor.
       The value of mineral resources is a stream of expected future rents. Hence the most important
rationalist explanations of war to consider as alternative to ours are those that relate to commitment
problems.6 It is di¢ cult to commit to any sharing rule if there is an expectation of resource-based
changes in the future balance of power, intended both as balance of strength and as balance of
control of natural resources that we alluded to above. The fact that commitment problems can
lead to preventive war incentives is well established in the literature (see e.g. Levy, 1987, Powell,
1996 and 2006, and the early work of Taylor, 1954). However, the preventive war incentive analysis
does not separate or highlight the role of geography or concentration of resources: a minority group
could have preventive war incentives to rebel wherever the future enrichment and strengthening of
the majority group is expected to come from. Perhaps for this reason, the most recent works on
civil war rationalization and natural resources that emphasize commitment problems, like Besley
and Persson (2011), Lei and Michaels (2011), and Bell and Wolford (2014), focus on the e¤ects
of changes in total amounts or values of resources rather than on distribution and concentration
variables.7
       While the e¤ect of the total quantity and/or value of oil on con‡ict is ambiguous,8 we are able
to demonstrate that the unevenness of oil has a robust e¤ect. The shadow of the future argument
(related to the fear that an oil discovery could strengthen the government) is equally strong when
the oil discovery is in the region controlled by the government; hence the fact that we …nd a
strong and robust impact of the concentration of resources only in the regions mostly populated
by minority groups speaks in favor of the type of war motivations that we uncover.
       Our paper can also be usefully contrasted with the literature in international relations. There
is a common view that preemptive as well as preventive war motivations relate to fear, and not to
greed.9 In our view, preemptive and preventive wars are much more likely if fear goes hand in hand
   6
     Asymmetric information and indivisibility, two other popular rationalist explanations of war, do not seem to be
particularly relevant in the presence of signi…cant natural resources to be extracted in the future. See Fearon (1995)
and Jackson and Morelli (2011) for comparative discussions of the various rationalist explanations of war.
   7
     Caselli, Morelli and Rohner (2013) …nd that geography, and in particular location of borders and resources,
matter a lot also for interstate wars. In that interstate war context it is more di¢ cult to disentangle the geographic
factors from the commitment problem related incentives.
   8
     Cotet and Tsui (2013) …nd that there is no robust e¤ect of oil reserves on civil wars when controlling for country
…xed e¤ects. In contrast, Lei and Michaels (2011) …nd that oil discoveries lead to more civil wars, perhaps consistently
with preventive war motivations.
   9
     "... the spiral model contends that even a state interested in protecting the status quo can go to war (out of
fear), whereas the deterrence model posits that there are status quo states and revisionist states and that only the
latter are attackers." (Reiter, 1995: 8). There is a large literature in international relations on this: See e.g. Schelling


                                                             6
with greed: in Esteban, Morelli and Rohner (2012) the decision by a minority group to start a war
is preventive, and certainly due to fear of mass killings, but this fear comes up precisely because the
group in power is made more greedy (or is afraid that the minority group will become more greedy
in the future) due to larger amounts of resources. In this paper, preemptive incentives can be seen
in the possibility of an attack due to the fear of being otherwise involved in a less advantageous
type of con‡ict, but once again this fear would not materialize without the complementary greed
on one side or the other. Moreover, given the existence of multiple con‡ict technologies that we
emphasize, spirals of events or spiral of beliefs are not necessary for the existence of preemptive
war motivations.10
    In terms of relationship with other empirical studies on civil war, our …ndings are broadly
consistent with the empirical results of Walter (2006a) on the importance of group concentration;
Reynal-Querol (2002), Saideman et al. (2002), and Cederman and Girardin (2007) on the im-
portance of ethnic discrimination;11 Gates (2002) and Buhaug, Gates and Lujala (2009) on the
importance of situations where the rebelling minority group is concentrated in remote peripheral
areas, where its odds of winning a local war are larger and con‡ict tends to be harder to avoid.
As far as the empirical literature on inequality and civil con‡ict is concerned (see e.g. Gurr (2000),
Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou (2012) and Huber and Mayoral (2013)), our contribution
is to show that between-group inequality can be expected to fuel civil con‡ict if such inequality
is mostly in terms of control or shares of resource extraction rents, and especially when resource
concentration is interacted with group concentration.
    The econometric speci…cation that we use in the analysis at the country level is related to
that in Fearon and Laitin (2003), Collier and Hoe- er (2004), Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005),
Cederman and Girardin (2007), Collier and Rohner (2008), and Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012).

    The paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we present our theory of bargaining failure and
the corresponding predictions; section 3 displays the country level analysis …rst, followed by the
ethnic group level analysis. Section 4 o¤ers some brief concluding remarks. As usual, the proof of
the theoretical predictions and the description of the data are relegated to the appendix.
(1966), Jervis (1978), and all the subsequent literature on the security dilemma and spiral of fear.
   10
      The o¤ense defense balance theory did already allow for the possibility that preemptive wars can occur due
to technology, but in that case they talk about countries having advantages in o¤ense technology over defense
technology (see e.g. Snyder, 1984), while we focus on di¤erent technological distinctions, more related to geography
and motivations.
   11
      In their qualitative comparative analysis of oil-exporters Basedau and Richter (2011) …nd that con‡ict is more
frequent in countries where there are groups from oil-producing regions that are excluded from power.




                                                         7
2          Model

2.1         Setup

Consider a country populated by two ethnic groups, i and j.12 The country is divided in two clearly
de…ned regions, 1; 2. We allow for di¤erent values of extractable natural resources in regions 1 and
2, labeled R1 and R2 , respectively.13 For simplicity, natural resource extraction and export of such
resources is the only activity in the country, and this sole activity is conducted by a unique State
…rm. The group in power can control the sharing of the ensuing surplus.14
         There are Ni1 and Ni2 members of group i in regions 1 and 2 respectively, and Nj1 ; Nj2 of group
j. Assume that the two groups are to some degree concentrated in the two regions, group i in
region 1 and group j in region 2, Ni1 =Nj1 > Ni2 =Nj2 .
         We assume that group j controls the government at the beginning of the game, which may
mean that group j is a majority group (Nj = Nj1 + Nj2 > Ni = Ni1 + Ni2 ) in a democracy, or simply
that j had won some con‡ict for power in a prior period. Group j in power can choose the shares
 ; (1         ) of the surplus to be attributed respectively to group i and j.
         There are three potential outcomes: peace (P ), secessionist con‡ict (S), and all-out con‡ict
(C).15 Secessionist con‡ict refers to war started by the powerless group with the aim of founding
an independent State in region 1, while all-out con‡ict is a con‡ict where at least one of the two
groups aims to fully subjugate the other group in the country.16
         The time line is as follows:

     1. Group j selects ;

     2. Both groups select non-cooperatively whether they want to initiate a con‡ict of their choice.
           In particular, the powerless group can engage in rebellion to initiate all-out con‡ict (c), it
           can initiate secessionist con‡ict (s) or it can remain peaceful (p). The group in power can
           either engage in repression aiming to capture all rents in all-out con‡ict (c) or remain peaceful
    12
     We call the two groups “ethnic groups”only because we need to focus on societies where the population is divided
along some identi…able cleavage, but that cleavage could be religion or anything else. Hence we will never require
any particular speci…c component of the concept of ethnicity in our theory.
  13
     The variables R1 and R2 capture the total value of rents, corresponding to the product of the amounts extracted
times their price. Hence, R1 and R2 increase when there are resource discoveries in the two regions (or when the
world demand for the potentially di¤erent natural resources increases).
  14
     Future work could include explicit consideration of the interaction between a government, the minority groups and
the extraction companies, rather than assuming State control. For a motivating case study for this future extension,
see Morelli and Pischedda (2014).
  15
     It is easy to allow also for accepted secession, which however does not add much to the analysis and does not
change any of the key results.
  16
     An all-out con‡ict initiated by the group in power could have repression motives, while it takes the form of a
rebellion when initiated by the group out of power.



                                                          8
         (p).17 As displayed in the matrix below, there is peace (P ) when nobody attempts to start
         any con‡ict. If only one group attempts to start a con‡ict or when both groups choose the
         same type of con‡ict, in both cases the type of con‡ict that emerges is clear. If group i
         tries to initiate secessionist con‡ict (s), and the government attempts to escalate the con‡ict
         into all-out repression (c), this latter attempt succeeds with probability              (we will give an
         extensive interpretation of this parameter in section 2.3 below).



                              i chooses p       i chooses c                    i chooses s
               j chooses p          P                C                               S
               j chooses c          C                C          C with prob ; S with prob 1

2.2      Payo¤s

If P prevails, total group payo¤s from natural resources are

                                            i
                                            P    =       (R1 + R2 )
                                            j
                                            P    = (1          )(R1 + R2 )


       If C is initiated, we assume that the winner takes all the relevant natural resource rents. Thus,
the payo¤s are as follows:



                                        i
                                        C   = pc (R1 + R2 )        di (C)
                                        j
                                        C   = (1      pc )(R1 + R2 )        dj (C)


where pc is the winning probability of group i in all-out con‡ict and di ; dj are the destruction
costs expected from this type of con‡ict. Think of such costs as mainly capital or infrastructure
destruction costs, while adding human life costs, although reasonable even in the mind of leaders,
would complicate the algebra without altering the qualitative results of the paper.18
       The logic of secessionist con‡ict is similar. We assume that when a group i’s secession attempt
is unsuccessful, i is deprived of all resource rents (again, we could allow for further punishment
without a¤ecting the qualitative results). When secession is successful, region 1 splits from region
  17
     For simplicity, we ignore the (unrealistic) possibility that a group in power proposes secession of some region.
We could easily extend the framework to allow for it.
  18
     In a complementary paper, Esteban, Morelli and Rohner (2012) deal explicitly with the strategic incentives to
decimate the population of enemies.


                                                           9
2, and group i gains control over all resources in region 1. The minorities in the new countries, Nj1
and Ni2 , are discriminated and do not receive anything after secession. The group leaders have a
utilitarian social welfare function with equal weight for any group member. Therefore, the payo¤s
under secessionist con‡ict are:

                              i
                              S   = ps R1     di (S)
                              j
                              S   = (1      ps )(R1 + R2 ) + ps R2   dj (S)


where ps is the probability of winning for group i in secessionist con‡ict.
   With this description of the payo¤s, the description of the game is complete. After the interpre-
tation of the main assumptions (in section 2.3) and some preliminary observations (in section 2.4)
below, we will turn to the equilibrium analysis, using as solution concept the standard Subgame
Perfect Equilibrium (SPE).


2.3     Interpretation of the       assumption

One important assumption in our model is that when group i wants secessionist con‡ict and group
j wants all-out con‡ict, with probability (1       ) the former prevails, and with probability    the
latter materializes. We now need to motivate this assumption about the uncertainty of con‡ict
type.
   As discussed above, secessionist con‡ict generally entails –when it is feasible–a higher winning
chance for group i, i.e. ps > pc . In fact, when …ghting a secessionist con‡ict, a separatist group
can use a "technology of rebellion" (see Kalyvas and Balcells, 2010) and guerrilla tactics – i.e.,
exploiting its knowledge of the local terrain and population, it can use promising hide-and-ambush
tactics –to avoid open-battle…eld …ghting against the usually stronger government troops (see e.g.
Gates (2002) and Buhaug, Gates and Lujala (2009)). In the literature, these privileged guerrilla
tactics of ethnic rebels aiming to gain control of the resource rents in their homelands have been
called "irregular rebellion or insurgency" by Kalyvas and Balcells (2010), and "sons of the soil" or
"peripheral" insurgency by Fearon (2004).
   Such guerrilla tactics however require several pre-requisites for being feasible. The condicio sine
qua non is that the secessionist group is able to avoid the open battle…eld and to hide-and-ambush
instead. Besides geographical characteristics such as "rough terrain" (see e.g. Fearon and Laitin,
2003), according to Kalyvas and Balcells (2010: 420) also "material support, revolutionary beliefs
and military doctrine", and in particular international military support from major powers, are
crucial for sustaining guerrilla insurgency. Also Fearon (2004) emphasizes that "sons of the soil

                                                   10
insurgencies" need funding to sustain their guerrilla …ghting, whereby contraband and cross-border
smuggling play important roles.
    When the conditions for guerrilla insurgency are not ful…lled, secessionist groups are obliged to
…ght on the open battle…eld like in all-out con‡icts. When the "conventional rebellion" technology
(with standing armies confronting each other) is the only one available, a secessionist attempt has
the same probability of success as any other all-out con‡ict with any other motivation. Thus, in
such cases the rebellion may well become a centrist con‡ict.19 .
    Some of the factors that can make secessionist guerrilla …ghting (with ps > pc ) feasible are
subject to exogenous and unanticipated shocks. In particular, the following factors are salient:
    First, international support from major powers matters. When the public opinion in Western
democracies identi…es with a politically excluded ethnic minority, separatist e¤orts may attract
more …nancial and logistical support from abroad than all-out rebellion, as the former may be
seen as act of legitimate defense, while the latter may be interpreted as aggression. This may help
to make secessionist con‡ict feasible, but the reaction of the international community and public
opinion is hard to anticipate, and hence constitutes (at least partially) a random shock.
    Second, the political situation in neighboring countries can play an important role. Saleyhan
(2007) shows systematic cross country evidence that weak neighbors, rival neighbors and refugee
diasporas favor rebels’external bases in neighboring countries, and make their guerrilla war e¤orts
more feasible. This is in line with the evidence from recent papers using micro-data and studying
how guerrilla insurgences bene…t from porous borders (which for example favor the …nancing of
guerilla insurgency through contraband), including Rohner, Thoenig and Zilibotti (2013) for the
Ugandan LRA, and Martinez (2013) for the Colombian FARC. Given that domestic politics of
neighboring states are time-varying and hard to anticipate, they constitute shocks that make the
feasibility of secessionist guerrilla warfare ex-ante a random event.
    Third, climate and rain fall shocks make attacks more or less possible. Heavy rain in separatist
areas would make it for example harder for the government to move in troops and access the rebels’
hiding grounds to force them into the open battle…eld. For example, Rogall (2013) shows that in
the Rwandan mass killings heavy rain was a major factor to curb assaults from the dominant Hutu
troops on peripheral Tutsi communities. Also Koenig et al. (2014) and Vanden Eynde (2011) …nd
that heavy rain could prevent major attacks and battles in the DRC and India, respectively. By
its very nature, future climate variation is very di¢ cult to anticipate, which implies that ex-ante
the feasibility of secessionist con‡ict has a random element.
  19
     Any leader of a rebel group would prefer winning (R1 + R2 ) with probability pc rather than winning only R1
with probability pc :



                                                      11
   Fourth, a further pre-condition for launching successfully a secessionist guerrilla insurgency is
the support from the local population. This also depends on factors with random variation that is
hard to know ex-ante, such as for example the charisma of local rebel commanders, or the outside
options of the local population –which depends on the harvest (see Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti,
2004).
   Fifth, some types of arms are better suited for all-out battle…eld …ghting, while others are
particularly well-suited for guerrilla tactics such as hide and ambush. The availability and price
of di¤ erent weapon types depends on various continental and international factors that vary a lot
over time and are hard to anticipate (see e.g. Killicoat, 2007).
   For all these reasons, the groups in con‡ict can be reasonably described as knowing only the
ex-ante probability (1     ) that the secessionist guerrilla technology will be available, but not the
realization of the exogenous draw of all those sources of uncertainty.


2.4      Preliminary observations

In a perfect and frictionless world, war could never occur, as it is a costly lottery, and the destruc-
tion cost of war implies that there should exist mutually bene…cial Pareto improvements through
bargaining. Having allowed group j to choose     at the beginning of the game is equivalent to assum-
ing that bargaining frictions like commitment problems do not apply to this setting. Given that we
have also complete information and full divisibility, none of the standard rationalist explanations
of war (Fearon, 1995) applies. Nor there is any agency friction, like in Jackson and Morelli (2007).
The intuition for why war may occur in our model, in spite of the absence of standard frictions in
the choice of , is as follows: while the possibility of bargaining with transfers eliminates war when
there is only one disagreement point or threat point, the fact that there exist two types of war and
the possibility that the probability of winning for group i may di¤er signi…cantly between the two
types of war creates a bargaining game with two threat points, where each one can be triggered
by the …rst mover. Therefore, even if in expectation peace dominates war given the endogenous
and the exogenous , what matters is the unilateral incentive to deviate and trigger the preferred
war if the opponent stays peaceful. These unilateral deviation incentives become unavoidable, as
we see below, when resources abound in the region inhabited particularly by the minority group.
Hence, the geography of natural resources, which is the focal point of the paper, is ultimately the
decisive factor driving war and peace in our framework.
   Another important note concerns the role of wealth. In the model the variables R1 ; R2 play the
role of "prizes", hence they represent the present discounted value of the future stream of rents



                                                  12
that can be derived from extraction, production and export. Obviously we could incorporate in the
model also the accumulated past wealth, but we decided to leave that out of the utility functions
because after all the main channel through which accumulated past wealth can a¤ect utility is
through its impact on the probability of winning and on the destruction costs, which are already
included (in abstract reduced form).20 Typically only a small fraction of natural resources to be
extracted in the future can be damaged by a war, while much of the accumulated physical capital
is often destroyed, partly because it is a vital input of the capacity of a …ghting group or State in a
con‡ict. Oil …elds and diamond mines (and especially their future productivity) "survive" …ghting,
while high-tech industries and banking su¤er considerably from political instability. A similar
argument could be applied to distinguish between various sorts of natural resources, according to
their risk of destruction in civil war.


2.5      Analysis and equilibrium wars

Here we present the main results, relegating all proofs and derivations to Appendix A. On the basis
of the expected outcomes for each group in all subgames for any                    , group j selects the preferred
level of     at the beginning of the game, a sort of take it or leave it bargaining. Our main result
will be that there are situations in which there exists no value of                that can possibly avoid war, of
one kind or the other.21
       The intuition for the result is as follows. Group j prefers peace to all-out con‡ict when                       is
less than or equal to some threshold           , while group i prefers peace over an attempt to secede for
values of      greater than a threshold         s,   which is not necessarily lower than            because the two
types of con‡ict have di¤erent costs and di¤erent probabilities of winning for the two groups. For
the range of parameter values such that              s   >    no level of    can be found for which there exists
an equilibrium in which civil war can always be avoided. Our bargaining failure result can be
summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 1 There exist parameter values under which no surplus sharing can be found for
which there exists an equilibrium in which civil war can always be avoided.
       The space of parameters inducing war increases with the geographical concentration of natural
resources in the region with relatively fewer members of the ruling group.
  20
     Note that the qualitative predictions would be unchanged if part of the natural resources were to be destroyed in
…ghting. Further, the qualitative predictions would also be robust to assuming a part of past wealth to be appropriable
in contest.
  21
     Note that it wouldn’t help to allow j to choose two separate sharing rules, 1 ; 2 , for the two regions: in fact, if
the parameters are such that no exists to make peace an equilibrium in the subsequent simultaneous move subgame,
then trivially it is not possible to …nd any peace inducing pair 1 ; 2 , since if this were possible then there would
exist 0 such that 0 (R1 + R2 ) = 1 R1 + 2 R2 that would work, a contradiction.


                                                             13
                           0.8
                   ps-pc
                           0.7

                           0.6                                                               Conflict

                           0.5

                           0.4

                           0.3                         Peace

                           0.2

                           0.1

                           0.0
                                 0.0   0.1       0.2      0.3   0.4      0.5   0.6     0.7     0.8      0.9   1.0
                                                                                                         R1/R

                        Figure 1: Zones of parameter values for peace and con‡ict

                                                                                                 di (S)+dj (C)
       As shown in the appendix,             s   >     happens when ps R1R+R
                                                                           1
                                                                             2
                                                                               > pc +                R1 +R2 ,       which obviously
becomes more and more likely the greater is R1 =(R1 + R2 ).22
       Note that in this game a con‡ict equilibrium always exists, which is intuitively due to the fact
that it takes two for peace, hence no player can unilaterally move out of con‡ict by deviating from
an equilibrium with con‡ict. However, when                      s   <     there also exists a second, better equilibrium
with always peace, while for           s   >         there does not exist an equilibrium featuring peace. Figure 123
displays the zones where a peace equilibrium exists (labelled "Peace") and the zone where con‡ict
can never be avoided (labelled "Con‡ict"). We can see that bargaining failure happens when the
share of natural resources that are situated in region 1, R1 =R, is large, and when the group out
of power has a substantially larger winning probability in secessionist than in all-out con‡ict, i.e.
when ps      pc is large. Other interesting predictions can be added when unbundling the probabilities
of winning in the di¤erent types of con‡ict, which is what we do in the following subsection.


2.6      Generating empirically testable predictions

There are two necessary conditions for bargaining failure (i.e. for no peace equilibrium existing):
…rst, natural resources need to be distributed unevenly (i.e. high R1 =(R1 + R2 )), and second, the
powerless group’s winning probability under secessionist war needs to be substantially larger than
the winning probability in an all-out con‡ict (i.e. high ps                          pc ). If either of these two conditions
  22
     Intuitively, when R1 =(R1 + R2 ) or ps pc are very small, secessionist con‡ict is not attractive and we would fall
back into a situation with only one form of salient threat (i.e., all-out con‡ict).
  23
     The following parameter values have been used in this Figure: R1 + R2 = 1, pc = 0:2, di (S) = 0:05, dj (C) = 0:1.




                                                                    14
does not hold, there exists an equilibrium in which bargaining will succeed to prevent con‡ict.
       The …rst condition on relative natural resource abundance of the homelands of the powerless
group does not require further disaggregation to be operationalized for empirical testing. In con-
trast, the winning chances for the powerless group in secessionist versus all-out war are still a
blackbox. We now analyze the main determinants of relative strength, and hence of the probability
of winning, leading to more testable implications.
       Denoting by Wi and Wj the accumulated usable wealth by group i and group j, the probability
with which i wins an all-out con‡ict can be expressed as:

                                                         Ni Wi
                                            pc =
                                                   Ni Wi + Nj Wj +

where       measures the extra strength of group j due to the control of the government and perhaps
the army. In this contest success function (CSF) the ratio of total wealth matters. Like Jackson
and Morelli (2007) and Esteban and Ray (2011) we regard accumulated wealth as capacity, and
therefore assume a group’s probability of winning to be increasing in its total wealth. Finally, this
expression allows for the obvious relevance of population sizes, especially in traditional warfare that
is typical of many civil con‡icts.
       Consistently, group i’s winning probability in secessionist con‡ict can be expressed as follows:


                                                      Ni1 Wi
                                     ps =
                                            Ni1 Wi + Nj1 Wj + =(1 + )

where the government’s advantage of controlling a standing army ( ) is discounted by (1 + ), and
  is a non-negative parameter that is an increasing function of the geographical distance between
the secessionist homelands and the capital. This is in line with the idea that the military power
of the government decays when projected at a large distance (see e.g. Boulding, 1962). It is also
consistent with the recent literature that has found that geographical remoteness and ideological
recruitment provide a larger advantage for group i in secessionist than in all-out wars (see e.g.
Gates, 2002; Buhaug, Gates and Lujala, 2009). The parameter               also depends on various factors
discussed in section 2.3 that a¤ect the scope for hide-and-ambush guerrilla insurgency. Note also
that in case of a secessionist con‡ict the men used are only those in the con‡ict region.24 Using
the explicit dependence of ps and pc on the distribution of populations of the di¤erent groups in
  24
    Gates (2002) and Buhaug, Gates and Lujala (2009) …nd evidence that when the minority group is concentrated
the odds of winning are larger.




                                                       15
the territory, the condition for bargaining failure becomes

                           Ni1 Wi             R1              Ni Wi                                di (S) + dj (C)
                                                      >                                        +                   :
              Ni1 Wi    + Nj1 Wj + =(1 + ) (R1 + R2 )   Ni Wi + Nj Wj +                                R1 + R2

This reveals that for various possible parameter values civil war is on average more likely when the
minority group i is very concentrated (large Ni1 ) and the corresponding region relatively homoge-
neous (low Nj1 ); and state capacity is low (i.e., low )25 . The results of the comparative statics
implied by the characterization of Proposition 1 are summarized below.

Corollary 1 Con‡ict occurs for a larger set of the other parameters when

   1. most of the natural resources are located in the region of the powerless group,

   2. the winning chances of the group out of power are much better for secessionist than for all-out
         con‡ict,

   3. war is not very destructive,

   4. the powerless group is very concentrated in a relatively homogeneous region,

   5. state capacity is low,

   6. the region of the group out of power is further away from the capital.


       To establish another natural baseline, consider a proportional democratic benchmark, in which
                                                                 D         Ni
surplus sharing is determined by vote strength, i.e.,                =   Ni +Nj   and where there is perfect wealth
equality, i.e., Wi = Wj . If con‡ict is not very destructive and if an ethnic group out of power is very
concentrated in an area with large resource rents (high Ni1 and high R1 ), even such democracy in
an egalitarian society cannot guarantee peace in the best SPE. We can even end up in a situation
where any of the two groups would like to start war because                           >        D    >    .26 This can occur
                                                                                  s

when the minority group is very concentrated (large Ni1 =Nj1 ), when the geographical distribution
of natural resources is unequal (high R1 =(R1 + R2 )), con‡ict is not very destructive, and when
state capacity is neither too small nor too large (intermediate ). For these parameter values either
group would like to start con‡ict. If          D   is either below       or above         s,   but still    s   > , then only
one group has interest in starting a con‡ict, but we cannot determine which con‡ict will actually
  25
    Con‡ict is more likely for low state capacity, as long as   (i.e. the parameter capturing among others remoteness
of group i’s homelands) is not too large.
  26                                                                       Ni1 Wi            R1             di (S)         Ni
       Expressed in structural parameters, this corresponds to    Ni1 Wi +Nj1 Wj + =(1+ ) (R1 +R2 )        R1 +R2
                                                                                                                     >   Ni +Nj
                                                                                                                                  >
     Ni Wi           dj (C)
Ni Wi +Nj Wj +
                 +   R1 +R2
                            .


                                                           16
occur, since as soon as at least one group has interest in con‡ict both groups try to impose their
preferred way to …ght it.
    The relevance of the above considerations about the      D   benchmark is that even when the two
groups are equally well o¤ from the past and democracy has already been achieved, a new con‡ict
can erupt because of regional new resources, if R1 jumps su¢ ciently high. Note also that if we start
from a non democratic surplus sharing regime, for example with an , such that         <    <      D   <   s,

the most promising policies to establish peace would be related to fostering development rather
than pushing democracy, as development would result in larger destruction costs of war, and would
thereby make bargaining easier, while democracy would still not secure peace when             >   D   > .
                                                                                          s



2.7    A remark on the comparison with other theories of war

We want to stress that it would not be easy to obtain our equilibrium prediction about the role of
resource concentration and group concentration in a di¤erent model that used one of the standard
frictions discussed in the rationalist explanations of war by Fearon (1995).
    For example, a "preventive" war incentive logic would generate di¤erent predictions: if a region
like region 1 is expected to become increasingly richer in terms of resources, the expectation of future
increase in strength and sharing demands by the minority group associated with that region can
increase the temptation by the ruling group to enact some type or another of preventive repression
or expropriation; however, while these incentives would be complementary to the logic of our model,
the prevalence of preventive war incentives could also work the other way: an increase in R2 could
determine an expectation of future increase in exploitation power by group j in power, increasing
thereby the incentives of group i to rebel in an all-out con‡ict because of the expected increase in
R2 . Thus, while our model unambiguously predicts that the civil war probability increases with
  R1
R1 +R2 ,   preventive war motivations would not distinguish between increases of R1 and R2 , both
potentially leading to greater shadow of the future.
    We will now show that our main theoretical predictions …nd a strong validation in the data.


3     Empirical Analysis

The existing empirical literature on natural resources and civil war has two main weaknesses: First,
it only studies the e¤ects of the total amount of natural resources and not of their geographical dis-
tribution. Second, it studies the impact of natural resource abundance mostly on the country level
rather than on the ethnic group level. On such an aggregate level of analysis there is more unob-
served heterogeneity in the data, and some of our predictions relate to ethnic group characteristics,


                                                  17
which calls for a test on this disaggregated level.
      To address these concerns, we will now perform our own empirical analysis. First, we will use
panel data on the country level and construct our novel oil inequality measure. Based on geo-
referenced petrol …eld and ethnic group location data, we are able to compute a Gini Index of
how unevenly petrol …elds are spread between di¤erent ethnic groups in a given country. Using a
standard speci…cation of control variables and including country …xed e¤ects, we will demonstrate
that petrol unevenness has a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on the likelihood of civil con‡ict.
      Afterwards, we will move to a panel on the ethnic group level. Using a variety of control
variables, as well as country …xed e¤ects / ethnic group …xed e¤ects, it will be shown that indeed
the ethnic groups out of power who are relatively oil rich with respect to the rest of the country
will be signi…cantly more likely to be involved in civil con‡ict. We also …nd that the interaction
terms between oil abundance and group concentration, resp. distance from capital are positive and
signi…cant, pointing out that indeed civil wars are more likely when R1 =(R1 + R2 ) and ps                pc are
both large, as predicted by our theory.


3.1      Empirical Analysis: Country Level

Our goal in this section is to analyze how the unevenness of geographical distribution of petrol
…elds across ethnic groups in a given country impacts on the likelihood of con‡ict. For this purpose
we have put together a panel of 157 countries with sample period 1960-2008, and have constructed
a novel variable, Oil Gini, which we will describe in more detail below. In our regressions we use
–in addition to our main, new variable of interest–the standard battery of control variables, as well
as country …xed e¤ects and annual time dummies. Below we start by describing in some detail the
data.


3.1.1      Data and Speci…cation

Given that our theory focuses on bargaining failure to avoid con‡ict outbreaks, a natural choice of
dependent variable is the onset of civil con‡icts. The source of the civil war data is "UCDP/PRIO
Armed Con‡ict Dataset" (UCDP, 2012), which is the most commonly used standard data source
for civil wars at the country level27 . We focus on the widely used standard de…nition of civil war,
counting a country and year as having a civil war when at least 1000 casualties are recorded in a
given year. Our con‡ict onset variable takes a value of 1 when a new civil war starts, is coded as
missing during wars (where by de…nition a war cannot newly start), and is coded as 0 for peace.
 27
      This dataset has been used, among others, by Besley and Persson (2011) and Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012).



                                                        18
In a robustness check we will also show that our results are robust when focusing on war incidence
as dependent variable (where ongoing wars are also coded as one).28
       To construct our main novel "Oil Gini" measure, we started out from the ethnic group level.
First, we constructed a panel dataset on the ethnic group and year level using the sample of ethnic
groups in the "Geo-referencing of ethnic groups" (GREG) dataset (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman,
2010).29 Relying on maps from the classical "Soviet Atlas Narodov Mira" from 1964 (Bruk and
Apenchenko, 1964), which is still very extensively used for ethnolinguistic fractionalization (ELF)
indices, GREG is a geo-referenced dataset with the coordinates of the group boundaries of 1120
ethnic groups.
       One major advantage of this dataset is that it provides a global coverage of ethnic groups for the
whole world, containing relatively precise information on the geographical location of groups, which
enables us to merge it with other geo-referenced group-level data using Geographical Information
Systems (GIS). In contrast, the main alternative datasets on ethnic groups like the "Minorities
at Risk" data (Minorities at Risk, 2009), the "Ethnologue" (Lewis, 2009), and the lists of ethnic
groups from Alesina et al. (2003), resp. Fearon (2003) lack detailed geographical information on
the location of ethnic groups in all countries.30
       The fact that the GREG data is a non-time varying snapshot from the early 1960s has both
advantages and disadvantages. On the negative side, it implies that in some instances the group
boundaries are not fully accurate in recent decades, although thankfully group borders generally
evolve very slowly over time. The fact that the group border information is not time-varying lowers
accuracy and hence adds noise to our estimations, which biases the magnitude of coe¢ cients and
the signi…cance levels downwards, while there seems to be no other obvious bias of the results.
This means that using GREG will tend to bias the results against us and making them appear less
strong than they are in reality.
       On the positive side, using ethnic group borders from the beginning of our sample –which hence
  28
     The war onset variable relates to the question of what makes wars break out, while the war incidence variable is
designed to capture the total intensity of con‡ict, which is not only driven by factors making wars start, but also by
factors making wars last.
  29
     Throughout the database construction we use the country borders from the time-varying, geo-referenced
"CShapes" dataset (Weidmann, Kuse, and Gleditsch, 2010).
  30
     Very few other datasets on ethnic groups provide geographical information. The "Ethnographic Atlas" (Gray,
1999) includes one longitude and one latitude for each group, but does not provide polygons of the group territories,
which are needed for computing our main new variables. Wucherpfennig et al. (2011) have also put together a dataset
on ethnic groups with location information ("Ethnic Power Relations" (EPR)). They, however, do not include all
ethnic groups, but only those that have been judged as "politically relevant", which could result in endogenous sample
selection if the judgment of group "relevance" is a¤ected by past political outcomes like wars. Controlling for past
wars would not address this issue, as the concern is about the potential bias of the composition of the sample itself,
with peaceful groups being less likely to be viewed as politically relevant, and hence more likely to be omitted from
the sample. If these omitted groups di¤er in key characteristics from the included groups, the beta coe¢ cients in the
regression are biased.



                                                         19
pre-date the con‡ict observations in our regressions– has the advantage to alleviate concerns of
ethnic group locations being endogenous to the wars that we want to explain. Still, there remains
the possibility that past wars and existing oil …elds had some impact on location patterns of ethnic
groups –although such concerns are of course alleviated by the fact that ethnic group homelands
are very stable. To address such remaining concerns we control for past con‡ict in all regressions
and we include additional robustness tables in the appendix showing that our results also hold for
a restricted sample that includes only observations of countries that did not have oil in 1964 when
the "Soviet Atlas Narodov Mira" underlying GREG was put together.
      Using GIS-Software (ArcGIS) we have then merged the GREG data with the geo-referenced
petroleum dataset (PETRODATA) from Lujala, Rod and Thieme (2007), which documents where
oil …elds lie. Given that discovery dates of oil …elds are available, this allowed us to construct a
time-varying map of oil …elds. Combining this information with the ethnic group data we were able
to compute for every country and year the area occupied by a given ethnic group and also the area
occupied by oil …elds lying in the ethnic group’s territory. Using this information, and the standard
formula of the GINI inequality index, we were able to compute a novel, time-varying measure of
the unevenness of oil …eld distribution across ethnic group for a given country and year, which we
call the "Oil Gini " variable.31
      It is important to note the limits of the "Oil Gini " measure. Given that we lack data on the
amounts of oil produced by ethnic groups, and only have data on the territory covered by oil, our
novel "Oil Gini " variable is not a perfect measure of oil unevenness, but rather an imperfect proxy.
However, the statistical noise of this measure does not appear biased in any particular direction.
Hence, we expect our results to be conservative estimates su¤ering from attenuation bias, i.e. which
makes our …ndings to appear weaker that they are in reality.
      We use a standard battery of control variables, which results in a speci…cation that is extremely
close to the core speci…cations run by Fearon and Laitin (2003), Collier and Hoe- er (2004), Mon-
talvo and Reynal-Querol (2005), Cederman and Girardin (2007), Collier and Rohner (2008), and
Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012). Like these papers, we control for natural resource abundance
(i.e., an updated version of Fearon and Laitin’s (2003) "oil exporter" variable), GDP per capita,
democracy, population size, whether a state was recently created, ethnic fractionalization, geogra-
phy (mountainous terrain and noncontiguous states), and peace duration. In robustness checks we
control for alternative war persistence measures (lagged war incidence, the number of war years
in the last …ve year period), and alternative natural resource measures (gold producer, diamond
producer, oil production per capita). All these variables are described in more detail in Appendix
 31
      Note that for countries without oil the "Oil Gini " variable takes a value of 0.


                                                            20
C. To account for omitted variable bias and unobserved heterogeneity we include from column 2
onwards country …xed e¤ects and annual time dummies, and we allow the robust standard errors to
be clustered at the country level. We will as default run linear probability models, which have the
advantage of providing easily interpretable coe¢ cients and allowing for clustered standard errors in
the presence of country …xed e¤ects. We will however show in a robustness check that the results
are robust to using conditional logit.
      To summarize, we estimate the following main speci…cation (corresponding to column 3 of Table
1):


                         W arc;t = Oil_Ginic;t + X0c;t + Yc0 + Z0t + uc;t

      where X0c;t is a vector of time-varying and country-varying control variables, Yc0 is a vector
of country …xed e¤ects, Z0t is a vector of annual time dummies, and uc;t is the error term. The
coe¢ cient of interest is , which our theory predicts to be of positive sign.


3.1.2     Results

In Table 1 we display the results of the country level regressions. In the …rst column we run a
linear probability model with just the battery of standard controls, but without our new "Oil Gini"
measure. For comparability with most papers in the existing literature (e.g. the classic article
of Fearon and Laitin, 2003) we focus on a speci…cation without country and time …xed e¤ects,
where standard errors are left unclustered. Besides the "New State" variable, all other variables
have the expected sign. In line with the existing literature (see e.g. Fearon and Laitin (2003),
Collier and Hoe- er (2004), Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005), Cederman and Girardin (2007),
Collier and Rohner (2008), and Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012)), we …nd that oil abundant,
ethnically fractionalized and very populated states with low GDP per capita and a track record of
past violence are more likely to experience civil war onsets.
      In column 2 we add country …xed e¤ects and annual time dummies, and allow for robust
standard errors to be clustered at the country level, in the goal of addressing omitted variable bias
and unobserved heterogeneity. As noted in the literature (Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Collier and
Hoe- er, 2004; Sambanis, 2004; Collier, Hoe- er and Rohner, 2009) adding country …xed e¤ects
tends to remove the signi…cance of most variables in such civil war regressions. In column 3 we
now add our new "Oil Gini" measure, which has the expected sign and is signi…cant at the 10%
level. Its e¤ect is quantitatively important: Moving a country from full ethnic oil equality to full oil
inequality increases the war risk by 6.6 percentage points, which is more than four-fold the baseline


                                                  21
                                                  Dependent variable: Civil War Onsets
                             (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
Oil Gini                                                0.066*         7.955**       0.098**          0.065*
                                                        (0.035)        (3.912)       (0.045)          (0.035)
Oil exporter (t-1)        0.016**           0.018         0.021        2.774**         0.014            0.019
                           (0.007)        (0.017)       (0.019)        (1.258)       (0.014)          (0.016)
ln GDP p.c.(t-1)          -0.004*          -0.009        -0.006         -0.363         0.001           -0.006
                           (0.002)        (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.589)       (0.014)          (0.009)
Democ. (t-1)                0.000         -0.001*       -0.001*         -0.040        -0.000          -0.001*
                           (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.042)       (0.001)          (0.001)
ln Popul.(t-1)           0.004***           0.005         0.006         -2.449         0.011            0.006
                           (0.001)        (0.010)       (0.011)        (1.974)       (0.014)          (0.011)
New State                -0.014***          0.007         0.008         1.799          0.009            0.009
                           (0.004)        (0.006)       (0.006)        (1.273)       (0.008)          (0.006)
Ethnic Fraction.          0.014**
                           (0.007)
Mountainous Terr.           0.003
                           (0.008)
Noncontig. State            0.006
                           (0.005)
Peace duration           -0.001***        -0.000         -0.000         0.025*                          -0.000
                           (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.014)                        (0.000)
Civ. War Incid. (t-1)                                                                 0.575***
                                                                                       (0.040)
Oil Exp. * Oil Gini                                                                                     0.004
                                                                                                       (0.042)
Model                        OLS            OLS            OLS           Logit           OLS             OLS
Country Fixed Eff.           No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                5289           5417           5180           1093           5421            5180
R-squared                   0.024          0.105          0.112          0.227          0.544           0.112
Notes: Dependent variable: Civil war onset (unless in column 5 where the dependent variable is Conflict
incidence). The dependent variable is coded as 1 if a conflict causing at least 1000 fatalities is starting in a
given year. Sample period: 1960-2008. Number of countries for which observations are available: 157.
From column 2 onwards unreported country fixed effects and annual time dummies are included, and
robust standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the country level (unless in the conditional logit
regression of column 4 where clustering of standard errors is not possible). Significance levels: * p<0.1, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



           Table 1: Country Level Regressions of the E¤ect of Oil Gini on Con‡ict Onsets




                                                    22
risk of 1.5 percentage points.
       In columns 4 and 5 it is shown that the e¤ect of Oil Gini is robust to running logit regressions
instead of OLS and to having "civil war incidence" rather than "civil war onset" as dependent
variable: In both columns, Oil Gini has a positive sign and is signi…cant at the 5 percent level.
       In column 6 we also include an interaction term of Oil Gini and our dummy variable taking a
value of 1 for big oil exporting countries. The coe¢ cient of Oil Gini remains positive and signi…cant,
while the interaction term also has the expected positive sign, but is not statistically signi…cant.
       In Table 3 in Appendix B we provide some additional results. First, columns 1-3 show that Oil
Gini continues to be statistically signi…cant and to have a coe¢ cient of similar magnitude when
we control for an alternative war persistence variable and for other natural resource measures (gold
producer, diamond producer and oil production per capita). In columns 4-6 we re-run the main
regressions of columns 3, 5 and 6 of Table 1, but restricting the sample to observations from countries
that did not have oil in 1964 when the "Atlas Narodov Mira" (Bruk and Apenchenko, 1964) –which
is the primary source for our geo-referenced ethnic group location dataset–was put together. This
restriction of the sample serves the purpose of alleviating concerns that oil abundance could have
a¤ected the location of ethnic groups.
       Even in these very demanding regressions run on a restricted sample our main Oil Gini variable
has the expected sign and is statistically signi…cant. Interestingly, also the interaction term of Oil
Gini with Oil Exporter in column 6 is of the expected positive sign and statistically signi…cant.


3.2      Empirical Analysis: Ethnic Group Level

To test the predictions of our theory on the impact of the relative oil richness of the ethnic groups
on civil war onsets, we have put together a panel dataset on the ethnic group level, covering 1120
ethnic groups and spanning over the period 1960-2006. In particular, we include all ethnic groups
of the "Geo-referencing of ethnic groups" (GREG) dataset (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010),
and construct group level variables that capture closely the expression R1 =(R1 + R2 ) of the model,
as explained above. There is a small number of papers in the literature that study civil war on
the ethnic group level (e.g., Walter, 2006; Cederman, Buhaug and Rod, 2009), but these papers
typically either ignore natural resources or use a natural resource abundance variable at the country-
level, which does not allow to capture unevenness of natural resource distribution.32 Hence, to the
best of our knowledge we are the …rst ones to study civil war using a panel on the ethnic group
  32
     Esteban, Morelli and Rohner (2012) use an ethnic-group level resource abundance measure to study massacres
of civilians, but they do not include in their analysis any variable of a group’s relative natural resource abundance
with respect to the other groups in the country.




                                                         23
level with natural resource variables that vary for di¤erent ethnic groups.
   Looking at this disaggregated level of analysis has several advantages: With more …ne grained
data typically unobserved heterogeneity and omitted variable problems are reduced. Further, study-
ing group level data also allows us to better discriminate between our mechanism and other mech-
anisms. Our theory predicts that con‡icts become more likely to break out if a powerless ethnic
minority group becomes very oil rich. Alternative theories could predict con‡icts to break out
when the governing ethnic group becomes more oil rich. So far, our country level regressions only
established the link between oil unevenness between ethnic groups and civil war onsets. However,
the country level analysis was not able to distinguish between our theory and alternative theories
stressing for example war triggered by oil rich governing groups. In contrast, the current ethnic
group level regressions will be able to distinguish such di¤erent mechanisms, and will be able to
conclude whether the dangerous type of oil unevenness is indeed when powerless groups are oil
abundant, as predicted by our theory.


3.2.1   Data and Speci…cation

The main dependent variable is civil war onset at the group level and is taken from Cederman,
Buhaug and Rod (2009). It varies on the ethnic group and year level and takes a value of 1 when
in a given year a civil war newly starts that involves a given ethnic group. It is coded as missing
for ongoing wars, and as 0 if the ethnic group is not involved in a civil war in a given year.
   Our main independent variable is the surface of an ethnic group’s territory covered with oil
and gas as a percentage of the country’s total surface covered with oil and gas. This proxies
well R1 =(R1 + R2 ). To construct this measure, we used as starting point all ethnic groups in
the "Geo-referencing of ethnic groups" (GREG) dataset (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010),
which allowed us to know the geographical coordinates of where a given ethnic group is located.
Then we merged this with the geo-referenced petroleum dataset (PETRODATA) from Lujala, Rod
and Thieme (2007), which documents where oil …elds lie and when they have been discovered.
Combining this information we were able to compute a variable measuring which part of the
territory occupied by a given ethnic group contains oil. Expressing this in terms of the total
surface containing oil in the country, we obtain a quite precise, time-varying measure of how
relatively petrol-rich the homelands of a given ethnic group are.
   We also include various control variables on the ethnic group level. In particular, we include
two time-varying demographic controls, Group Population / Governing Groups’ Population and
Governing Groups’Population from Cederman, Buhaug and Rod (2009). Note that while the pop-



                                                 24
ulation estimates of each ethnic group are not time varying, the composition of groups controlling
the government is time varying, which makes these measures time-varying. Further, we construct
di¤erent war persistence measures (Group Peace Duration, and lagged Group War Incidence). In
addition, we control for several time-invariant geographical and demographic factors, i.e. Group
Diamond Mines (constructed using raw data from Gilmore et al., 2005), Group co-ethnics abroad
(constructed based on the GREG dataset), Group’s share of mountainous terrain and ln group’s
distance to capital (from Cederman, Buhaug and Rod, 2009), Group’s soil quality (constructed
using the Harmonized World Soil Database from Fischer et al., 2008), Group Population Density
(constructed using the geo-referenced population density data from the Socioeconomic Data and
Applications Center at Columbia University, see Sedac, 2012).
      Further, we also include in two columns interaction terms of our main independent variable
R1 =(R1 + R2 ) with a group concentration measure constructed using raw data from Alesina and
Zhuravskaya (2011), and with a group distance from capital measure (as described above). All
these variables are described in more detail in Appendix C.
      Finally, we also include –but do not report– all country-level control variables included in the
country-level regressions above and annual time dummies. Like in the country-level regressions
above we include robust standard errors allowed to be clustered at the country level. As above, we
also run as main speci…cations linear probability models, but show that the results are robust to
the use of conditional logit estimators.
      To summarize, we estimate the following main speci…cation (corresponding to column 3 of Table
2):


                                              0
                      W are;t = (R1 =R)e;t + We;t + X0c;t + Ye0 + Z0t + ue;t

             0
      where We;t is a vector of time-varying and ethnic group-varying control variables, X0c;t is a
vector of time-varying and country-varying control variables, Ye0 is a vector of ethnic group …xed
e¤ects, Z0t is a vector of annual time dummies, and ue;t is the error term. The coe¢ cient of interest
is , which our theory predicts to be of positive sign.


3.2.2     Results

The focus of our empirical analysis is to assess whether con‡ict indeed becomes more likely when
the group out of power has an ethnic homeland that is abundant in oil, i.e. when R1 =(R1 + R2 ) is
large, as predicted by the theory. Hence, for most of our regressions, namely in the main table 2
and in the …rst four columns of the Appendix Table 4, we will use the sample of all ethnic groups


                                                   25
that are out of power, which corresponds to the largest part of all ethnic groups (i.e. on average
about 83% of all ethnic groups are non-governing groups).33 As discussed in more detail below, in
the columns 5-6 of the Appendix Table 4 we run as a sort of Placebo test the main regressions on
a sample of governing groups.
       In the …rst column of table 2 we regress for a pooled panel our main dependent variable, Civil
War Onsets, on the main independent variable R1 =R (where R                        R1 + R2 ) and on all controls
mentioned above. Our main variable R1 =R has the expected positive sign and is signi…cant at the
5% level. The e¤ect is sizeable: If an initially oil-less ethnic group has after a discovery all the
country’s oil …elds on its territory, the risk of being involved in a civil war onset is increased by 2.7
percentage points, which is about 8-times larger than the relatively small baseline risk for a group
to be involved in a con‡ict onset, which is of 0.3 percentage points.
       About half of the control variables are signi…cant. Larger ethnic groups and groups occupying
valuable soils are more likely to be involved in con‡ict onsets, while groups with a peaceful past
and ethnic groups with co-ethnics in many other countries are less likely to be involved in civil war
onsets.
       In column 2 we run the same speci…cation, but now including country …xed e¤ects. Our main
variable R1 =R remains signi…cant, with a coe¢ cient of similar size. In column 3 we now include
group …xed e¤ects. This is a very demanding speci…cation, as all time-invariant group characteristics
are controlled for by the group …xed e¤ects (which implies that all time-invariant variables drop
from the speci…cation) and the results are purely driven by within-group changes of relative resource
abundance over time. Even in this very demanding speci…cation our main independent variable
R1 =R remains statistically signi…cant (the p-value is 0.053), with now a somewhat larger coe¢ cient.
       In columns 4 and 5 we show that the results of columns 2 and 3 are robust to running conditional
logit estimations with country, respectively group …xed e¤ects, instead of the linear probability
models used before.
       In columns 6 and 7 we run the same regressions like in columns 2 and 3, but with civil war
incidence rather than civil war onsets as dependent variable. While our main variable R1 =R remains
signi…cant in the presence of country …xed e¤ects, it drops below the 10% signi…cance threshold
when group …xed e¤ects are included. This suggest that indeed our theory is better at predicting
the break-outs of wars due to bargaining failure rather than war duration, which also depends on
additional factors.
       Column 8 shows that our main variable R1 =R can also explain the presence of separatist move-
  33
    Concretely, all ethnic groups are included that do not control the government of their country in a given year, i.e.
for which the variable "ethnic group in power" (egip) of Cederman, Buhaug and Rod (2009) takes a value of zero.



                                                          26
ments in a given ethnic group. Given that this variable is ethnic group speci…c, but not time-varying,
we are only able to include country …xed e¤ects, but not group …xed e¤ects.
   Our theory predicts that not only R1 =R will be a main driving factor of bargaining failure to
prevent war, but that also the di¤erence between the winning prospects in secessionist versus in
all-out wars, ps   pc , matters. As shown in Corollary 1, the wedge between ps and pc is typically
larger when a given ethnic group is very concentrated and located far from the capital.
   In column 9 we hence interact our main variable of relative resource abundance, R1 =R, with a
measure of group concentration ranging from 0 to 1, constructed with raw data from Alesina and
Zhuravskaya (2011). While this is the most precise available data for our purpose, it only covers
a subset of our ethnic groups, leading to a drop in the sample size. It is also a time-invariant
variable, meaning that the baseline group concentration variable drops from the speci…cation as
we include group …xed e¤ects, and only its interaction with R1 =R remains in the speci…cation. We
…nd a quantitatively strong e¤ect of the interaction term that is signi…cant at the 1% level, and
also R1 =R and (R1 =R) * Group Concentration are jointly statistically signi…cant at the 1% level.
This highlights that indeed civil con‡ict outbreaks are most likely when R1 =R and ps      pc are both
large, as shown in Corollary 1 and displayed graphically in Figure 1.
   In column 10 we include the interaction of our R1 =R variable with a dummy of above-median
distance from the capital. In line with Corollary 1 we again expect this interaction term to be
positive. Indeed, we …nd a quantitatively large, positive coe¢ cient of this interaction term that is
statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. The variables R1 =R and (R1 =R)* Distance from capital are
jointly signi…cant at the 5% level. These …ndings are consistent with our theory’s prediction that
indeed civil con‡ict outbreaks are most likely when R1 =R and ps      pc are both large.
   The Appendix Table 4 provides additional results. In order to alleviate concerns of oil abundance
a¤ecting ethnic group location, we restrict in columns 1-4 like in some country level regressions the
sample to groups from countries that did not have oil in 1964, which is the year when our primary
ethnic group location data was put together. Column 1 replicates the main regression of column
3 of Table 2 for this restricted sample …nding still a positive coe¢ cient of comparable size that
is signi…cant at the 5% level. Also the regression of column 2 –which mirrors the war incidence
regression of column 7 of Table 2–…nds like before in Table 2 a positive coe¢ cient which however
is not quite statistically signi…cant. Like before in the columns 9-10 of Table 2, we …nd in columns
3-4 that the interaction terms of R1 =R and group concentration, resp. distance from capital are
statistically signi…cant at the 1% level.
   The columns 5-6 re-run the main regressions of columns 2 and 7 of Table 2, but this time for



                                                 27
 Dep. Var.: Civil War         Onsets       Onsets       Onsets       Onsets       Onsets        Incid.       Incid.       Separ.      Onsets       Onsets
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)
 R1 / R                       0.027**      0.022*       0.064*      2.610***      3.189*       0.021*        0.048       0.126*        0.024        -0.061
                              (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.033)      (0.652)      (1.859)      (0.012)      (0.034)      (0.074)      (0.026)      (0.047)
 (R1/R)* Group. Conc.                                                                                                                0.181***
                                                                                                                                      (0.044)
 (R1/R) * Dist.                                                                                                                                   0.169**
                                                                                                                                                   (0.068)
 Gr.Pop./Gov.Pop.(t-1)         0.003*     0.006***     0.012***     0.578***     9.627**      0.007***      0.006**       0.081        0.012      0.012***
                               (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.158)     (4.589)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.050)      (0.010)      (0.002)
 Gov. Pop. (t-1)               -0.000       -0.008       0.004         -1.012      0.921        -0.009       0.007        -0.251       0.042        0.004
                               (0.001)     (0.009)      (0.007)       (2.365)     (3.476)      (0.006)      (0.008)      (0.250)      (0.054)      (0.007)
 Group Peace Duration        -0.001***      -0.001       0.001      -0.062***    0.110***                                              0.001        0.001
                               (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.008)     (0.018)                                             (0.001)      (0.001)
 Group Diamond Mines            0.032        0.029                    5.107*                       0.043                   -0.025
                               (0.032)     (0.031)                    (2.931)                    (0.041)                  (0.124)
 Group Co-Ethnics             -0.001**      -0.000                     -0.014                     -0.000                   -0.011
                               (0.000)     (0.000)                    (0.065)                    (0.000)                  (0.015)
 Group Mount. Terr.             0.002      0.003*                       0.583                      0.002                   0.029
                               (0.002)     (0.002)                    (0.391)                    (0.002)                  (0.048)
 ln Group Dist. Cap.            0.002        0.004                  1.325***                    0.006**                   0.089**
                               (0.001)     (0.002)                    (0.232)                    (0.003)                  (0.039)
 Group Soil Quality            0.005*        0.001                      0.028                     -0.001                   0.074
                               (0.002)     (0.002)                    (0.496)                    (0.002)                  (0.076)
 Group Pop. Dens.               0.009        0.014                   3.058**                       0.023                   0.522
                               (0.012)     (0.012)                    (1.227)                    (0.015)                  (0.399)
 Group War Inc.(t-1)                                                                            0.906*** 0.801***
                                                                                                 (0.014)     (0.030)
 Model                            OLS         OLS           OLS          Logit        Logit         OLS        OLS          OLS           OLS           OLS
 Fixed effects                    No        Cou. FE       Gr. FE        Cou. FE       Gr. FE     Cou. FE      Gr. FE      Cou. FE        Gr. FE       Gr. FE
 Observations                   28549        28594        28594         14799         2013        30164       30164        10282         11828        28594
 R-squared                       0.024       0.049        0.168          0.274        0.376        0.869      0.878        0.873         0.128        0.169
 Notes: Dependent variable: Civil war onsets (unless when specified differently in row 1). Sample period: 1960-2006. Number of non-governing ethnic
 groups for which observations are available: 930. In all columns unreported annual time dummies are included, and robust standard errors are allowed
 to be clustered at the country level (unless in the conditional logit regressions of columns 4-5 where clustering of standard errors is not possible).
 Significance levels: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




   Table 2: Ethnic Group Level Regressions of the E¤ect of Oil Unevenness on Con‡ict Onsets


governing rather than for non-governing groups. According to our theory the expression R2 =R
that captures resource abundance of the governing group should –if anything–decrease the risk of
civil war. We …nd indeed a negative coe¢ cient which is however imprecisely estimated and not
statistically signi…cant. This is unsurprising given the smaller sample size. Still, running such a
regression on a sample of governing groups and …nding a non signi…cant coe¢ cient of interest being
of opposite, negative sign alleviates concerns that our main results could be driven by some other
channel outside our model which mechanically leads to more con‡ict in resource rich groups.




                                                                        28
4    Conclusion

This paper has proposed a simple model to capture how the geographical distribution of natural
resources within a country can a¤ect the risk of civil war of di¤erent types. We have allowed for
uneven resource abundance and two di¤erent forms of con‡ict, secessionist and all-out, and found
that bargaining fails to prevent costly con‡ict if an ethnic minority group is located in a region
that is particularly rich in natural resources (relative to the rest of the country) and if its winning
probability for the case of secessionist con‡ict is substantially larger than for all-out con‡ict. This
leads to the presence of two relevant threat points for war, which cannot be addressed at the same
time by bargaining.
    The new simple theory of bargaining breakdown due to multiple types of civil war is not only
interesting per se, in our opinion, but it is also shown to …t nicely with most existing empirical
…ndings and with the estimations on our newly constructed data sets with detailed geographic
information about ethnic groups and resources.
    The analysis of the conditions under which discovery of new resources in a developing country
can lead to development without con‡icts is still incomplete. This paper has highlighted the
signi…cance of resource concentration and group concentration for civil war, but of course the
elimination of the resource curse in terms of violent incentives also requires checking that inter-
state wars and other forms of violence and discriminations can be avoided. An integrated study of
the role of natural resources for violent incentives of all kinds is left as next step in our research
agenda.


References



Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg
(2003): "Fractionalization", Journal of Economic Growth 8: 155-194.

Alesina, Alberto, Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou (2012): “Ethnic Inequality,”NBER
working paper 18512.

Alesina, Alberto and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2011): "Segregation and the Quality of Government
in a Cross Section of Countries", American Economic Review 101: 1872–1911.




                                                  29
Basedau, Matthias, and Thomas Richter (2011): "Why Do Some Oil Exporters Experience Civil
War But Others Do Not? A Qualitative Comparative Analysis of Net Oil-Exporting Countries",
mimeo, German Institute of Global and Area Studies.

Bell, Curtis, and Scott Wolford (2014): “Oil Discoveries, Shifting Power, and Civil Con‡ict,”
forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly

Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson (2011): "The Logic of Political Violence", Quarterly Journal
of Economics 126: 1411-1445.

Boulding, Kenneth (1962): Con‡ict and defense: A general theory, New York: Harper & Brothers.

Bruk, Solomon, and V. S. Apenchenko (eds) (1964): Atlas narodov mira [Atlas of the Peoples of
the World]. Moscow: Glavnoe Upravlenie Geodezii i Kartogra….

Buhaug, Halvard, Scott Gates, and Päivi Lujala (2009): “Geography, Rebel Capability, and the
Duration of Civil Con‡ict,” Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 53: 544-69.

Caselli, Francesco and Wilbur John Coleman II (2013): “On the Theory of Ethnic Con‡ict,”Journal
of the European Economic Association 11: 161-192.

Caselli, Francesco, Massimo Morelli, and Dominic Rohner (2013): “The Geography of Inter State
Resource Wars,” NBER working paper no. 18978.

Cederman, Lars-Erik, Halvard Buhaug and Jan Ketil Rod (2009): “Ethno-Nationalist Dyads and
Civil War : A GIS-Based Analysis,” Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 53: 496-525.

Cederman, Lars-Erik and Luc Girardin (2007): “Beyond Fractionalization: Mapping Ethnicity
onto Nationalist Insurgencies,” American Political Science Review 101: 173-85.

Collier, Paul and Anke Hoe- er (2004): "Greed and Grievance in Civil War", Oxford Economic
Papers 56: 563-95.

Collier, Paul, Anke Hoe- er, and Dominic Rohner (2009): "Beyond Greed and Grievance: Feasi-
bility and Civil War", Oxford Economic Papers 61: 1-27.

Collier, Paul and Dominic Rohner (2008): "Democracy, Development, and Con‡ict", Journal of
the European Economic Association 6: 531-40.

Cotet, Anca M., and Kevin K. Tsui (2013): “Oil and Con‡ict: What Does the Cross Country
Evidence Really Show?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5: 49-80.


                                                 30
Dube, Oendrila, and Juan Vargas (2013): "Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Con‡ict: Evidence
from Colombia", Review of Economics Studies 80: 1384–1421.

Esteban, Joan, Laura Mayoral, and Debraj Ray (2012): “Ethnicity and Con‡ict: An Empirical
Investigation,” American Economic Review 102: 1310-1342.

Esteban, Joan, Massimo Morelli, and Dominic Rohner (2012): “Strategic Mass Killings,” mimeo,
IAE, Columbia University, and University of Zurich.

Esteban, Joan and Debraj Ray (2011): "A Model of Ethnic Con‡ict", Journal of the European
Economic Association 9: 496–521.

Fearon, James (1995): “Rationalist Explanations for War,”International Organization 49: 379-414.

Fearon, James (2003): "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country", Journal of Economic Growth
8: 195-222.

Fearon, James (2004): "Why Do Some Civil Wars Last So Much Longer than Others?" Journal of
Peace Research 41: 275-301.

Fearon, James (2005): “Primary Commodity Exports and Civil War,” Journal of Con‡ict Resolu-
tion 49: 483-507.

Fearon, James and David Laitin (2003): “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,”American Political
Science Review 97: 75-90.

Fischer, Guenther, Freddy Nachtergaele, Sylvia Prieler, Harrij van Velthuizen, Luc Verelst, and
David Wiberg (2008): Global Agro-ecological Zones Assessment for Agriculture. IIASA, Laxenburg,
Austria and FAO, Rome, Italy.

Gates, Scott (2002): "Recruitment and Allegiance: The Microfoundations of Rebellion", Journal
of Con‡ict Resolution 46: 111-30.

Gilmore, Elisabeth, Nils Petter Gleditsch, Päivi Lujala, and Jan Ketil Rod (2005): “Con‡ict Dia-
monds: A New Dataset”, Con‡ict Management and Peace Science 22: 257–292.

Gray, J. Patrick (1999): "A Corrected Ethnographic Atlas", World Cultures 10: 24-85.

Grossman, Herschel and Juan Mendoza (2003): “Scarcity and appropriative competition,” Euro-
pean Journal of Political Economy 19: 747-58.



                                                31
Gurr, Ted (2000): Peoples Versus States: Minorities at Risk in the New Century, Washington DC:
U.S. Institute of Peace Press

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten (2011): "Penn World Table Version 7.0", dataset,
Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Penn-
sylvania, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/.

Hodler, Roland (2006): “The curse of natural resources in fractionalized countries,” European
Economic Review 50: 1367-86.

Horowitz, Donald L. (1985): Ethnic Groups in Con‡ict, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Huber, John and Laura Mayoral (2013): “Civil Con‡ict and Three Dimensions of Ethnic Inequal-
ity”, mimeo, Columbia University.

Humphreys, Macartan (2005): “Natural Resources, Con‡ict, and Con‡ict Resolution: Uncovering
the Mechanisms,” Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 49: 508-37.

Jackson, Matthew O. and Massimo Morelli (2007): “Political Bias and War,” American Economic
Review 97: 1353-73.

Jackson, Matthew O. and Massimo Morelli (2011): “The Reasons for War, An Updated Survey,”
in Handbook on the Political Economy of War, edited by Chris Coyne, Cheltenham UK: Edward
Elgar Publishing.

Jervis, Robert (1978): “Cooperation under the Security Dilemma,” World Politics 30: 188-189.

Killicoat, Philip (2007): "Weaponomics: The Global Market for Assault Ri‡es," World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 4202, Washington DC: World Bank.

Koenig, Michael, Dominic Rohner, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2014): "Networks
in Con‡ict: Theory and Evidence from Ethnic War in Africa", mimeo, University of Zurich and
University of Lausanne.

Le Billon, Philippe (2001): “The political ecology of war: natural resources and armed con‡icts,”
Political Geography 20: 561-584.

Lei, Yu-Hsiang, and Guy Michaels (2011): “Do Giant Oil Field Discoveries Fuel Internal Armed
Con‡icts?”, mimeo, LSE.

Levy, Jack (1987): “Declining Power and the Preventive Motivation for War,” World Politics 40:
90-92.

                                               32
Lewis, M. Paul (ed.) (2009): Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Sixteenth edition), Dallas,
Texas: SIL International.

Lujala, Päivi (2010): “The Spoils of Nature: Armed Civil Con‡ict and Rebel Access to Natural
Resources,” Journal of Peace Research 47: 15-28.

Lujala, Päivi, Jan Ketil Rod and Nadja Thieme (2007): “Fighting over Oil: Introducing a New
Dataset", Con‡ict Management and Peace Science 24: 239-56.

Lujala, Päivi, Nils Petter Gleditsch and Elisabeth Gilmore (2005): “A Diamond Curse? Civil War
and a Lootable Resource,” Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 49: 538-62.

Martinez, Luis (2013): "Where are the rebels? On the geography of con‡ict and transnational
insurgents" mimeo, LSE.

Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti (2004): "Economic Shocks and Civil
Con‡ict: An Instrumental Variables Approach", Journal of Political Economy 112: 725-53.

Minorities at Risk (2009): Dataset, www.cidcm.umd.edu/mar.

Montalvo, José and Marta Reynal-Querol (2005): “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Con‡ict, and
Civil Wars,” American Economic Review 95: 796-815.

Morelli, Massimo, and Dominic Rohner (2010): “Natural Resource Distribution and Multiple Forms
of Civil War,” IEW Working Paper 498, Department of Economics, University of Zurich.

Morelli, Massimo and Costantino Pischedda (2014): “The Turkey-KRG Energy Partnership: As-
sessing Its Implications”, Middle East Policy 21(1).

Ploeg, Frederick van der and Dominic Rohner (2012): “War and Natural Resource Exploitation,”
European Economic Review 56: 1714-1729.

Polity   IV,   2012,     "Political   Regime    Characteristics   and   Transitions",   dataset,
www.systemicpeace.org/polity4.

Powell, Robert (1996): “Uncertainty, Shifting Power, and Appeasement”, American Political Sci-
ence Review 90: 749-764.

Powell, Robert (2006): “War as a Commitment Problem,”International Organization 60: 169-203.

Powell, Robert (2013): “Monopolizing Violence and Consolidating Power,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 128: 807-859.

                                                33
Reiter, Dan (1995): “Exploding the Powder Keg Myth: Preemptive Wars Almost Never Happen,”
International Security 20: 5-34.

Reuveny, Rafael and John Maxwell (2001): “Con‡ict and Renewable Resources,” Journal of Con-
‡ict Resolution 45: 719-42.

Reynal-Querol, Marta (2002): “Ethnicity, Political Systems, and Civil Wars,” Journal of Con‡ict
Resolution 46: 29-54.

Rogall, Thorsten (2013): "The Escalation of Violence: Armed Groups and Civilian Perpetrators",
mimeo, IIES Stockhom.

Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2013): “War Signals: A Theory of
Trade, Trust and Con‡ict,” Review of Economic Studies 80: 1114-1147.

Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2013b): "Seeds of Distrust: Con‡ict in
Uganda", Journal of Economic Growth 18: 217-252.

Ross, Michael (2004): “What Do We Know About Natural Resources and Civil War?” Journal of
Peace Research 41: 337-56.

Ross, Michael (2004b): “How Do Natural Resources In‡uence Civil War? Evidence from Thirteen
Cases,” International Organization 58: 35-67.

Saideman, Stephen, David Lanoue, Michael Campenni, and Samuel Stanton (2002): “Democra-
tization, Political Institutions, and Ethnic Con‡ict: A Pooled Time-Series Analysis, 1985-1998,”
Comparative Political Studies 35: 103-29.

Salehyan, Idean (2007): "Transnational Rebels: Neighboring States as Sanctuary for Rebel
Groups", World Politics 59: 217-242.

Sambanis, Nicholas (2004): “Poverty and the Organization of Political Violence: A Review and
Some Conjectures,” in Carol Graham and Susan Collins (eds.), Brookings Trade Forum: 2004:
Globalization, Poverty, and Inequality, Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Schelling, Thomas C. (1966): Arms and In‡uence, New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

Sedac (2012): “Geo-referenced population density data,”Dataset, Socioeconomic Data and Appli-
cations Center (Sedac), Columbia University, http://sedac.ciesin.org/.

Snyder, Jack (1984): “Civil-Military Relations and the Cult of the O¤ensive, 1914 and 1984,”
International Security 9: 108- 146.

                                                34
Taylor, A.J.P. (1954): The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848 to 1918, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

UCDP (2012): “UCDP/PRIO Armed Con‡ict Dataset,” dataset, www.pcr.uu.se/research/ucdp.

Vanden Eynde, Oliver (2011): "Targets of Violence: Evidence from India’s Naxalite Con‡ict",
mimeo, Paris School of Economics.

Walter, Barbara (2006): “Information, Uncertainty, and the Decision to Secede,” International
Organization 60: 105-35.

Walter, Barbara (2006b): “Building Reputation: Why Governments Fight Some Separatists but
Not Others, ” American Journal of Political Science 50: 313-30.

Weidmann, Nils, Doreen Kuse, and Kristian Skrede Gleditsch (2010): “The Geography of the
International System: The CShapes Dataset,” International Interactions 36: 86-106.

Weidmann, Nils, Jan Ketil Rod, and Lars-Erik Cederman (2010): “Representing Ethnic Groups in
Space: A New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research 47: 491-499

World         Bank         (2010):               “Adjusted          Net   Savings     Database”,        Dataset,
http://go.worldbank.org/3AWKN2ZOY0.

World            Bank          (2012):                “World         Development      Indicators,”      Dataset,
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator.

Wucherpfennig, Julian, Nils Weidmann, Luc Girardin, Lars-Erik Cederman, and Andreas Wim-
mer (2011): "Politically relevant ethnic groups across space and time: Introducing the GeoEPR
dataset", Con‡ict Management and Peace Science 28: 423-437.


Appendix A: Characterization of equilibrium
                                         d (C)
De…ne the threshold               pc + R1j+R2 as an upper bound of government concessions that would still
make group j prefer peace to all-out con‡ict. Group i weakly prefers peace to all-out con‡ict if
                     di (C)
       c     pc     R1 +R2 .   Note that    c    <   always holds. Hence if only all-out con‡ict were considered
as a possibility, there would be an obvious Pareto frontier of intermediate values of              between these
two that would avoid war if the two players could bargain about .
     Considering that another type of con‡ict is possible; group i weakly prefers peace to secessionist
                                          di (S)
con‡ict if           s    ps R1R+R
                                 1
                                   2     R1 +R2 .    We restrict attention to the most interesting setting where

 c   > 0,    s    > 0. There are three cases to consider (recall that =probability that group j can


                                                               35
impose all-out war in the face of a secessionist rebellion). In terms of notation, (x; y) means that i
plays x and j plays y.
   Note …rst that this game features multiple equilibria. In particular, a bad equilibrium with
con‡ict always exists. This is intuitive, as it takes two for peace, and hence if a given player plays c
or s, then the opponent can never achieve peace, hence either (c; c) or (s; c) is always an equilibrium.
   Below, we will characterize the best SPE that can be sustained.
   Case 1 (         >    c   >           s   > 0):
   The only two possible rent-sharing choices have the following consequences:                                                  = 0 ) (c; fp; cg),
  =   c   ) (p; p).


                                                         j
                                                 E(          ( = 0)) = (1                pc )(R1 + R2 )     dj (C);



                                 j
                      E(             ( =          c ))   = (1              c )(R1      + R2 ) = (1     pc )(R1 + R2 ) + di (C):

   Group j would always select                                    =       c,   followed by peace in the best SPE.
                                                                      j         j
   Case 2a (         >       s       >       c   > 0 and              S   >     C   (which can happen when dj (S) << dj (C))):
   The only two possible rent-sharing choices have the following consequences:                                                     = 0 ) (s; p),
  =   s   ) (p; p).


                                                             j
                                                  E(             ( = 0)) = (1             ps )R1 + R2      dj (S);



                                     j
                        E(               ( =       s ))      = (1              s )(R1   + R2 ) = (1     ps )R1 + R2 + di (S):

   Group j would always select                                    =       s,   followed by peace in the best SPE.
                                                                      j         j
   Case 2b (         >       s   >           c   > 0 and              S   <     C ):

   The only two possible rent-sharing choices have the following consequences:                                                      = 0 ) (s; c),
  =   s   ) (p; p).



               j
          E(       ( = 0)) = [(1                         pc )(R1 + R2 )                 dj (C)] + (1      ) [(1   ps )R1 + R2     dj (S)] ;



                                     j
                        E(               ( =       s ))      = (1              s )(R1   + R2 ) = (1     ps )R1 + R2 + di (S):




                                                                                        36
    Group j will select          =     s   i¤ the following condition holds (and            = 0 otherwise):


                 [(1       pc )(R1 + R2 )       dj (C)     (1    ps )R1   R2 + dj (S)] < di (S) + dj (S):

    This always holds when                 is small. It is again possible in this case to have a peaceful outcome
as best SPE.
                                                  j       j
    Case 3a (     s    >    >    c   > 0 and      S   >   C ):

    The only two possible rent-sharing choices have the following consequences:                             = 0 ) (s; p),
  =   s   ) (s; p). Hence, group j will be indi¤erent between                    = 0 and      =   s.   In case 3a for both
  = 0 or     =    s    there will always be secessionist con‡ict.
                                                  j       j
    Case 3b (     s   >     >   c    > 0 and      S   <   C ):

    The only two possible rent-sharing choices have the following consequences:                             = 0 ) (s; c),
  =   s   ) (s; c). Hence, group j is indi¤erent between selecting                  =   s   or    = 0, which both result
in the same outcome. There will always be con‡ict in case 3b (in particular, with probability
there will be all-out con‡ict, while with probability (1                   ) there will be secessionist con‡ict).
    To sum up, in the third case (cases 3a and 3b), where                   s   > , even in the best SPE no surplus
sharing can avoid con‡ict.


Appendix B: Additional Regression Tables

The Tables 3 and 4 display –as discussed in the main text– additional regressions at the country,
resp. ethnic group level.


Appendix C: Data

This appendix describes the data used in section 3. Table 5 provides the descriptive summary
statistics for all variables.


Country Level Variables

The dependent variables, civil war onset and incidence, and the main independent variable, Oil
Gini, have been described above in the main text. In what follows we describe the control variables.
    Oil exporter: Dummy variable taking a value of 1 if in a given country and year the fuel exports
(in % of merchandise exports) is above 33%. Variable from Fearon and Laitin (2003), but updated
with recent data of the variable "fuel exports (in % of merchandise exports)" from World Bank
(2012).

                                                                 37
                                                 Dependent variable: Civil War Onsets
                              (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)                (6)
Oil Gini                   0.069*        0.107**       0.067*          0.092*       0.155**            0.083*
                           (0.037)       (0.053)       (0.037)         (0.053)      (0.067)            (0.049)
Oil exporter (t-1)          0.020          0.033                        0.029         0.017             -0.008
                           (0.019)       (0.021)                       (0.044)      (0.026)            (0.009)
ln GDP p.c.(t-1)            -0.004         0.000       -0.017*          -0.005       -0.006             -0.009
                           (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.010)         (0.018)      (0.029)            (0.019)
Democ. (t-1)                -0.001        -0.001        -0.001       -0.002***       -0.001          -0.002***
                           (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.001)            (0.001)
ln Popul.(t-1)              0.008          0.011         0.021          0.004        -0.007             -0.007
                           (0.012)       (0.016)       (0.015)         (0.026)      (0.028)            (0.024)
New State                   0.011          0.000       0.014*           -0.003        0.011             -0.002
                           (0.008)       (0.006)       (0.007)         (0.013)      (0.013)            (0.013)
War yrs. last 5y.          0.017*
                           (0.009)
Gold Producer                             -0.024
                                          (0.020)
Diamond Producer                          -0.039
                                          (0.027)
Peace duration                            -0.000         -0.000         -0.001                         -0.001
                                          (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)                        (0.001)
Oil Prod. pc. (t-1)                                       0.034
                                                         (0.029)
Civ. War Incid. (t-1)                                                                 0.556***
                                                                                       (0.051)
Oil Exp. * Oil Gini                                                                                  1.394***
                                                                                                       (0.071)
Sample                                 All countries                      All countries without oil in 1964
Model                        OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS             OLS
Country Fixed Eff.           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                4949            4017          4204           1918           2035            1918
R-squared                   0.117          0.137          0.125          0.125          0.521           0.141

Notes: Dependent variable: Civil war onset (unless in column 5 where the dependent variable is Conflict
incidence). The dependent variable is coded as 1 if a conflict causing at least 1000 fatalities is starting in a
given year. Sample period: 1960-2008. Number of countries for which observations are available: 157. In
all columns unreported country fixed effects and annual time dummies are included, and robust standard
errors are allowed to be clustered at the country level. Significance levels: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



 Table 3: Additional Country Level Regressions of the E¤ect of Oil Gini on Con‡ict Onsets



                                                    38
  Dep. Var.: Civil War        Onsets         Incid.      Onsets        Onsets       Onsets        Incid.
                                 (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
  R1 / R                      0.096**        0.041        0.032         -0.035       -0.004      -0.019
                              (0.044)       (0.034)      (0.023)       (0.026)      (0.008)      (0.014)
  (R1/R)* Group. Conc.                                  0.184***
                                                         (0.027)
  (R1/R) * Dist.                                                      0.173**
                                                                      (0.066)
  Gr.Pop./Gov.Pop.(t-1)         0.010        0.004        0.015        0.010         -0.021     -0.052***
                               (0.008)      (0.006)      (0.013)      (0.008)       (0.014)       (0.010)
  Gov. Pop. (t-1)              -0.006        0.049        0.067        -0.006        -0.038     -0.118***
                               (0.017)      (0.056)      (0.067)      (0.017)       (0.023)       (0.041)
  Group Peace Duration          0.002                    0.003**       0.002         0.000
                               (0.001)                   (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
  Group War Inc.(t-1)                     0.845***                                             0.722***
                                           (0.032)                                              (0.064)
  Sample                      Non-gov. groups in countries without oil in 1964       Governing groups
  Model                         OLS          OLS          OLS            OLS          OLS         OLS
  Group fixed effects           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
  Observations                 9616         10533        3431           9616         8383        8538
  R-squared                    0.203        0.898        0.227          0.204        0.175       0.794
  Notes: Dependent variable: Civil war onsets (unless when specified differently in row 1). Sample period:
  1960-2006. Number of ethnic groups for which observations are available: max. 317 for columns 1-4;
  273 for columns 5-6 . In all columns unreported group fixed effects and annual time dummies are
  included, and robust standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the country level. Significance
  levels: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



Table 4: Additional Ethnic Group Level Regressions of the E¤ect of Oil Unevenness on Con‡ict
Onsets




                                                  39
   ln GDP per capita: PPP adjusted GDP per capita at constant prices. From the Penn World
Tables (Heston, Summers, and Aten, 2011).
   Democracy: Polity scores ranging from -10 (strongly autocratic) to +10 (strongly democratic).
From Polity IV (2012).
   ln Population: Total population. From World Bank (2012).
   New State: Coded as 1 when a state was created in the previous 10 years, coded as 0 otherwise.
   Ethnic Fractionalization: Index of ethnic fractionalization. From Fearon and Laitin (2003).
   Mountainous Terrain: Percentage of territory covered by mountains. From Collier, Hoe- er
and Rohner (2009).
   Noncontiguous State: Dummy taking a value of 1 if a state has noncontiguous territory. From
Fearon and Laitin (2003).
   Peace duration: Years since last civil war incidence.
   Con‡ict Incidence (t-1): First lag of the civil war incidence variable.
   War years during last 5 years: Count of how many civil war incidence years during last 5 years,
ranging from 0 to 5.
   Gold Production Dummy: Takes a value of 1 when there is gold production in a country year,
and 0 otherwise. From World Bank (2010).
   Diamonds production dummy: Takes a value of 1 when there is diamond production in a country
year, and 0 otherwise. From Lujala, Gleditsch, and Gilmore (2005).
   Oil production per capita: Average amount per capita of oil extracted per day in a given year,
measured in millions of barrels per day. From Humphreys (2005).
   Oil exporter * Oil Gini: Interaction term of the variables Oil exporter and Oil Gini de…ned
above.


4.1      Group Level Variables

The two main dependent variables, civil war onset and incidence at the group level, and the main
independent variable, R1 =R, have been described above in the main text. In what follows we
describe the third dependent variable and all control variables.
   Separatism: Dummy taking a value of 1 when the variable Sepx from Minorities at Risk (2009)
takes a value of 2 or above.
   Group Population / Governing Groups’Population: From Cederman, Buhaug and Rod (2009).
Note that the population estimates of each ethnic group are not time-varying, but that the com-
position of groups controlling the government is time varying, which makes this measure time



                                                40
varying.
   Governing Groups’ Population: In 100 Millions. From Cederman, Buhaug and Rod (2009).
The population estimates of each ethnic group are not time-varying, but that the composition of
groups controlling the government is time varying, which makes this measure time varying.
   Group Peace Duration: Years since last civil war incidence involving the given ethnic group.
   Group Diamond Mines: Total number of diamond mines on the group territory (re-scaled in
100 mines). Constructed with GIS based on the group boundaries from the “Geo-referencing of
ethnic groups” (GREG) dataset (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010) and the geo-referenced
DIADATA dataset on the location of diamonds (from Gilmore et al., 2005).
   Group co-ethnics abroad : Number of countries in which the same ethnic group also exists.
Computed with GIS based on the group boundaries from the “Geo-referencing of ethnic groups”
(GREG) dataset (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010).
   Group’s share of mountainous terrain: From Cederman, Buhaug and Rod (2009).
   ln group’s distance to capital: From Cederman, Buhaug and Rod (2009).
   Group’s soil quality: Part of the group’s territory with high-quality fertile soil. Constructed
based on the Harmonized World Soil Database (Fischer et al., 2008). Their complete global grid of
nutrient availability is ranked from 1 (“no or slight constraints”) to 4 (“very severe constraints”),
and also including categories 5 (“mainly non-soil”), 6 (“permafrost area”) and 7 (“water bodies”).
Our dummy takes a value of 1 for categories 1 and 2, categories 3 to 6 get value 0, and category 7
is set to missing.
   Group Population Density: Average population density, re-scaled in 1000, constructed with GIS
based on the on the group boundaries from the “Geo-referencing of ethnic groups”(GREG) dataset
(Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010) and the geo-referenced population density data from the
Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center at Columbia University (Sedac, 2012).
   Group War Incidence (t-1): First lag of the group level civil war incidence variable.
   (R1/R) * Group Concentration: Interaction term between the (R1/R) variable and the following
group concentration measure. The group concentration variable corresponds to the ratio of the
"ethnic group’s population living in areas where this ethnic group is the largest group" divided by
the "total population of an ethnic group" in a given country. This time-invariant variable has been
constructed using raw data from Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011).
   (R1/R) * Distance: Interaction term between the (R1/R) variable and a dummy variable taking
a value of 1 if the value of the group distance from capital variable described above is larger than
its median.



                                                 41
Country Level Variables           Obs        Avg         Sd       Min      Max
Conflict Onset                   8071      0.015      0.123         0         1
Conflict Incidence               8494      0.050      0.219         0         1
Oil Gini                         7983      0.167      0.258         0     0.977
Oil Exp. * Oil Gini              7464      0.038      0.145         0     0.888
Oil exporter (t-1)               7775      0.139      0.346         0         1
Gold Producer                    6277      0.389      0.488         0         1
Diamond Producer                 7921      0.186      0.389         0         1
Oil Prod. pc. (t-1)              5237      0.045      0.270         0     4.923
ln GDP p.c.(t-1)                 7074      8.249      1.287     4.767    11.722
Democ. (t-1)                     7662          0      7.666       -10        10
ln Popul.(t-1)                   7059     15.747      1.680    11.578    21.000
New State                        8494      0.126      0.332         0         1
Ethnic Fraction.                 7921      0.392      0.284     0.001     0.925
Mountainous Terr.                7559      0.176      0.209         0     0.943
Noncontig. State                 7921      0.169      0.375         0         1
Peace duration                   8428     29.452     18.781         0        62
Conflict Incid. (t-1)            8428      0.050      0.218         0         1
Conflict yrs. last 5y.           7613      0.257      0.920         0         5


Group Level Variables             Obs        Avg         Sd        Min     Max
Group Conflict Onset            63869      0.003      0.059          0        1
Group Conflict Incid.           65934      0.035      0.183          0        1
Group Separatism                19313      0.336      0.472          0        1
R1 / R                          69596      0.065      0.210          0        1
(R1/R)* Group. Conc.            28987      0.059      0.210          0        1
(R1/R) * Dist.                  65934      0.018      0.102          0        1
Gr.Pop./Gov.Pop.(t-1)           55884      0.165      0.441   7.80E-08    8.918
Gov. Pop. (t-1)                 55884      0.686      1.564      0.001    8.673
Group Peace Duration            63869     25.610     16.330          0       59
Group Diamond Mines             69596      0.006      0.061          0    1.790
Group Co-Ethnics                69596      2.781      2.329          1       15
Group Mount. Terr.              65934      0.369      0.352          0        1
ln Group Dist. Cap.             65934      6.154      1.090      1.609    8.782
Group Soil Quality              69596      0.699      0.333          0        1
Group Pop. Dens.                69596      0.069      0.153          0    4.354
Group Conflict Inc.(t-1)        65880      0.035      0.183          0        1



                           Table 5: Descriptive Statistics



                                         42
