NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN CONSUMERS DO NOT MAKE AN ACTIVE DECISION:
DYNAMIC DEFAULT RULES AND THEIR EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS
Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
Working Paper 20127
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20127
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

Portions of this paper were previous circulated as part of "Market Design when Firms Interact with
Inertial Consumers: Evidence from Medicare Part D". I thank Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Stefano
DellaVigna, Drew Fudenberg, Andreas Fuster, Larry Katz, David Laibson, Michael Grubb, Oliver
Hart, Jim Rebitzer, Michael Salinger, Amanda Starc, and participants at the 2013 European Behavioral
Economics Meeting for their thoughtful comments. I thank the Williams College Tyng Committee
and the National Science Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Keith M. Marzilli Ericson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

When Consumers Do Not Make an Active Decision: Dynamic Default Rules and their Equilibrium
Effects
Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
NBER Working Paper No. 20127
May 2014
JEL No. D01,D02,D03,D04,D81,D86,H23,L1
ABSTRACT
Dynamic defaults for recurring purchases determine what happens to consumers enrolled in a product
or service who take no action at a decision point. Consumers may face automatic renewal, automatic
switching, or non-purchase defaults. Privately optimal dynamic defaults depend on the contributions
of adjustment costs versus psychological factors leading to inaction: both produce inertia under renewal
defaults, but differ under non-renewal defaults. Defaults have equilibrium effects on pricing by changing
the elasticity of repeat demand. Socially optimal defaults depend on firms' pricing responses as well;
more elastic repeat demand restrains price increases on repeat customers and can reduce inefficient
switching.
Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu

1

Introduction

Defaults determine what happen to consumers who do not actively express a preference.
This paper examines a previously unstudied category of default — "dynamic defaults" for
recurring purchases of products or services. Products purchased on a flow or subscription
basis are ubiquitous, and such products have dynamic defaults: defaults that determine
whether a consumer who previously purchased the product will continue to purchase the
product if they do not make an active decision. This paper shows how these defaults affect
firm behavior and how they can be optimally set.
This paper provides a model to describe consumer behavior under dynamic defaults,
and shows how optimal dynamic defaults depend on both the source of individual inertia
and on how firms respond to them. It is well known that one-time assignment default rules
can have powerful effects on individual behavior in many contexts, from retirement savings
behavior (Madrian and Shea 2001; Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick 2004; Goda and
Manchester 2013) to organ donation (Johnson and Goldstein 2003; Abadie and Gay 2004).
Yet defaults do not merely affect individual behavior: they also have equilibrium effects.
This paper is the first to examine optimal defaults in markets where firms strategically
interact with individuals.1 The model shows how defaults have externalities, as the defaults
consumers would choose for themselves do not necessarily correspond to the socially optimal
default. Hence, market designers may desire to intervene and set market-wide defaults,
such as employers administering retirement funds, health insurance exchanges, and utility
regulators offering consumer choice of electricity prices.
Policy-makers have attempted to determine how dynamic defaults can best be set, but
they have lacked an analytic framework to guide their choice, as the economics literature has
not examined dynamic defaults for recurring purchases of products or services. Consider the
Medicare Part D prescription drug insurance market, a large and controversial program that
is also a model for other health insurance exchanges.2 Prices for insurance plans vary from
year to year, and individuals can switch between plans each year. Policy-makers debated3
which dynamic default should apply to low-income individuals: should they be automatically
renewed in their current plan, or automatically switched to a similar, cheaper plan? They
1

Note that one-time assignment default rules can have equilibrium effects as well, as they can change the
price elasticity of demand that firms face.
2
Medicare Part D provides prescription drug insurance for the elderly. In contrast to traditional Medicare,
it relies on a competitive market of firms that offer prescription drug insurance plans. It receives government
subsidies of about $40 billion annually and covers over 24 million people. For more detail on the program in
general, see Duggan, Healy, and Scott Morton (2008). For more detail on its defaults, inertia, the low-income
subsidy program, see Ericson (2014a).
3
See e.g. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2009); Summer, Hoadley and Hargrave (2010).

1

were concerned that low-income individuals would be inattentive, and be exploited by firms
raising prices on them in later years. Automatic switching has potential benefits to enrollees
— those who are switched save money — but could also be harmful if enrollees faced costs
of switching plans, such as missed prescriptions. Ultimately, these low-income enrollees
were given an automatic switching default: if their plan raised its price above a benchmark
threshold, they had to actively send in a form to reenroll in their current plan, or else they
would be automatically switched to one of the cheapest plans in the market. In contrast,
higher-income enrollees received an automatic renewal default, in which they stayed in their
plan unless they actively chose otherwise.4
Products purchased on a flow or subscription basis are prevalent in core sectors of the
economy, including healthcare (insurance, prescription drug refills), finance (banking and
investment services, credit cards, auto and life insurance), energy (electricity and natural
gas), telecommunications (cell phones, cable, internet), software (consumers and firms can
subscribe to cloud-based software applications such as Microsoft Office and Adobe Creative
Suite), and consumer products (for instance, online retailer Amazon.com has a program
in which consumers can subscribe to period deliveries of various items, such as food or
batteries).
In each case, consumers enroll in a product or service at a specified price. However, these
markets do not typically feature long-term price commitment, so firms can later update their
prices. Consumers can then either actively switch to a different product/service (or to no
product), actively choose to stay with their current product/service, or simply do nothing.
For instance, consumers can choose to renew their current health insurance plan or switch
plans during the annual open enrollment period. Banks and credit card companies alter fee
structure and contracts, and consumers could actively affirm their acceptance of the new
terms or switch to a competing firm. However, consumers often simply take no action.
Dynamic defaults determine what happens to consumers who previously purchased a
product or service if they take no action at a decision point. In many cases, customers who
do nothing are automatically renewed with their current service provider, regardless of the
provider’s new price. Such automatic renewal defaults can make repeat demand less price
elastic, and thereby enable firms to raise prices on consumers who face high adjustment costs
or who are inattentive. This leads to inefficient churning of consumers between products, as
they switch to get a better deal. In other contexts, consumers face non-renewal defaults that
would require them to make an active decision to continue purchasing their current product
4

The Massachusetts Group Insurance Commission (health insurance for state employees) provides another
example of a dynamic switching default: in 2011, individuals who did not make an active choice were by
default automatically switched to the cheapest plan unless they made an active choice.

2

or service if the firm has raised prices. Under an automatic switching default, failure to act
leads consumers to be switched to an alternative product if their current provider has raised
prices (e.g. a cheaper electricity supplier); under a non-purchase default, consumers receive
no product at all if they do not act (e.g. not renewing a magazine subscription).
Dynamic defaults matter because individuals display inertia — they tend to avoid making
an active decision and are likely to stick with past choices, even though they would make a
different choice if they were choosing for the first time. Often the failure of individuals to
switch products to take advantage of cheaper alternatives has been interpreted as switching
costs or adjustment costs (e.g. Greenstein’s (1993) study of computer systems; Chetty et
al. (2011) on labor supply). Adjustment costs are prevalent and impact behavior in many
domains. Yet the literature also shows substantial inertial behavior even when the costs of
switching seem much smaller than gains. In employer-provided health insurance, Handel
(2013) examined choice following a large price change and finds that individuals may have
forgone gains of approximately $2000 that year to stay in their current plan, even though the
alternative option was offered by the same firm, had identical networks, and could be switched
to by mailing in a simple form.5 Madrian and Shea (2001) examine retirement savings plans,
and find that initial enrollment defaults that do not require employees to send in a form
have economically significant effects on retirement savings; Chetty et al. (2012) show that
defaults have significant effects on wealth accumulation. Moreover, Esteves-Sorenson and
Perretti (2011) find evidence of non-trivial inertia even when adjustment costs are tiny —
changing a television channel.
Distinguishing between two types of frictions is necessary to set optimal dynamic defaults: real adjustment (switching) costs and psychological factors that lead to inaction
(PFLIs). Both types of frictions lead to inertia under automatic renewal defaults, but they
differ in their implications for welfare and for the effects of non-renewal defaults. Adjustment costs are the time and effort costs that result from moving between products, e.g.,
setting up new paperwork or learning how a new product or service operates. However,
psychological factors can also lead individuals to fail to act, even if switching products is not
costly: e.g. inattention (Lacetera, Pope, and Sydnor 2012), procrastination (O’Donoghue
and Rabin 2001), and limited memory (Ericson 2011). For instance, individuals can forget
to send back a form, even if sending the form is not itself costly. If individuals are inactive
because they are forgetful but do not face large adjustment costs, an automatic switching
default can make them better off by switching them to cheaper services of equivalent quality.
5

A number of other studies document inertia in health insurance choice, including Samuelson and Zeckhauser’s (1988) classic paper status quo bias, and Strombom, Buchmueller and Feldstein’s (2002) examination
of employer-based health insurance enrollment.

3

On the other hand, if individuals face large adjustment costs but still forget to opt out of
the default, automatic switching can make them worse off.
The analysis of dynamic defaults requires a model of firm pricing behavior. Because
defaults affect individual behavior, they change the incentives facing firms and thereby alter
firms’ pricing strategy. Inertia implies that potential repeat customers are less price-sensitive
than potential new customers. As a result, prices are often lower for first-time buyers than
for consumers already enrolled in a subscription product or service: firms can end an introductory offer (Taylor 2003) or simply raise their standard price once they have an established
customer base. A large theoretical literature (see Farrell and Klemperer 2007 for a review)
predicts this invest-then-harvest pricing pattern in a variety of contexts,6 and this pricing
pattern is prevalent in many markets.
I examine the equilibrium effect of dynamic defaults in an invest-then-harvest model
with overlapping generations of consumers. I consider both a perfectly competitive environment (e.g. electricity) and a monopoly seller (e.g. subscriptions to a magazine). In
the competitive equilibrium, the choice of default affects efficiency but not the division of
surplus between consumers and firms, as firms make zero profits. The monopolist model
highlights strategic considerations in setting the initial price shows how the choice of default
affects profits: unless consumers dislike automatic renewal enough to substantially reduce
the number of consumers who enter the market, the monopolist will make higher profits under automatic renewal. As a corollary, if individuals are sufficiently myopic, the monopolist
will always prefer the automatic renewal default.
Defaults affect the price elasticity of demand and thus the price differential between
prices faced by new and repeat customers (i.e. introductory prices v. legacy prices, or
the price of new entrants v. existing products.) Non-renewal defaults, such as automatic
switching, can raise the elasticity of demand of existing consumers and thereby lower this
equilibrium price differential; in a competitive market, this reduction comes from both higher
initial prices and lower legacy prices. A lower equilibrium price differential can increase social
welfare, as consumers not directly affected by the default switch less, reducing resources
expended on adjustment costs. (There is also a reduction in the transfer of resources away
from consumers who do not switch products, which may increase social welfare in the presence
of distributional concerns for inattentive consumers.) Against these gains are weighed the
increased adjustment costs borne by consumers directly affected by the default. I derive
conditions under which an automatic switching default is privately and socially optimal.
When firms respond to incentives created by defaults, defaults have externalities, and
the socially optimal default for the population may not coincide with the privately optimal
6

More pejoratively, "bargains-then-ripoffs".

4

default for an individual. For instance, automatic switching may be the socially optimal
default because it lowers the equilibrium price differential between new and existing products.
Yet a given individual may prefer that an automatic renewal default applied to him or
her alone, allowing the individual to avoid bearing adjustment costs and leaving others to
discipline the market. Thus, having consumers choose their own defaults will not necessarily
lead to the socially optimal default being chosen.
This paper builds on the previous literature on defaults. Carroll et al. (2009) examine
a different type of default — optimal initial assignment defaults for retirement savings — in
a context where firms are not strategic actors. Their model assumes a particular source of
inaction: individuals are quasi-hyperbolic discounters (Laibson 1997), and so do not opt-out
of the default even if the gain is greater than the cost. As a result, individuals in Carroll
et al. (2009) will certainly opt-out of the default if the consequences are bad enough, which
motivates their results on active decisions and off-set defaults (defaults that would lead
individuals to have poor outcomes if they did not act). In contrast, the model of switching
frictions used in this paper can accommodate other psychological biases, such as forgetting or
inattention. In this model, the probability an individual will act is increasing in the net gain
to doing so, but allows for a positive probability that an individual will not act even if the
gain to action is very high. Bernheim, Fradkin, and Popov (2011) also examine retirement
savings rate defaults. They use the framework of Bernheim and Rangel (2009) to analyze the
welfare effects of initial assignment defaults without taking a stance on the source of inertia.
In contrast, for setting dynamic defaults, I show how choice data can be used to distinguish
real adjustment costs from psychological factors leading to inaction, and conduct standard
welfare analysis.
The paper is also related to the design of contracts in the presence of consumer biases,
which find a variety of motivations for back-loaded fees. DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004)
examine contract design when individuals are potentially are quasi-hyperbolic discounters.
They find that firms introduce switching costs and charge back-loaded fees (e.g. making it
difficult to cancel a gym membership) when individuals are time-inconsistent and naive about
their inconsistency. In contrast, the price increases in the invest-then-harvest equilibrium
result from the lack of long-term commitment and arise even with sophisticated consumers
who correctly predict future behavior. This paper also examines the externalities defaults
have on other consumers, and hence how defaults can be set to maximize social welfare.
In other work, Gabaix and Laibson (2006) and Heidhues, Koszegi, and Murooka (2012)
examine shrouded prices, in which all consumers see a base price and myopic consumers do
not see the add-on price. Insights from the shrouded price models can applied to investthen-harvest models with a slight reinterpretation (myopic consumers may not anticipate
5

the high legacy price). However, this present paper assumes (at least as a baseline) that
consumers are sophisticated; it adds new analysis of dynamic defaults and how they interact
with adjustment costs and psychological factors that lead to inaction.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a model of consumers who have
both classical adjustment costs and psychological factors that lead to inaction. Section 3
examines optimal dynamic defaults in competitive equilibrium and Section 4 examines the
dynamic defaults in a monopoly market. Finally, Sections 5 and 6 discuss the implications
of the results and conclude.
2

Model of Consumer Behavior

2.1

Context

In the model, let there be overlapping generations of consumers who live for two periods
each ("young" and "old"), with a continuum of new consumers, normalized to measure one,
arriving each period. Consumers have a constant per-period valuation vi for one unit of a
non-storable product (and 0 for each additional unit). Consumers maximize their discounted
expected utility, rationally anticipate their own future behavior and future firm behavior,
and have linear utility for money in the region of the prices they face. Consumers discount
future utility by δ < 1 each period.
Contracts are for one period each, which can be thought of as a standard contract term
(e.g. a monthly rate for many internet service providers, a year for most health insurance
products, 2-3 years for many cell phone products). Firms cannot commit to prices in future
periods and consumers cannot commit to purchasing in future periods; incomplete contracts
without commitment to future prices and purchases are commonly observed. Inability to
commit can result from a number of factors, including regulatory constraints on the form of
the contract (e.g. many insurance markets), or costs of writing and enforcing a sufficiently
detailed commitment contract (i.e. on both cost and quality) given future uncertainty.7
2.2

Consumer Behavior

Consumers who purchased a product last period have three options: renew the purchase
of the current product, switch to an alternative product, or cease purchasing all together.
Consumers can either actively express their preference for one of these options, or they can
do nothing and take the default. Actively expressing their preference requires "opt-out costs"
7

When the model is generalized to allow firms to costlessly commit to future prices, contracts without
commitment to future prices emerge endogenously if consumers are myopic about future firm behavior.
Myopic consumers are unwilling to pay higher prices in the present for future gains.

6

Figure 1: Timeline
given by κ (e.g. the cost of sending in a form), but taking the default is costless. In this
section, I describe how κ affects consumer behavior. However, since κ is typically small, I
assume κ = 0 in Sections 3 and 4 of the paper for clarity of exposition and treat κ > 0 in
the Appendix.
There are two classes of frictions that affect behavior. Both sources of frictions will lead
to inertial behavior when the default is automatic renewal, but will lead to different behavior under an automatic switching default. They can thus be distinguished using revealed
preference (see Section 2.4.)
1. Consumers face real adjustment (or switching) costs that result from moving
between products and that reduce welfare; these will lead consumers to prefer to stay
with their current product, all else equal. Real adjustment costs are present in many
markets: whether switched by active decision or by default, virtually every switch
involves paperwork. When switching insurance plans, consumers need to learn the rules
of their new plan; when switching checking accounts or credit cards, they may need
to reenter billing and direct deposit information. Also counted under real adjustment
costs is the experience of disutility from negative emotions (e.g. confusion, fear, loss
aversion) that may occur when consumers switch.

7

2. Consumers are subject to psychological factors that lead to inaction (PFLIs).
PFLIs affect whether a consumer actively expresses their preference, but not their welfare conditional on the action taken. PFLIs lead consumers to take the default; even
when a consumer perceives a net benefit from acting, they may not make an active
decision, but instead do nothing and take the default. For instance, an individual may
wish to switch to another product but forget (Ericson 2011; Letzler and Tasoff 2012),
procrastinate on taking action (O’Donoghue and Rabin 2001; Ariely and Wertenbroch
2002), or simply not be paying attention to this decision (Lacetera, Pope, and Sydnor
2010; Taubinsky 2013). Under an automatic renewal default, these inactivity factors
lead consumers not to switch and simply take the default option, even though their welfare would be increased (as they themselves would judge it) if they were automatically
switched to a cheaper product.
I capture adjustment costs by having each consumer pay ω i if and only if they leave their
current product. This cost ω is drawn from c.d.f. G (ω) in the consumer’s second period;
in the consumer’s first period, the distribution G is known but ω i is unknown. Consumers
bear the cost ω regardless of whether the switching results from their choice, or from them
being switched by default. For instance, regardless of how consumers are switched between
health insurance plans, they must set up new billing information and switch doctors if their
previous doctor is not covered in the new plan’s network.
I capture PFLIs by letting each consumer have a tolerance for inaction λi : the consumer
has a maximum tolerable loss from taking the default λi . This has the property that the
probability a psychological factor will lead a consumer to take the default is decreasing in
the gain to making an active decision. For instance, a consumer is more likely to pay attention
and remember to switch credit cards the larger is the difference in interest rate between the
two cards. The timing of the realization of λ is the same as for ω : λi is drawn in the
second period from the c.d.f H (λ) , independent of the distribution of ω;in the consumer’s
first period, distribution H is known but not the value of λi .
Although most of the existing optimal default literature has assumed individuals have
quasi-hyperbolic (β −δ, Laibson 1997) preferences, quasi-hyperbolic preferences cannot plausibly explain default taking when the losses from inaction are extremely large (e.g. as in
Handel [2013], see also discussions in Ericson [2011], Bernheim Fradkin, and Popov [2011]).
Also, note that the distribution of λ captures the fact that inaction is stochastic— consumers
may not know whether they will forget to send in a form. PFLIs provide a more flexible
framework to capture when individuals will take the default, as default-taking is likely the
product of a complex interaction of many biases (e.g. memory and time-inconsistency interact in complex ways, as shown in Ericson [2014b]). In the next section, I show how PFLIs
8

Figure 2: Consumer Repeat Demand Under Different Defaults. Assumes products are perfect
substitutes and opt-out cost κ = 0.
differ from quasi-hyperbolic preferences.
For simplicity in the paper’s text, I assume that λ is distributed such that λ = λ̄ > 0
with probability ψ and λ = 0 with probability 1 − ψ. I refer to consumers with λ = 0 as
"attentive" and consumers with λ = λ̄ as "inattentive", though λ may result from many
different biases. This two point distribution of λ is only for ease of exposition; the Appendix
shows the general case where λ is drawn from a general H (λ) .
2.3

Consumer Behavior Under Defaults

I consider three potential default options8 that determine what happens if the consumer
does not actively express their preference:
• Automatic renewal with the consumer’s current product from the same firm.
• Automatic switching to the lowest priced product of the type the consumer chose.
• Non-purchase so that the customer buys no product.
8

The default could, in principle, entail arbitrary consequences, such as a fine for non-responding. I assume
that fines for not actively expressing preference are not feasible policies, due to concerns over the limit of
government power and/or constraints on the ability to collect such fines.

9

Consumer behavior depends on the default, their adjustment cost ω, and their PFLI
λ. Consider a consumer who purchased a product last period that is now priced at plegacy .
Switching to the cheapest identical product priced at pinitial gives a utility gain of ∆U =
∆p = plegacy − pinitial . From this gain is subtracted the consumer’s real adjustment cost
ω i . Thus, whenever ∆p − ω it > 0, a consumer would prefer to be switched to the cheaper
product. However, their behavior is affected by costs of expressing preference κ, PFLIs λ,
and the default.
Under the automatic renewal default, a consumer will actively choose to switch products
if the net gain to switching exceeds their tolerance for inaction λit , and otherwise take the
default and stay in their current product. In order to switch, consumers must also actively
express their preference and pay κ. Hence, a consumer switches under automatic renewal if
∆p − ω i − κ > λi . With this default, a consumer is never switched when they prefer not to
be switched (∆p − ω i < 0), but they sometimes do not switch even when there would be a
gain to doing so.
Under the automatic switching default, a consumer must actively express their preference to stay in the current product. The gain to switching then comprises ∆p and the
saved opt-out costs κ. Hence, a consumer switches under the automatic switching default if
∆p − ω i + κ > −λi , tolerating a loss up to λi from staying with the default and switching;
that is, they will sometimes switch even if the adjustment cost from switching outweighs the
financial gain.9
Under a non-purchase default, consumers get utility vi − plegacy − κ from their current
product if they actively express a preference to keep purchasing their current product, get
vi − pinitial − ω i − κ if they actively express a preference to switch to a cheaper product, and
−ω i if they take the default.10 They opt-out of the default and choose their preferred option
whenever vi − κ + max {−plegacy + ω, −pinitial } > λi .
Figure 2 summarizes consumer behavior, distinguishing between consumers who face no
PFLIs ("attentive") and consumers who do ("inattentive" or "forgetful" consumers). Repeat
9

In contrast, consider how an individual with quasi-hyperbolic preferences would behave before the deadline for responding. Set δ = 1 and λ = 0. Then, under an automatic renewal default, the consumer would
choose to switch whenever β∆p > ω + κ, assuming κ and ω are paid today. Under automatic switching,
the only difference is that κ needs to be paid in order to not switch, rather than to switch. Then, the
consumer would choose to switch whenever β∆p > ω − κ. The difference in the probability of switching is
the probability that ω ∈ β∆p±κ, which is limited for κ small. However, PFLIs capture the fact that defaults
can lead to large losses as λ may be large with some probability (i.e. forgetting to send back an important
form).
10
Here, the adjustment cost ω is assumed to be the same if they move to a different product or no product
at all. This could be generalized to allow adjustment costs and PFLIs to differ between non-purchase of a
product and switching among products. For instance, having the electricity go out is a potent reminder to
act and repurchase in electricity; foregone monetary gains from not switching to a cheaper supplier are not
nearly so salient.

10

demand for a product depends on the default; I use Drepeat as the general term for the probability a consumer will repurchase the product, and indicate repeat demand under a particular
R∞
Sw
default with a superscript: under automatic switching Drepeat
= 0 H (ω − ∆p − κ) dG (ω) ,
R∞
Re
and under automatic renewal Drepeat
= 1 − 0 H (∆p − ω − κ) dG (ω) ; repeat demand for
a non-purchase default is discussed in Section 4.
2.4

Identification of Real Adjustment Costs versus PFLIs

This section shows how to separately identify real adjustment costs from PFLIs using a
series of choice experiments. The key intuition is that while ω and λ lead to similar behavior
under an automatic renewal default, they lead to very different behavior under an automatic
switching default.
Consider product A and product B, and let B be the more preferred product. When
products are not identical, the difference in their valuations for the product can be ascertained
by eliciting willingness-to-pay (WTP) from new choosers (unattached to any product)11 for
each product for one period only. For now, though, let product A and product B be perfect
substitutes, so that the difference in utility from purchasing the products is just the price
difference ∆p.
The real adjustment cost ω can be identified by WTP to avoid being forced to switch
between products next period. Consider a consumer who previously purchased product A,
and who is now given a choice between staying in product A for certain versus being switched
to product B for certain next period. This identifies the expected value of ω, as the difference
in WTP is ∆p− Eω. If instead, this WTP is elicited immediately before the switching occurs,
when ω i is revealed to consumers, the ex-post distribution of ω can be identified, as it gives
∆p−ω i . All these WTP elicitations hold κ constant regardless of what the consumer chooses,
since an active choice is required only at the time of elicitation.
To identify the costs κ of opting-out of the default and expressing preference (e.g. sending in a form), the researcher can elicit WTP to avoid a task similar to the method of opting
out. Moreover, κ can also be identified from choice behavior in the market environment
without needing to define a similar task. Consider a consumer who previously purchased
product A, and elicit that consumer’s WTP to be given a switching default versus an automatic renewal default. Appendix A.2 shows that this WTP is a function of κ and other
observable objects: the probability of switching times the gain to switching (observed in the
data), the difference in adjustment costs borne under each default (elicited as above), and
the probability of opting out of the default (observed in the data) times κ.
11

WTP could be elicited in a variety of incentive compatible ways, including the Becker-DeGroot-Marshack
(1964) mechanism or the multiple price-list mechanism.

11

PFLIs λ can be measured in a few different ways. First, note that Proposition 2 will
show that WTP for a given default regime will depend on λ. Another marker that PFLIs are
affecting choice is if the difference in probability of switching under the automatic renewal
versus automatic switching defaults is "too high". In the absence of PFLIs (λ = 0), consumers switch if ω < ∆p ± κ (depending on the default), and so the difference in switching
is the probability that ω is between ∆p − κ and ∆p + κ. For κ small, the probability should
be low; PFLIs allow for a larger effect of the default, as the difference in probabilities of
R∞
switching is given by 0 Pr(ω ∈ [∆p ± (λ + κ)] dH (λ) .
The complete distribution H (λ) can be traced out by experiments that compare behavior under different defaults. First, observe old consumers’ choices under an automatic renewal
regime (either to take the default and renew, or to opt-out and switch). Then, identify ω i by
(unexpectedly) eliciting consumers’ WTP to switch. A consumer’s choice to stay with the
default can be compared to the estimated utility of doing so. Under a automatic renewal
default, a consumer will only have opted-out and switched if ∆p − ω i − κ > λ. Hence, the
probability a consumer with ω i did not opt out of the renewal default is P r(λ > ∆p−ω i −κ).
By observing this probability for various values of ω i and ∆p, it is then possible to trace out
H (λ) . Similar experiments can be done under an automatic switching default.12
3

Dynamic Defaults and Competitive Equilibrium

3.1

Market Setup

In order to analyze optimal defaults, we need to determine the equilibrium that results
under each default. In this section, I describe competitive equilibrium with overlapping
generations of consumers and then show conditions for optimal defaults. I assume there are
N ≥ 2 firms in the market. Firms can set prices separately for new purchasers (initial or
introductory prices) and repeat purchasers (legacy prices). Because products are ex-ante
identical and firms cannot commit to future behavior, consumers always choose the cheapest
product when they enter the market. I assume all firms charging the same price receive
an equal share of all the unattached consumers and switchers who choose a product with
that price. For the competitive equilibrium, I assume valuation vi is high enough that a nonpurchase default is neither optimal nor credible (e.g. products that individuals are mandated
to have, such as health or auto insurance, or are almost certain to have, such as electricity),
and thus restrict discussion to automatic renewal or automatic switching defaults.13 Section
12

In the model, I have assumed that the distribution of λ is the same, regardless of which default applies.
However, this same method can be used to identify the distribution of λ separately under each default.
13
A full treatment of non-renewal versus automatic switching defaults needs to specify how adjustment
costs and PFLIs differ between non-purchase of a product and switching among products. For instance,

12

4 discusses the effect of non-purchase defaults in the context of monopoly.
3.2

The Invest-then-Harvest Equilibrium

In setting prices, firms have two motives: an investment motive, to acquire market share
for the future, and a harvesting motive, to maximize profits this period on new and existing
customers. These incentives lead to an "invest-then-harvest" pricing pattern (Farrell and
Klemperer 2007): low initial prices (perhaps below marginal cost), and higher "legacy" prices
for repeat purchasers.
Each firm offers one product and sets its price for first-time purchasers pinitial and legacy
price plegacy each period, competing via Bertrand competition on prices only. The cost of
each customer to the firm is a constant c. Firms are infinitely lived with discount factor δ,
and seek to maximize the expected discounted present value of profits Vt , which is given by
flow profits and future profits in the recursive equation:
Vt = (pt,initial − c) Dt,new + (pt,legacy − c) Dt,repeat + δVt+1 (Dt,new )
where Dt,repeat is repeat demand from consumers who bought from the firm in period t − 1,
and Dt,new is the demand of potential switchers from other products and new customers
entering the market unattached to any product. The last term captures that future firm
value depends on its current market share. The firm’s first order condition for optimal
′
−Drepeat
is the negative of the
legacy pricing is thus plegacy = c + η 1 , where η repeat = Drepeat
repeat
semi-elasticity of repeat consumers. Note that repeat demand, its semi-elasticity, and V
all depend on the choice of default. In a perfectly competitive environment, the zero-profit
condition determines pinitial . Under imperfect competition, the firm’s first order condition for
′
′
new
. Because
the introductory price gives pinitial = c + η 1 + δVt+1
(Dnew ) , where η new = −D
D
new
new
potential repeat customers face adjustment costs, they are likely to have relatively inelastic
demand compared to new customers entering the market, who can choose from many close
substitutes.
Proposition 1. For a given default, a competitive equilibrium exists and takes the following
Drepeat
and legacy
form: each period, firms set introductory prices p∗initial = c − η δ 1+(1−D
repeat )
Repeat
1
∗
prices plegacy = c + η
. All young consumers purchase a product at an introductory price.
repeat
Fraction 1 − Drepeat of old consumers switch to a different product and get an introductory
price.
having the electricity go out is a potent reminder to act and repurchase in electricity; foregone monetary
gains from not switching to a cheaper supplier are not nearly so salient.

13

The intuition behind the results can be simply seen by examining how consumers and
firms would behave if the market were ending this period. This is equivalent to setting
δ = 0. Young consumers and old switchers simply choose the cheapest product, as they are
all perfect substitutes. Hence, when firms set prices for new customers, they face a perfectly
elastic demand curve, and set price equal to marginal cost: pinitial = c. For repeat customers,
firms have market power over repeat customers due to adjustment costs and PFLIs. Given
that consumers who switch products will switch to a product sold at price pinitial , firms
simply set legacy prices with their first-order condition. (In contrast, when there are neither
adjustment costs nor PFLIs, introductory and legacy prices are both set to marginal cost,
as consumers would simply choose the cheapest product each period.)
With δ > 0, the firm’s first order condition and the elasticity of repeat demand still
determines plegacy . Bertrand competition implies that the market is perfectly competitive for
introductory prices, and so firms compete away the profits they will later make on consumers
Drepeat
"stuck in place". The zero-profit condition implies pinitial = c − δ (plegacy − c) 1+(1−D
.
repeat )
The last fraction arises because firms only sell at the higher legacy price to (old) repeat
customers, but sell at introductory prices to both old and young first-time customers.14 This
Drepeat
then simplifies to pinitial = c − η δ 1+(1−D
. Initial prices are now lower than marginal
repeat )
Repeat
cost, as firms invest in acquiring market share in the future. Define ∆p ≡ plegacy − pinitial as
the price differential between legacy and initial prices.
Compared to a situation in which firms could commit to future prices or simply charged
the same price each period, this equilibrium is inefficient. So long as consumers bear some real
adjustment costs, switching between identical products is a waste. These results also suggest
other potential inefficiencies. Because switching is higher, firms and consumers may have
reduced incentives to invest in relationship-specific investments (e.g. insurer investments in
enrollees’ future health).15
3.3

Privately Optimal Defaults

Given this equilibrium, I first consider what defaults are privately optimal: what default
an individual consumer would choose for themselves, holding fixed the defaults that everyone
14

By assumption, firms can price on purchase history but not age. If firms could price on both age and
purchase history, competition would set prices equal to marginal cost c for old switchers. Legacy prices for
repeat purchasers would be set based on the elasticity of repeat demand, and introductory prices for young
consumers would simply be equal to c − δ (plegacy − c) Drepeat .
15
Proposition 1 describes an equilibrium in which competition implies that firms do not make excess profits
as a result of inertia, even if consumers are myopic. For models of imperfect competition, there is an active
debate about whether switching costs raise or lower the average level of markups: compare Farrell and
Klemperer (2007) and Dubé, Hitsch & Rossi (2009), who find that the effect of switching costs on average
markups are non-monotonic and depend on the setting.

14

else faces. In this analysis, the prices a consumer faces do not vary depending on the
default they choose. It is commonly found that consumers can change their default renewal
option at some point during the contract without changing their price; in many markets,
regulators do not allow prices to vary depending on the default (insurance exchanges, utilities,
cable/internet).16 Moreover, consumers can implement their chosen default with third-party
services (unobserved by the firm): an insurance broker could be instructed to switch or
renew policies, a personal finance website such as mint.com could be given permission to
automatically cancel old credit cards and apply for new ones when better deals are available,
and in general, automation scripts can automatically cancel orders or place new ones (see
the consumer site "if-this-then-that" at ifttt.com).
While the equilibrium that obtains under a given default regime depends only the switching behavior of consumers, the optimal default will depend on the relative contributions of
adjustment costs versus PFLIs. Because choice of default depends on the source of frictions,
this analysis again shows how adjustment costs can be distinguished from PFLIs via revealed
preference. When choosing a default for herself, a consumer weighs the change in prices paid
against the change in adjustment costs borne, taking into account that PFLIs will affect
their behavior. (Recall, that for exposition I assume consumers are inattentive or forgetful
with probability ψ, in which case λ = λ̄, and are otherwise attentive with λ = 0.)17
Proposition 2 below considers when automatic switching versus automatic renewal would
be the optimal default for an individual consumer or small group (formally, the case where
the default affects a measure-zero subset of the population.)
Proposition 2. Under perfect competition, the privately optimal dynamic default is auto
R λ̄+∆p
matic switching if 0
ωdG (ω) < ∆p · G λ̄ + ∆p , and is otherwise automatic renewal.
The intuition behind Proposition 2 is as follows: the default only matters for consumers
when they are inattentive or forgetful. Consumers compare the expected additional adjustment costs borne under automatic switching to the amount of price savings. Under automatic
switching, inattentive consumers switch whenever the adjustment cost is below the thresh
old λ̄ + ∆p, which occurs with probability G λ̄ + ∆p . They save ∆p when they switch,
but expected adjustment costs are the integral of ω up to that threshold. A consumer’s
willingness to pay for an automatic renewal default over an automatic switching default
16

If consumers were instead to choose among products with default-specific prices, they would also consider
the effect of the differential prices paid and how that affected switching behavior when attentive as well.
17
I set opt-out costs κ = 0 here, but treat positive κ in Appendix Section A.2. The results are similar,
with κ > 0 creating an additional motivation to choose a default that matches the modal switching behavior
of the population: if most people switch plans each period, then an automatic switching default might raise
welfare by saving most people the cost of opting out of the default.

15

h
i
 R λ̄+∆p
is ψ ∆p · G λ̄ + ∆p − 0
ωdG (ω) , where ψ captures the probability the consumer
draws a PFLI.
If the price differential is small but λ̄ is high, then automatic switching will not typically
be optimal, since inattentive consumers would bear large adjustment costs (up to λ̄) for little
gain. Conversely, when ∆p is large because consumers are inattentive, but consumers do not
face many real adjustment costs, automatic switching will be optimal. The privately optimal
default can be determined by eliciting (from sophisticated consumers) their willingness to
pay to move from one default to another, or from the distributions of λ and ω as elicited in
Section 2.4.
3.4

Socially Optimal Defaults

Defaults have externalities, and so the socially optimal default for consumers may differ
from the privately optimal default. I assume the social welfare function attaches equal
welfare weights to all consumers; given the zero-profit condition, payments to firms are simply
transfers from one consumer to another. Thus, the socially optimal default minimizes total
adjustment costs borne.
When defaults are chosen for the entire population of consumers, the response of firms to
the default must be considered. Moving from an automatic renewal default to an automatic
switching default alters the elasticity of demand of existing consumers, and so the equilibrium
price differential ∆p between introductory and legacy prices will differ under the two defaults.
Let this differential take the value ∆pSw under an automatic switching default and ∆pRe
under an automatic renewal default. Proposition 3 shows that whether automatic switching
or automatic renewal is optimal will depend on the difference between ∆pSw and ∆pRe .
Proposition 3. Under perfect competition, the socially optimal dynamic default for the
R ∆p
R λ̄+∆pSw
Re
ωdG (ω) < (1 − ψ) ∆pSw
ωdG (ω), and is
population is automatic switching if ψ 0
otherwise automatic renewal.
Proposition 3 shows that the socially optimal default compares the two effects of automatic switching. First, automatic switching increases the probability the ψ inattentive
consumers will switch, increasing their adjustment costs borne. This increases the elasticity
of demand firms face18 and so lowers the equilibrium price differential between introductory
and legacy prices: ∆pSw < ∆pRe . As a result, we have our second effect: the 1 − ψ attentive consumers are less likely to switch under an automatic switching default. Social welfare
counts as a gain the reduction in adjustment costs borne by attentive consumers who draw
18

In this simple setting in which λit is either 0 or λ̄, it is always the case that ∆pSw < ∆pRe . However,
for some distributions of λ, ∆pSw > ∆pRe due to more inelastic demand.

16

ω in the region between ∆pSw and ∆pRe and do not switch. Automatic renewal may be optimal if inattentive consumers bear large adjustment costs but automatic switching has only
a small effect on prices. Conversely, automatic switching is optimal if inattentive consumers
drive firms’ prices but do not bear large adjustment costs.
Defaults have externalities, as illustrated by the difference between the optimal default
from a given individual consumer’s perspective and the optimal default for the entire population. In some cases, automatic switching may be the optimal population default because it
raises the elasticity of demand and leads to lower price differentials; nonetheless, a given consumer may prefer that his or her own default was automatic renewal to save his or her own
adjustment costs, leaving other people to discipline the market. The other case is possible
as well. When automatic switching does not change ∆p very much, automatic renewal will
typically be socially optimal since there will be little savings in adjustment costs by attenR ∆p
Re
ωdG (ω) will be small). However, faced with ∆pRe , a
tive individuals (the term (1 − ψ) ∆pSw
given consumer may prefer that he or she (alone) faced an automatic switching default that

R λ̄+∆pRe
ωdG (ω) < ∆pRe ·G λ̄ + ∆pRe .
leads to price savings when he or she is inattentive: 0
The socially optimal default can be determined if the distributions of λ, ω are elicited
as in Section 2.4. However, there are simpler ways of identifying these terms. The increased
R λ̄+∆p
adjustment costs borne by inattentive consumers ψ 0
ωdG (ω) can be identified from
WTP for an automatic switching default over an automatic renewal default; Proposition 2
showed that this is the difference between the sought after adjustment costs and the (observable) price savings from inattentive switching. The adjustment costs of attentive people
R ∆p
(1 − ψ) 0 ωdG (ω) can be identified by consumers’ WTP to avoid being forced to stay in
their current product next period for sure next period versus having a given default, which
is comprised of price savings (observable), inattentive, and attentive adjustment costs. The
WTP for an automatic switching default regime over certain staying in the current product
R ∆p
R ∆p+λ̄
is ∆p (qSw ) − ψ 0
ωdG (ω) − (1 − ψ) 0 ωdG (ω) , with the first two terms already identified. This WTP can be elicited for a market with ∆p = ∆pRe and ∆p = ∆pSw , allowing us
R ∆p
Re
to identify (1 − ψ) ∆pSw
ωdG (ω) .
3.5

Extension of Equilibrium Model

Although the model presented above was a simple two-period consumer model, the form
of equilibrium and optimal dynamic default conditions can be generalized to richer models.
First, note that while I assumed that firms could distinguish between new and existing
customers, this equilibrium can be generalized to the case where firms cannot set prices that
differ between new customers and repeat customers, either because of legal restrictions or
information limitations. In such a case, firms with no attached customer base (i.e. new firms,
17

or firms whose customer base has left) set low prices pinitial as in Proposition 1 to appeal
to new consumers and switchers. Legacy firms (who offered the product in the previous
period and who thus have a base of "attached" consumers) set prices equal to plegacy as
in Proposition 1.19 Such an equilibrium has been observed in Medicare Part D by Ericson
(2014a).
Appendix Section A.3 shows that the model can also be generalized to a market with
infinitely-lived consumers with a constant hazard of dying each period: in such a model, set
lower introductory prices and legacy prices, and (each period) consumers have an incentive to
switch to competing firms to get lower introductory prices. Each period, they face adjustment
costs and PFLIs. The resulting equilibrium and optimal defaults are similar to that in the
two-period overlapping generations case.
4

Defaults with a Monopolist Seller

4.1

Context

Examining a context with a monopolist seller allows us to examine non-purchase defaults
along with strategic considerations in the setting of the introductory price. In this analysis,
consumers decide each period whether to purchase the product; there is no switching, as
there is only one seller. A single firm sells the product, and consumer i has per-period
valuation vi , with vi distributed with c.d.f. W that is independent of the distributions G, H.
As before, consumers live two periods (young and old), have discount factor δ (shared by the
monopolist), know the distributions G, H in advance but not their future draw from those
distributions, and correctly forecast the second period behavior of firms and themselves.
The monopolist knows the distribution W but does not know any particular consumer’s
valuation. The monopolist can distinguish between repeat customers and new customers,
and thus can set two prices: plegacy for repeat customers and pinitial for new customers. I
continue to assume κ = 0, λ = λ̄ > 0 with probability ψ and λ = 0 otherwise.
4.2

Consumer Behavior and Monopolist Price Setting

Here, we examine how consumers behave for a given default, and show how the monopolist will set prices for a given default. Consumers can choose whether to enter the market and
buy when young and then whether they repurchase when old.20 Working backwards, consider
19

The equilibrium is similar to that in Farrell and Shapiro (1988), who model a duopoly with overlapping
generations and perfect substitutability between goods: they find an "alternating equilibrium" in which firms
cycle between selling to new consumers only or selling to old consumers only.
20
I assume that consumers who do not purchase when young do not enter the market when old. This
can be thought of as resulting from large adjustment costs that are incurred when moving from the outside

18

the choice of whether to repurchase the product. Repurchasing yields utility vi −plegacy , while
not purchasing entails bearing an adjustment cost, giving utility −ω i . Attentive consumers
(λ = 0) will thus repurchase the product iff ω i > plegacy − vi , noting that even an attentive
consumer may repurchase in cases where price exceeds valuation in order to avoid bearing
the adjustment cost. Inattentive consumers (λ = λ̄) face the same incentives, but have a
wedge between their action and welfare. Under an automatic renewal default, an inattentive
consumer will repurchase whenever their adjustment cost ω i is greater than a threshold, that
is whenever
ω i > plegacy − vi − λ̄ ≡ ω ∗vi Re
Note that the renewal threshold depends on the default and the consumer’s valuation vi .
Under a non-purchase default, inattentive consumers are strictly less likely to repurchase:
they do so whenever ω i > ω ∗vi N on ≡ plegacy − vi + λ̄. Under a generic default, I write the
renewal threshold as ω ∗vi Def and write repeat demand for a consumer with valuation v as
Def
Dold
(v) .
Now, consider consumer behavior when young. The consumer will buy whenever vi −
pinitial + δE ÛiDef > 0, where E ÛiDef is their expected utility when old, which will depend
on both the default and legacy prices. Under a regularity condition21 , there is a defaultspecific purchase threshold solution such that consumers purchase the product if and only if
vi ≥ vi∗Def .
This allows us to derive the population demand of the young and old consumers:22

∗
Def
Dyoung
= 1 − W vDef
Z ∞



Def
Dold =
1 − ψG ω ∗vi Def − (1 − ψ) G (plegacy − v) dW (v)
∗
vDef

The monopolist simply wants to maximize total discounted profits (pinitial − c) Dyoung +
δ (plegacy − c) Dold . The first-order condition for the legacy price gives p∗legacy = c + η 1 , with
old

−D′

old
η old = Dold
. Now, instead of a zero profit condition determining the introductory price,
pinitial is determined by invest-then-harvest incentives. Note that changing pinitial not only

option entailed by non-purchase to purchasing the product. This portion of the model could be generalized
at the cost of additional complexity (specifying another adjustment cost distribution). The choice of whether
to delay entry to the market until old in order to avoid the legacy price is an artifact of the two period model;
and would be less important in a multi-period model.
21
The regularity condition is required because of the wedge λ places between action and welfare,
and

 re

Re
∗
quires that the lifetime utility of the product not be decreasing in v, or 1+δ 1 − Dold (v) −δψg ω Re,v,λ̄ λ >
0, which is true for small ψ and g. Note that there is always a threshold solution with a non-purchase default.
22
Note that Dnew and Drepeat from the competitive equilibrium case differ from the demand curves defined
here, as first-time purchasers at the firm are all young in the monopoly model.

19

affects demand of initial purchasers, but has an effect on repeat demand by changing the mix
of who enters the market. The monopolist
accounts
for this effect: the first-order condition


dDold /dpinitial
1
1
∗
− η δ dDyoung /dpinitial , where dDyoung /dpinitial and dDold /dpinitial
gives pinitial = c + η
young
old
capture how changes in the introductory price affect initial and repeat demand, respectively.
By affecting demand, the defaults will also affect monopolist profits. First, note that for
any consumer with vi who entered the market, repeat demand at any given price is higher
under automatic renewal than under the non-purchase default. Holding constant price, the
increase in repeat demand under automatic renewal depends on the probability and degree
of inattentiveness (ψ and λ), and is given by ψ Pr(ω ∈ (plegacy − v ± λ) . As a result, holding
fixed the population who enters the market, the monopolist makes higher profits on repeat
customers under automatic renewal. A sufficient condition for the monopolist to prefer
automatic renewal is that demand of young consumers is weakly higher under automatic
∗
∗
renewal (vN
on > vRe ). In order for the automatic switching default to be preferred, demand
of young consumers has to be lower enough under automatic renewal to offset the additional
profits automatic renewal would give on repeat purchasers. (Also note that in the absence
of the ability to commit to a default regime, the monopolist would always have an incentive
to switch to automatic renewal defaults.)
4.3

Optimal Defaults

First, consider the privately optimal default (holding fixed the demand of the rest of the
population— and thus, prices) for someone who purchases when young under both defaults.
Then, the consumer prefers the non-purchase default to the automatic renewal default if the
reduced probability of repurchase times the net utility of purchase outweighs the increase in
adjustment costs borne.
Proposition 4. With a monopolist seller, the privately optimal dynamic default for a consumer who enters the market under both defaults is non-purchase iff



(plegacy − v) G plegacy − vi + λ̄ − G plegacy − vi − λ̄ >

Z

plegacy −vi +λ̄

ωdG (ω)

plegacy −vi −λ̄

and is otherwise automatic renewal. If the consumer enters the market for only one default,
their privately optimal dynamic default is the one under which they enter.
Proposition 4 shows that necessary condition for non-purchase to be privately optimal
is that v < plegacy (the consumer does not want to buy at the second period price), since
the left hand side of the inequality must outweigh the adjustment-costs avoided under auto
matic renewal and the difference in second period inattentive demand G plegacy − vi + λ̄ −
20


G plegacy − vi − λ̄ is positive. Yet supposing that v < plegacy , the intuition that a lower valuation makes automatic renewal more desirable is not true. Another way of writing Proposi

tion 4’s condition for non-purchase to be privately optimal is plegacy −v > E ω|ω ∈ (plegacy − v) ± λ̄ ,
which depends crucially on the distribution of ω between the two renewal thresholds.
Now, consider the socially optimal default. Again, social welfare is comprised of consumers’ valuation minus marginal cost of production minus any adjustment costs borne;
prices matter only insofar as they affect behavior. The choice of default can affect social welfare through three channels: repeat demand from attentive consumers, repeat demand from
inattentive consumers, and a change in the mix of consumers who enter the market. Below,
I define the change in social welfare when moving from automatic renewal to a non-purchase
default as ∆Att for attentive consumers and ∆Inatt for inattentive consumers (so that the
terms are positive if non-purchase gives higher social welfare). Thus, we have:
• Attentive consumers: The default affects plegacy by changing the elasticity of repeat
demand. When the non-purchase default lowers plegacy , more consumers who are attentive will repurchase when old, which increases social welfare since plegacy > c. Holding fixed initial demand, the social gain to repurchase is vi − c + ω i , while attentive consumers purchase if vi − plegacy + ω i > 0. For each consumer type vi , define
R pRe −vi
(vi − c + ω) dG (ω) : the social surplus for this group
∆Att (vi ) = (1 − ψ) pNlegacy
o
legacy −vi
under the non-purchase default minus that under automatic renewal, weighted by the
probability of being attentive.
• Inattentive consumers: Holding fixed price, fewer inattentive consumers will renew
under a non-purchase default. These cancellations are a loss when vi − c > ω i , but are
a gain for inattentive people who drew high adjustment costs. Moreover, the default
also affects the mix of inattentive consumers who take the default by changing plegacy
and thus the net gain to an
 active decision. For each consumer type vi , define this
o
R pNlegacy
−vi +λ̄
(vi − c + ω) dG .
term as ∆Inatt (vi ) = −ψ pRe
−vi −λ̄
legacy

• Change in who enters the market: Defaults change consumers’ expected utility when
old, and thus change who purchases when young. So long as pinitial > c, the increase in
initial purchases raises social welfare: consumers only purchase if their expected utility
is positive, and social welfare is simply expected utility plus prices paid minus the
costs of the product (when purchased). The expected two period social surplus from a
consumer
Def is N ewDef (vi ) =
i vi enteringR the market under a default
h with valuation
∗
R
ω
p
−v
v Def
Def
(vi ) − (1 − ψ) 0 legacy i ωdG (ω) − ψ 0 i ωdG (ω) .
(vi − c) 1 + δDold
Having defined these terms, we have the following proposition:
21

Proposition 5. With a monopolist seller, the socially optimal dynamic default is nonR v∗
R∞
purchase iff δ max{v∗ ,v∗ } [∆Att (v) + ∆Inatt (v)] dW (v) > v∗N on N ewDef (v) dW (v) , where
Re N o
Re
Def is the default under which more consumers enter the market when young, and is otherwise automatic renewal.
On the left-hand side of the inequality, we integrate the change in social welfare over all
the consumers with valuations that entered the market under both defaults. Their behavior
when young is unchanged, so this term is comprised of the change in behavior when old,
is discounted by δ, and is decomposed into terms for attentive and inattentive consumers.
The right-hand side of the inequality integrates over the additional consumers who purchase
only under one default. The threshold for purchase v ∗ depends on the default; the default
that brings the most consumers into the market will depend on the distributions of F, G,
∗
∗
and W . If there are more initial purchasers under automatic renewal (vN
on > vRe ), the
introductory price under automatic renewal is low enough to outweigh any potential benefit
of the non-purchase default on the legacy price or unintended renewals.
4.4

Extension: Myopia

Up until now, we have assumed that consumers are sophisticated about their future
behavior and firms’ future behavior. However, consumers can be myopic in at least four
different ways: they can disregard the future entirely (setting δ = 0), they can mistakenly
believe that they will not have PFLIs (when young, perceived λ̂ = 0 but actually λ > 0
when old), they can mistakenly believe that they will not have adjustment costs (when
young, perceived ω̂ = 0 but actually have ω > 0 when old), and they can mistakenly believe
that introductory prices will persist (an anticipated legacy price that is equal to pinitial ).
Myopic consumers enter the market too often. Consumers should only enter if vi −
pinitial + δEU (v) > 0, where EU (v) is the consumer’s expected utility when old. Note that
EU (v) is negative for vi = pinitial , as legacy prices are higher than pinitial and adjustment
costs are (in expectation) positive; thus, this consumer should not enter the market. However,
a consumer with vi ≥ pinitial will enter the market if δ = 0 (they disregard the future), or
if p̂legacy = pinitial (they anticipate weakly positive next period utility), or if ω̂ = λ̂ = 0
(they anticipate not purchasing next period but without facing adjustment costs). Thus, all
consumers who should enter the market do so (the optimal purchase threshold v ∗ > pinitial ),
along with additional consumers who should avoid the market.
From the monopolist perspective, then, myopia is quite attractive: not only does it
enable the monopolist to set the preferred automatic renewal default (since initial demand
is unaffected by the default when consumers are myopic), it also expands who enters the
22

market (which surely increases profits if pinitial > c).
5

Discussion

Implementing an automatic switching default may require a market organizer with access to the menu of prices a consumer faces and regulatory authority to implement a switch.
They are thus ideal for consideration in markets that are government-organized markets,
such as health insurance exchanges. However, automatic switching defaults can also be implemented by private, third-party clearinghouses, such as a travel website that allows you
to search many different airlines, brokers in an insurance market, or a consumer finance
site that tracks products offered by many different banks. Non-purchase defaults can be
implemented with less information or organization.
The model can be extended in several ways. I have assumed that firms cannot make
long-term commitments to future prices, but do assume that firms can commit to the default
that they apply. This state of affairs is often observed in markets, and it is likely that
contracting on the default is simpler than writing a state-contingent contract for future
prices. Yet if firms were not able to commit to future defaults, and defaults were not set by
a regulator, products with automatic switching default would be undersupplied. Suppose a
consumer preferred an automatic switching default, even though it would lead to a higher
initial price. Even if firms initially offered automatic switching defaults, the firm would have
an incentive to change the default to automatic renewal in later periods in order to raise
demand for its product. Not only would automatic switching defaults be only transitorily
applied, but consumers (foreseeing future firm behavior) would be less likely to pay extra to
choose automatic switching defaults.
More complex switching defaults could be considered. I have assumed that products
are homogenous, but automatic switching could also apply in contexts with heterogenous
products. A market designer implementing a switching default could use information to
predict a consumer’s next-best match (i.e. switching to the cheapest insurance plan that
contained one’s doctor and had the same deductible). The analysis of the optimal default
in such a market could also take into account that automatic switching may disrupt the
unobserved match quality between a consumer and a product. Other switching defaults
could also depend on ∆p : the probability that a consumer is automatically switched could
increase in ∆p, or consumers could only be switched if ∆p exceeds some threshold. These
defaults would then shape the demand curve for firms. However, if set by the regulator, they
could begin to approximate price regulation.

23

6

Conclusion

While dynamic defaults affect many markets, they have received little study. The investthen-harvest pricing pattern is prevalent, and leads to incentives for individuals to switch
products. This paper provided a framework for determining how individuals choose dynamic
defaults for themselves, trading off price savings versus adjustment costs and taking into
account that they may face PFLIs. These dynamic defaults have externalities through firm
pricing, so the decentralized choice of default will not necessarily lead to the socially optimal
default. This paper provided conditions under which the various defaults would be optimal.
While this paper focused on the equilibrium effects of dynamic defaults, firms will also
respond to other types of defaults. For instance, consider an employer administering a
retirement savings plan that is choosing between requiring an active decision versus setting
a default savings rate and fund allocation. If the retirement savings plan contains competing
mutual funds, the choice of default rule may affect the price elasticity competing funds face
when setting management fees. If active decision increases (decreases) competitive pressure
on firms when setting fees, then the equilibrium level of fees will be lower (higher) under this
policy than under a default assignment policy. While empirical work thus far has focused
on showing default effects on individual behavior, future empirical work should also examine
the equilibrium effects of changes in default rules.
The distinction between adjustment costs and PFLIs is relevant for contracting and
competition in many contexts. Often, a failure to switch products under an automatic
renewal default has been interpreted as evidence of adjustment costs. However, PFLIs can
also lead to a failure to switch when an automatic renewal default applies. Adjustment
costs and PFLIs have different welfare implications, lead to different choices of defaults,
and can be distinguished using revealed preference. PFLIs provide a general framework for
inactivity resulting from numerous psychological sources (e.g. procrastination, memory, and
inattention) that can interact with each other in complex ways. This PFLI framework can
be applied to the analysis of other types of defaults and can be useful for interpreting inertia
observed in markets.
REFERENCES
Abadie, Alberto, and Sebastien Gay. 2006. "The Impact of Presumed Consent Legislation on Cadaveric Organ Donation: A Cross-Country Study." Journal of Health Economics
25 (4): 599—620.

24

Ariely D, Wertenbroch K. 2002. "Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance: SelfControl by Precommitment." Psychological Science, 13, 219—224.
Becker, G. M., M. H. DeGroot, and J. Marshak. 1964. Measuring Utility by a Single
Response Sequential Method, Behavioral Science, 9, 226-232.
Bernheim, Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. 2011. "The Welfare Economics
of Default Options: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of 401(K) Plans." NBER Working
Paper No. 17587.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2009. "Beyond Revealed Preference:
Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 51—104.
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew
Metrick. 2009. "Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics
124,1639-1674.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service, "Impact of Reassignment in the Part D Program on Health Outcomes," June 11, 2009.
http://www.cms.gov/PrescriptionDrugCovGenIn/Downloads/ReassignmentOutcomes.pdf
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. "Adjustment
Costs, Firm Responses, and Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 749-804.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Soren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore
Olsen. 2012. "Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowdout in Retirement Savings Accounts:
Evidence from Denmark". NBER Working Paper No. 18565.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004. "For
Better or For Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior." David Wise, editor.
Perspectives in the Economics of Aging. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 81-121.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. "Contract Design and Self-Control:
Theory and Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 353-402.
Dubé, Jean-Pierre, Günter Hitsch, and Peter Rossi. 2009. "Do Switching Costs Make
Markets Less Competitive?." Journal of Marketing Research 46, 435-445.

25

Duggan, Mark, Patrick Healy, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2008. "Providing Prescription Drug Coverage to the Elderly: America’s Experiment with Medicare Part D." Journal
of Economic Perspectives 22, 69-92.
Ericson, Keith M. 2011. "Forgetting We Forget: Overconfidence and Memory." Journal
of the European Economic Association 9, 43-60.
Ericson, Keith M. 2014a. "Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D
Prescription Drug Insurance Exchange". American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6,
38-64.
Ericson, Keith M. 2014b. "On the Interaction of Memory and Procrastination". Working
Paper.
Esteves-Sorenson, Constança, and Fabrizio Perretti. 2012. "Micro-Costs: Inertia in
Television Viewing." The Economic Journal 122 (563): 867—902.
Farrell, Joseph, and Klemperer, Paul. 2007. "Coordination and Lock-In: Competition
with Switching Costs and Network Effects." Handbook of Industrial Organization, Elsevier,
Vol 3 , 1967-2072.
Farrell, Joseph, and Carl Shapiro. 1988. "Dynamic Competition with Switching Costs."
RAND Journal of Economics 19, 123-137.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia,
and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121,
505-540.
Goda, Gopi Shah, and Colleen Flaherty Manchester. 2013. "Incorporating Employee
Heterogeneity into Default Rules for Retirement Plan Selection." Journal of Human Resources 48 (1): 198—235.
Greenstein, S.M. 1993. "Did installed base give an incumbent any (measurable) advantage
in federal computer procurement?" RAND Journal of Economics 24, 19—39.
Handel, Benjamin. 2013. "Adverse Selection and Switching Costs in Health Insurance
Markets: When Nudging Hurts." American Economic Review, 103 (7), 2643-2682.
Heidhues, Paul, Botond Koszegi, and Takeshi Murooka. 2012. "The Market for
Deceptive Products." Working Paper.

26

Johnson, Eric J., and Daniel Goldstein. 2003. "Do Defaults Save Lives?" Science 302
(5649): 1338—39.
Lacetera, Nicola, Devin G Pope, and Justin R Sydnor. 2012. “Heuristic Thinking
and Limited Attention in the Car Market.” American Economic Review 102 (5): 2206—36.
Laibson, David. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting". Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112: 443—477.
Letzler, Robert and Joshua Tasoff. 2012. "Everyone Believes in Redemption: Overoptimism and Nudges". Working Paper.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1187.
Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole. 2001. "Markov Perfect Equilibrium: I. Observable Actions." Journal of Economic Theory 100, 191-219.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2001. "Choice and Procrastination." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116, 121-160.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser. "Status Quo Bias in Decision Making."
Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 1 (1988), 7-59.
Strombom, Bruce, Thomas Buchmueller, and Paul Feldstein. 2002. "Switching
Costs, Price Sensitivity and Health Plan Choice." Journal of Health Economics 21 (2002),
89-116.
Summer L, Hoadley J, Hargrave E. 2010. "The Medicare Part D Low-Income Subsidy
Program: Experience to Date and Policy Issues for Consideration." Kaiser Family Foundation Brief #8094.
Taubinsky, Dmitry. 2013. "From Intentions to Actions: A Model and Experimental Evidence of Inattentive Choice", Working Paper.
Taylor, Curtis. "Supplier Surfing: Competition and Consumer Behavior in Subscription
Markets." RAND Journal of Economics 34 (2003), 223-246.

A.1

For Online Publication: Web Appendix
When Consumers Do Not Make an Active Decision: Dynamic Default Rules
and their Equilibrium Effects
Keith M Marzilli Ericson
A.1

Proof of Propositions in the Text

Proposition 1. For a given default, a competitive equilibrium exists and takes the following
Drepeat
form: each period, firms set introductory prices p∗initial = c − η δ 1+(1−D
and legacy
repeat )
Repeat
prices p∗legacy = c + η 1 . All young consumers purchase a product at an introductory price.
repeat
Fraction 1 − Drepeat of old consumers switch to a different product and get an introductory
price.
Proof. The repeat demand of old consumers who previously purchased from a firm is a function of ∆p = plegacy − pinitial . Legacy prices are set by maximizing (plegacy − c) Drepeat (∆p) ,
giving p∗legacy = c + η 1 . The zero-profit condition requires that pinitial be defined by
repeat
[1 + (1 − Drepeat )] (pinitial − c) + δ (plegacy − c) Drepeat = 0. Note that the measure of consumers purchasing at the introductory price includes measure 1 of young consumers and
Drepeat
(1 − Drepeat ) old consumers. This then gives p∗initial = c − η δ 1+(1−D
. Depending on
repeat )
Repeat
the distributions G and H there may be multiple equilibria having the specified form. At
least one such equilibrium exists.
Proposition 2. Under perfect competition, the privately optimal dynamic default is auto
R λ̄+∆p
matic switching if 0
ωdG (ω) < ∆p · G λ̄ + ∆p , and is otherwise automatic renewal.

Proof. We need only consider expected utility when consumers are old, as the introductory
price and consumer behavior while young is invariant to a change in the default. Under
automatic renewal, utility when old is given by:
EU

Re


Z
= v − plegacy − ∆p (1 − ψ) G (∆p) + (1 − ψ)

0

∆p



ωdG (ω) ,

since a consumer switches with probability (1 − ψ) G (∆p), saving ∆p relative to the legacy
price plegacy , but bearing adjustment costs. Similarly, under an automatic switching default,
expected second period utility is
EU

Sw

=v−

"


 #
plegacy − ∆p (1 − ψ) G (∆p) + ψG λ̄ + ∆p
R λ̄+∆p
R ∆p
ωdG (ω)
+ (1 − ψ) 0 ωdG (ω) + ψ 0
A.2

since consumers switch 1) if they are attentive and ∆p > ω it , or 2) if they are inattentive and
 R λ̄+∆p
λ̄ + ∆p > ω it . Taking the difference, EU Sw > EU Re iff ∆p · G λ̄ + ∆p > 0
ωdG (ω) .

Proposition 3. Under perfect competition, the socially optimal dynamic default for the
R λ̄+∆pSw
R ∆p
Re
population is automatic switching if ψ 0
ωdG (ω), and is
ωdG (ω) < (1 − ψ) ∆pSw
otherwise automatic renewal.
Proof. The optimal default from the social welfare perspective simply minimizes adjustment
costs borne, since transfers to all consumers are equally weighted and firms make zero profits.
(The cost of producing the product c per period and the quantity sold are invariant to the
default.) Adjustment costs borne per period under the automatic switching default are equal
to
Z
Z
λ̄+∆pSw

∆pSw

ωdG (ω) + ψ

(1 − ψ)

ωdG (ω)

0

0

since consumer switching behavior is as described in Proposition 2. Similarly, adjustment
R ∆p
costs borne under automatic renewal are equal to (1 − ψ) 0 Re ωdG (ω) per period. Hence,
adjustment costs are lower under automatic switching if
ψ

Z

λ̄+∆pSw

ωdG (ω) < (1 − ψ)

0

Z

∆pRe

∆pSw

as asserted.
Proposition 4. With a monopolist seller, the privately optimal dynamic default for a consumer who enters the market under both defaults is non-purchase iff



(plegacy − v) G plegacy − vi + λ̄ − G plegacy − vi − λ̄ >

Z

plegacy −vi +λ̄

ωdG (ω)

plegacy −vi −λ̄

and is otherwise automatic renewal. If the consumer enters the market for only one default,
their privately optimal dynamic default is the one under which they enter.
Proof. For the analysis of privately optimal defaults, the prices are constant across defaults. For a consumer who enters the market under both defaults, behavior when young
does not depend on the default by assumption. Expected utility when old and attentive
is unaffected by the default. Finally, expected utility when old and inattentive is simR∞
R ω∗v Def
(v − plegacy ) , where ω ∗vi Def is the default-specific renewal
ply 0 i (−ω) dG (ω) + ω∗
vi Def
threshold defined in the text. Utility under the non-purchase default is higher whenever
R∞
R ω∗v Re
R∞
R ω∗vi N on
(−ω) dG (ω) + ω∗
(v − plegacy ) > 0 i (−ω) dG (ω) + ω∗ (v − plegacy ) dG (ω) ,
0
vi N on
vi Re
which simplifies to the asserted condition. If the consumer purchases under only one default,
that default is privately optimal, since it is revealed preferred to not entering the market.
A.3

Proposition 5. With a monopolist seller, the socially optimal dynamic default is nonR v∗
R∞
purchase iff δ max{v∗ ,v∗ } [∆Att (v) + ∆Inatt (v)] dW (v) > v∗N on N ewDef (v) dW (v) , where
Re N o
Re
Def is the default under which more consumers enter the market when young, and is otherwise automatic renewal.
Proof. Social welfare is the total valuation of purchasers, minus the cost of production and
adjustment costs. For a given default, this can be decomposed into the welfare of the
young and old at each valuation v, and then integrated over the distribution of first-period


R∞
purchasers. Thus, social welfare is: v∗ (v − c) + δ AttDef (v) + InattDef (v) dW (v) , with
Def

Def

Att

(v) = (1 − ψ)

"Z

pDef
legacy −v

(−ω) dG +

0

and
InattDef (v) = ψ

"Z

ω ∗v

i Def

(−ω) dG +

Z

Z

pDef
legacy −v

∞

(v − c) dG

#

#

(v − c) dG .

ω ∗v

0

∞

i Def

When comparing welfare under the defaults, the left-hand side of the condition for optimality
integrates over the valuation of consumers who purchase when young under both sets of defaults, leaving just the change in welfare when old; this is decomposed into that for attentive
R pRe −v
and inattentive consumers with AttN o (v) − AttRe (v) = (1 − ψ) pNlegacy
(v − c + ω) dG,
o

 legacy −v
o
R pNlegacy
−vi +λ̄
(v − c + ω) dG . The increase in social
and InattN o (v) − InattRe (v) = −ψ pRe
−vi −λ̄
legacy

welfare under a non-purchase default for type i who purchases when young under both
defaults is then δ [∆Att (vi ) + ∆Inatt (vi )] . The change in social welfare for
h type i who puri
Def
Def
chases when young under default Def only is N ew
(vi ) = (vi − c) 1 + δDold
(vi ) −
Rp
R ω∗v Def
−v
Def
(1 − ψ) 0 legacy i ωdG (ω) − ψ 0 i ωdG (ω) , with Dold
(vi ) being the repeat demand for
type v. Then, total change in social welfare from moving to a non-purchase default simply
integrates over all the different valuations in the population.
A.2

Appendix: Extension to General Distribution of PFLI and Opt-Out Costs

This appendix generalizes the discussion in Section 3. I now consider optimal defaults
when λit , the tolerable losses from inaction resulting from psychological frictions, is drawn
from an arbitrary distribution H that is continuous, bounded and differentiable with p.d.f.
h. As in Section 3, consumers also draw an adjustment cost ω from a continuous, bounded
and differentiable distribution G.
Furthermore, I allow for an "opt-out" cost κ that must be borne when a consumer does
A.4

not take the default option, where κ is a real resource cost and lowers utility. The opt-out
cost κ represents the cost of actively expressing preference (e.g. sending back a form), and
is distinct from the cost of switching products (e.g. setting up prescription to be billed to a
new insurer). Thus, κ is borne when people switch under an automatic renewal default, and
when people do not switch under an automatic switching default. The cost κ acts similarly
to λ in how it affects consumer behavior: it increases the likelihood of taking the default.
However, it affects utility differently than λ, as it directly affects an individual’s WTP for
different defaults; it can be distinguished from λ using the choice experiments described in
Section 2.4. Intuitively, κ creates an additional motivation to choose a default that matches
the most likely action: if most consumers switch products each period, then an automatic
switching default might raise welfare by saving them the cost of opting out of the default.
When the default is automatic renewal, consumers switch if the gain to doing so, net
of adjustment costs, exceeds λit + κ, the psychological friction and the real cost of opting
R∞
out of the default. This occurs with probability qRe ≡ 0 H (∆p − ω − κ) dG (ω) : the
probability that ∆p − ω it > λit + κ, integrated over draws of ω. Similarly, when the default
is automatic switching, attentive consumers always switch when ∆p − ω it > −κ, since they
compare the gain of switching to paying κ if they opt out of the default. However, when
λ > 0, they also switch so long as ω it − ∆p − κ < λit , since they are willing to tolerate a
loss of λ to stay with the default of switching. Thus, the probability they switch is given by
R∞
qSw ≡ 1 − 0 H (ω − ∆p − κ) dG (ω) .
Now, we have the analogues of Propositions 2 and 3. Proposition A.1 again shows that
the privately optimal default for an individual consumer weighs the price savings against the
increased adjustment costs and opt-out costs borne. Similarly, Proposition A.2 shows that
the socially optimal default for the entire population is the default that minimizes adjustment
costs and opt-out costs.
Proposition A.1. Under the competitive equilibrium setup with κ > 0 and distribution H
of λ, the privately optimal dynamic default is automatic switching if
κ [(1 − qSw ) − qRe ] +

Z

∞

0

Z

∆p+λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) < ∆p (qSw − qRe )

∆p−λ−κ

and is otherwise automatic renewal.
Proof. The proof follows that of Proposition 2. Under automatic renewal, expected total
costs in the second period are given by
ET CRe = κqRe + plegacy (1 − qRe ) + pinitial (qRe ) +

Z

0

A.5

∞

Z

0

∆p−κ−λ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ)

where the last term is adjustment costs borne. For each value of λ, the adjustment costs
borne are those between ω = 0 and ω = ∆p − λ − κ. Similarly, under automatic switching,
expected total price, adjustment, and opt-out costs in in the second period are given by
ET CSw = κ (1 − qSw ) + plegacy (1 − qSw ) + pinitial (qSw ) +

Z

∞

0

Z

∆p+λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ)

0

where again, the last term is adjustment costs borne. For each value of λ, we take the integral
of adjustment costs from ω = 0 to ω = ∆p + λ + κ, since the latter adjustment cost gives
the maximal tolerable loss from switching. Now, automatic switching is privately optimal if
ET CSw < ET CRe , which requires
Z

κ [(1 − qSw ) − qRe ] +

∞

0

Z

∆p+λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) < ∆p (qSw − qRe )

∆p−λ−κ

as asserted.
Sw −2κ
. Under the competitive equilibrium setup with
Proposition A.2. Define z = ∆pRe −∆p
2
κ > 0 and distribution H of λ, the socially optimal dynamic default is automatic switching
if

κ [(1 − qSw ) − qRe ] +

Z

Z

∞

z

∆pSw +λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) <

Z

0

∆pRe −λ−κ

z

Z

∆pRe −λ−κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ)

∆pSw +λ+κ

and is otherwise automatic renewal.
Proof. The proof follows that of Proposition 3: the socially optimal default minimizes real
adjustment costs and opt-out costs borne. Using the logic of Proposition A.1, note that total
adjustment costs and opt-out costs borne under automatic renewal are given by
Z

∞

0

Z

∆pRe −λ−κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) + κqRe

0

where ∆pRe is the equilibrium introductory v. legacy price differential between, given the
automatic renewal default. Similarly, adjustment costs and opt-out costs borne under automatic switching are given by
Z

0

∞

Z

∆pSw +λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) + κ (1 − qSw )

0

Note that when ∆pSw ≥ ∆pRe , total adjustment costs borne are certainly higher under
automatic switching, but opt-out costs may be lower. In general, automatic switching is
A.6

optimal if total adjustment and opt-out costs are higher under automatic renewal
Z

∞

0

Z

∆pRe −λ−κ

0

ωdG (ω) −

Z

∆pSw +λ+κ



ωdG (ω) dH (λ) + κ [qRe − (1 − qSw )] > 0

0

Now, we can break the integrals apart, noting that ∆pRe − λ − κ > ∆pSw + λ + κ when
Sw −2κ
z ≡ ∆pRe −∆p
> λ. Hence we have automatic switching optimal when
2
Z

0

z

Z

∆pRe −λ−κ

∆pSw +λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) >

Z

z

∞

Z

∆pSw +λ+κ

ωdG (ω) dH (λ) + κ [(1 − qSw ) − qRe ]

∆pRe −λ−κ

as asserted. It can easily be seen that this expression simplifies to the condition in Proposition
R ∆pRe −λ̄−κ
ωdG (ω) >
3: with λ = λ̄ with probability ψ and otherwise zero, it becomes ψ ∆pSw
+λ̄+κ
R ∆pSw +κ
(1 − ψ) ∆pRe −κ ωdG (ω) + κ [(1 − qSw ) − qRe ] . Setting κ = 0, noting that ∆pRe − λ̄ < 0 by
R ∆p +λ̄
R ∆pRe
assumption, and multiplying by -1, we have ψ 0 Sw ωdG (ω) < (1 − ψ) ∆pSw
ωdG (ω) , as
asserted.
A.3

Appendix: Generalization to Infinite Horizon

Now, let consumers live more than two-periods: let consumers have a constant hazard
ρ ∈ (0, 1) of dying each period, so that fraction 1 − ρ of the population survives from the
last period. Let population size be constant, as each period measure ρ of new consumers
that are unattached to any product enter the population. As before, consumers discount
future utility by δ < 1 each period, in addition to the discounting that results from the
probability of death. Each period, a consumer receives an i.i.d. draws of ω it from G and λit
from H.23 Define Drepeat (p − pinitial ) as the repeat demand of measure one of consumers at
a firm charging a legacy price p in market in which the lowest price is pinitial ; that is, if a
firm has measure s potential repeat customers, the measure of customers who actually buy
′
−Drepeat
again from the firm is s · Drepeat (p − pinitial ). As before, η repeat = Drepeat
I assume that there N ≥ 2 firms in the market. Firms can distinguish between repeat
customers from last period and new customers, but cannot observe a consumer’s entire
purchase history. Because firms are involved in an infinitely-repeated game, many possible
collusive equilibria may exist. I consider a Markov-perfect equilibrium (Maskin and Tirole
2001) in which firms’ prices cannot depend on other firms’ histories. Proposition A.3 shows
that a simple invest-then-harvest equilibrium exists.
23

The i.i.d. assumption implies that there are no persistent heterogeneity in consumers’ propensities to
switch. This assumption substantially simplifies the calculation of equilibrium, but could be relaxed. In the
presence of persistent heterogeneity in switching costs, firms would set price taking into account that the
mix of individuals that would purchase is endogenous to the price.

A.7

Proposition A.3. A pure-strategy Markov-perfect equilibrium exists and takes the following
form. Firms set introductory price pinitial ,and price for previous period purchasers plegacy ,
0)
with prices given by pinitial = c − δ V ((1−ρ)s
, and plegacy = c + η 1 − δ (1 − ρ) V ′ (s) .
s0
repeat
The price differential ∆p ≡ plegacy − pinitial = η 1 .Each firm receives new purchasers of
repeat
measure s0 = N1 [ρ + (1 − ρ) (1 − Drepeat (∆p))] each period. The value of a firm with measure
s of customers is V (s) = s Dη repeat .
repeat

Proof. I show the proposed equilibrium exists by construction. Take the proposed value
function for a firm with market share s:
V (s) = s

[Drepeat (∆p)]2
′
−Drepeat
(∆p)

∗

Drepeat (∆p )
1
. Note that ∆p∗ does not depend on either plegacy
where we define ∆p∗ = −D
′
∗ = η
repeat
repeat (∆p )
or pinitial directly.
This value function is linear in s and hence has a constant derivative with respect to s.
Since the value function of a firm with a positive customer base is given by

V (s) = max s (p − c) [Drepeat (p − pinitial )] + δV (s (1 − ρ) [Drepeat (p − pinitial )])
p

the first order condition determining the optimal legacy price is
p∗legacy = c +

Drepeat (∆p∗ )
− δ (1 − ρ) V ′ (s)
′
−Drepeat
(∆p∗ )

This does not depend on s given the linearity of V. Substituting in for V ′ andη gives
p∗legacy = c +

Drepeat (∆p∗ )
[1 − δ (1 − ρ) [Drepeat (∆p∗ )]]
′
−Drepeat
(∆p∗ )

which defines plegacy . It is easy to see that this pricing strategy yields the proposed value
function, as

V (s) = s (plegacy − c) [Drepeat (∆p∗ )] 1 + δ (1 − ρ) [Drepeat (∆p∗ )] + δ 2 (1 − ρ)2 [Drepeat (∆p∗ )]2 + ...
1
= s (plegacy − c) [Drepeat (∆p∗ )]
1 − δ (1 − ρ) [Drepeat (∆p∗ )]
Now, consider competition for new customers. The market is competitive, and so
firms compete away future profits with the initial price. The zero-profit condition gives

A.8

s0 (pinitial − c) = −δV ((1 − ρ) s0 ) , or by the linearity of V :
p∗initial = c − δ (1 − ρ) V ′ (s)
[Drepeat (∆p∗ )]2
= c − δ (1 − ρ)
′
(∆p∗ )
Drepeat
It is easily checked that these values of p∗initial and p∗legacy satisfy the definition of ∆p∗ . .
Now I show that neither type of firm has an incentive to deviate from the proposed
strategy. First, note that the optimal strategy for setting a legacy price depends solely on
a firms’ last period purchasers and pinitial , as repeat demand is a function only of the plan’s
own price and the lowest price in the market, which will be an introductory price. Then,
consider deviations to alternative introductory prices p′ . If p′ > pinitial , the firm gets no new
customers, and makes zero profit. If p′ < pinitial , the firm makes negative discounted profits.
Hence there are no profitable deviations for introductory prices.
Finally, consider deviations to alternative legacy prices. Given pinitial , plegacy is defined
as profit maximizing and so there is no incentive to deviate to any other legacy price p′legacy >
pinitial . If p′legacy < pinitial , the firm makes negative discounted profits, just as a firm setting an
introductory price below pinitial would. The other potential deviation is to p′legacy = pinitial .
But this would give zero profits: such a firm would get higher enrollment s′ > s0 since it
would attract unattached consumers as well as keep all its own enrollees. But the value of
such a firm is s′ (pinitial − c) + δV ((1 − ρ) s′ ) = 0 (assuming future optimal action) which
is invariant to s′ and equal to zero by construction. Hence the proposed {pinitial , plegacy }
strategy is an equilibrium.
Proposition A.4. If the equilibrium in Proposition A.3 obtains, privately optimal and socially optimal defaults are determined by Propositions 2 and 3, respectively.
When consumers enter the market, they face price pinitial .In period 2 they draw ω from
G, and λ from H. The consumer faces the same decision in this period as a consumer would
in case where consumers lived only two periods: their result is affected by the default and
λ, if they switch they pay plegacy but bear ω it ,if they renew they pay plegacy .Regardless of
whether the consumer switches or renews, they will face the same decision in period 3 (with
a new draw of λ, ω), as prices only vary based on whether the consumer has newly switched
or purchased in the previous period.

A.9

