                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TESTING THE RESPONSE OF
                  CONSUMPTION TO INCOME CHANGES
                     WITH (NOISY) PANEL DATA




                        Joseph G. Altonji

                          Aloysius Siow




                      Working Paper No. 2012




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            September 1986




An earlier draft of this paper was presented at a meeting of the
Econometric Society in December 1984. We are grateful to Thomas
Melito for excellent research assistance and recieved helpful com-
ments from Alan Blinder, John Ham, Douglas Holtz-Eakins, Fumio
Hayashi, Robert Lalonde, Lynn Paquette, Stephen Zeldes, and par-
ticipants in workshops at Baruch College-CUNY, Columbia University,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and New York University. We
also thank Lawrence Summers and two anonymous referees for their
suggestions. Altonji gratefully acknowledges research support from
Columbia University, the Industrial Relations Section--Princeton
University, and from the National Science Foundation under grant
No. SES-85-13470. Siow gratefully acknowledges research support
from Columbia and from the National Science Foundation under grant
No. SES-84-11396. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                    Working Paper #2012
                                                    September 1986



     Testing the Response of Consumption to Income with (Noisy) Panel Data



                                     ABSTRACT



     This paper tests the rational expectations lifecycle model of consumption
against (1) a simple Keynesian model and (ii) the rational expectations
lifecycle model with imperfect capital markets. The tests are based upon the
relative responsiveness of consumption to income changes which can be
predicted from past information and income changes which cannot be predicted.
Since there is strong evidence that panel data contains substantial measurement
error, the tests are especially constructed to allow for measurement error in the
income process. They also allow for more general income processes than have been
considered to date in the literature.
     The results reject the Keynesian model and generally support the lifecycle model,
although the tests are not sufficiently precise to rule out the possibility that some
households are liquidity constrained. Measurement error does have a strong influence
on the relationship between consumption and income. When it is ignored our tests do
not reject the Keynesian model. We show that consideration of measurement error may
also reconcile differences in the results of Hall and Mishkin (1982) and Bernanke
(1984). Nevertheless, our most important conclusion is that Hall and Mishkin's,
Bernanke's, and Hayashi's (198 )   qualitative   finding that the vast majority of
households obey the lifecycle model is not an artifact of failure to account for
measurement error in the income data.




Joseph J. Altonji                                  Aloysius Siow
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Columbia University                                Columbia University
New York, NY 10027                                 New York, NY 10027
First Draft: December 1984                   1 —
Final Draft: July     1986



                                       1. INTRODUCTION

          Hall   and Mishkin [1982], Bernanke [19841, and Hayashi [1985] have recently

     used micro panel data sets to study rational expectations models of the response

     of consumption to income changes.' A critical assumption that these studies

     have in common is that income is measured without error. This assumption is

     used to identify the consumption response to transitory income. The assumption

     of no measurement error in income is very strong (as Hall and Mishkin point

     out), because many variables in micro data sets contain substantial measurement

     error, and the ratio of signal to noise in first differences of the data may be

     very poor.2 Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (Hall and Mishkins data

     set) Altonji [1986] finds strong evidence that the change in the log of labor

     earnings divided by annual hours worked contains a large amount of measurement

     error. Duncan and Hill [1984] have gathered direct evidence on the importance

     of measurement error. They compare the responses of employees of a single large

     firm with the records of the employer. They find that measurement error

     accounts for 16.8 percent of the variance in the earnings level.3 Under

     reasonable assumptions, this translates into a much larger percentage of the

     variance in the first difference of earnings.4 Measurement error in nonlabor

     income is likely to be an even more serious problem.

          Fortunately, micro data sets such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

     contain many measures of determinants of income, such as wage rates, layoffs,

     quits, promotions, hours unemployed, and hours lost due to illness. For those

     variables which are based on questions that are independent of the ones used to

     construct family income, one may assume that the measurement errors in the

     income determinants are independent of measurement errors in reported income and

     consumption. These determinants provide the leverage necessary to implement

     tests of consumption models which are free of bias from measurement error. They

     can also be used to relax the assumption made in many studies of the permanent
                                    —2--


income hypothesis that the income process is exogenous with respect to

consumption preferences5, and to integrate work on consumption of goods with

research on lifecycle labor supply.6

     For a rough quantitative assessment of the above issues, we regressed the

first difference of the log of food consumption on the first difference of the

log of family income for a sample from the Panel of Income Dynamics. The

coefficient estimate for the first difference of the log of family income was

0.076 with an estimated standard error of 0.013. If income is measured with

error, then this estimated coefficient is biased downward. We re—estimated the

relationship between the change in consumption and the change in income using

the income determinants as instrumental variables for the income variable. (The

first stage regression is in Column 7, Table I). The new point estimate is

three times larger than the ordinary least squares estimate (0.229 with a

standard error of 0.047.). This simple comparison suggests that the measurement

error problem for panel studies of the link between consumption and income is

quantitatively important. Moreover the small standard error of the instrumental

variables estimate suggests that the other variables in the data set are

important enough in the income process to implement tests of consumption models

which are free of bias from measurement error.

     The above result also calls into question the findings of previous studies

which have not taken measurement error into account.7 Rall and Mishkin,

 Bernanke, and Hayashi all find that the vast majority of households obey the

 lifecycle model. We wish to examine whether this important result is an

 artifact of measurement error in the income data. We also wish to know whether

 differences in the detailed findings of these studies might be due to

 differences in their sensitivity to measurement error.

      This paper uses measures of income determinants to test the rational

 expectations (RE) lifecycle model of consumption against (i) a simple Keynesian
                                    —3--


model and (ii) the RI lifecycle model with imperfect capital markets. Two major

advantages of our test are: (1) it is valid in the presence of measurement error

in income, consumption, and in the income determinants, and (2) the test allows

for more general income processes than have been considered to date in the

literature,8 and does not assume that all components of the income process, such

as work hours, are exogenous with respect to consumption.

     The first set of tests simply checks whether the change in consumption is

correlated with the past values of various variables which might be related to

income and wealth, such as past wage changes, unemployment, and layoffs. This

approach has been used in a number of time series studies, beginning with papers

by Hall [1978] and Sargent [1978]. Micro data tests have been conducted as well

(Hall and Mishkin [1982], Hayashi[1985], Altonjl [19861, Runkle [1983] and

Zeldes [1985]), but these have worked with only a few variables.

     The second set of tests, which also parallels work in the aggregate time

series literature, is the main contribution of this paper. We study the

relationship between the change in consumption and (partial) measures of

anticipated and unanticipated changes in income. To circumvent the problem

caused by measurement error in the income changes, we construct instruments for

the unanticipated changes and the anticipated income change. We show that the

Keynesian model implies that the coefficients of a regression of the change in

consumption on the instruments for the anticipated and unanticipated components

of the income change should be equal, while a simple RE—lifecycle model implies

that only the instrument for the unanticipated component matters. These

restrictions hold even though the instrument for the unanticipated change in

income is contaminated by past innovations in the true income determinants as

well as by measurement errors in the Income determinants.

     The empirical results are generally supportive of the lifecycle model, and

reject the Keynesian model. Moreover they show that the Keynesian model cannot
                                    —4—

be rejected if measurement error in the income process is ignored by the

econometrician. We also show that measurement error is likely to bias the Hall

and Mishkin study against the lifecycle model, while biasing Bernankes results

in favor of the lifecycle model. Thus, it is possible that the contradiction

between Hall and Mishkins finding that perhaps 20 percent of their sample are

constrained and Bernankes confirmation of the lifecycle model is due to

measurement error.

     Finally, we incorporate capital market imperfections into our empirical

formulation of the RE—lifecycle model by assuming that the marginal interest

rate at a point in time is a differentiable function of the net assets. This

approach to modeling "liquidity constraints" leads to a simple modification of

the conventional Euler equation for consumption and is analytically more

tractible than approaches based upon discontinuous borrowing
                                                               contraints. Our

modified model, in common with models by Dolde [1978], Flemining [19731, Manger
                                                             implies that the
[19851, and Zeldes [19851 using discontinuous constraints,

response of consumption to positive and negative changes in income is

asymmetric. We present a preliminary study of whether consumption responds

differently to positive and negative predictable changes in consumption.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the RE—lifecycle and

Keynesian model and discusses the restrictions which they impose on the

 relationship between the change in consumption and instruments for unanticipated

 and anticipated components of the income change.   Section 3 discusses

 econometric issues and data and Section 4 present the results. Section 5

 examines capital market imperfections.



                                                                OF CONSUMPTION
      2: IMPLICATIONS OF TILE RE—LIFECYCLE AND KEYNESIAN W)DELS
                                                                     is
      The RE—lifecycle model posits that the change in consumption
 proportional to the revision in the marginal utility of income. Under RE, past
                                         —5—

determinants of income do not affect the revision and therefore do not also

affect the change in consumption. As developed in the Appendix, a version of

the RE—lifecycle model used in several previous studies implies that



(1) L\lnC*t = Bent +



      Equation (1) states that the change in the log of measured consumption,

AlnC*, is equal to the coefficient B times the revision in the log of the

marginal utility of income, n,        plus an error term ect. The error term et is
used to represent the sum of the effect of variation in preferences and the

measurement error in the consumption data.          is uncorrelated with past

determinants of income. Equation (1) is based on the assumption that credit

markets are perfect and taxes are proportional, so that all individuals face a

common after tax interest rate in year t,      which we have supressed for notational
convenience. In most of the empirical work we control for the interest rate by

using a dummy variable for each year, although we also experiment with

introduction of a control for variation in the after tax rate which arises from

the tax system.

      The Keynesian model of consumption argues that consumption varies with

current income. In first differences of the logs of consumption and income the

model may   be   represented as



(2)    LlnC* =
                     cth1ny
                              +
                                  e
where ect is used as in (1).

      Our test of the two models is based upon an equation which relates the

change in consumption to a component of the lnyt which is anticipated by the

consumer and a component which is at least partially unanticipated. To derive
                                          —6--


this equation from the consumption equations (1) and (2), we first decompose the

change in measured income into a (1) component which is predictable given

information which is available to the consumer, (2) a component which is in part

unanticipated by the consumer, and (3) a composite error term.

     Let y denote real family income in period t. We assume that



(3) lny = h1iX             + h2X1 +         Vt
              =             +
(4) Alny                          Ae
(5) t x =xt +               Lc
                                 xt



In the above equations lnyt is             —           lny is the sum of Ldny and a

measurement error LEyt v is an error component. LX is a vector of exogenous

determinants of income which are known to consumers at t, including determinants

of wage rates, labor supply determinants, and constraints on hours.             is a

set of measures of LXt and             is a vector of measurement errors in

Equation (3) and (4) are least squares linear prediction equations. The error

component Vt is orthogonal to             by definition of h1 and h2. We make the

assumption that            is uncorrelated with the measurement error and shifts in

consumption preferences driving the consumption error component eat. We also

assume that          is uncorrelated with the income measurement error          The

justification for these assumptions given our data and choice of AX*t is

discussed in Sections 3.1 and 4.1 below.

     Let the decomposition of            into its linear least squares projection on

its first few lagged values and the error component           be



                       *
(6) x* =          O(L)LX     +



where 0(L) is a matrix polynomial in the lag operator, L, and u is
                                              —7—

uncorrelated with O(L)LX*t_l by construction. Equation (6) need not contain a

sufficient number of lags to be the autoregressive representation of                  The

composite error          may be serially correlated and in general is a function of

current and past innovations in               and current and past measurement errors.9

Although       is contaminated by measurement error and past innovations in

we will refer to it as a component of the unanticipated change in income for

lack of a better name. Equations (3), (4) and (6) imply that the regression

equation relating lny and                     is




(7)    Alny    =
                   [h2
                         +
                             h1e(L) 1tX_1 +        hiu+ v +    yt
      The relationship between the change in consumption and income for the RE—

lifecyle model may now be derived. First, we project the revision in the

marginal utility of income, n, onto the scalar variable hiut



(8) n =       b(hiu)      +



The coefficient b is an increasing function of the size and degree of permanence

in the effects of the components of LX on income.

      We will now examine the relationship between the change in consumption and

income using



(9)     lnC =       lihjut     +
                                   2[h2   +
                                              h1O(L)]X_1 ÷ ct


Equation (9) decomposes the consumption change A1nC*t into its least squares

linear projection on hiut and [h2 + hlO(L)LIX*t_l] and an orthogonal error,



      The RE—lifecycle model implies that i=Bb and                   To see this,
                                         —8—

substitute (8) into (1) and compare the result with (9). Intuitively, 2

should be zero because [h2 +    hlO(L)JX*t_l       contains only old information and

therefore does not affect the revision in the marginal utility of income.'0

Although hiu contains old information and measurement error, It also contains

new information which induces the nonzero value Bb for the coefficient 4. A

formal demonstration that the above restrictions do in fact hold for the linear

projection equation (9) is in the Appendix.

        On the other hand, the Keynesian consumption model implies that           =
                                                                                      2   in

equation (9). Substituting for Llny from (7) into (2) leads to



(10)      lnC*t =      ah1u    +
                                   a[h10(L)
                                              +
                                                  h2]X1   ÷ av +
                                                                   e
Comparison of (10) with (9) indicates that the Keynesian model implies that                =

       as claimed.'1

        We also perform a secondary test of the RE—lifecycle hypothesis based upon

the fact that the parameter b relating fl to h,ut is a positive function of the

extent to which innovations In           have large permanent effects on lifetime

income. We do this by comparing estimates of            when transitory factors

(unemployment and hours lost due to illness) are excluded from             with the

results when they included.

        It is important to keep in mind in examining the empirical results below

that the restriction 42=0 is based upon the assumption of separability of

preferences. King [1985] and many others have noted that nonseparability of

preferences between consumption and leisure within a given time period and/or

intertemporal nonseparability of preferences will lead to a nonzero correlation

between the change in consumption and lagged determinants of the income

change. 12,13

       In addition to the above test, we extend earlier analyses of the effect of
                                             —9—

past income on the consumption change by analyzing the relationship between

and           with        left out of the model. The Keynesian model obviously

implies that the relationship is



                                             ÷ ect +            +
(11) LdnC*t = a[h2 +       hiO(L)]X*t_l                czhiut       cvt


where hiut is treated as part of the error term. The RE—lifecycle model
implies that the coefficient on                and its lags are all 0.

      The above tests were developed to overcome measurement error in income. As

we will see in the next section, ignoring measurement error in the testing

procedure when it is present in the data will lead to incorrect inferences.



                           III ECONOMETRIC METhODOLOGY AND DATA

      Estimation of (9) is complicated by the fact that hiut and

                        are unobserved. However, one may form instruments for these
[h2 +    hiO(L)]X*t_l
variables from regressions of 1fly* on                 and its lags. In practice it is

convenient to use the fact that



(12) hiu = [h1AX            +
                                h2X1     ]   — (h10(L)     ÷ h2)X_i


to rewrite (9) in the form



(13) tlnC*t =        l[hlx*t    +   h2x*t_l]   +   2   —
                                                           41][h2 +   hie(L)]X*t...l

                                                                          with the estimate
        We then rewrite (13) by replacing [h2 +          hiO(L)]X*t_l
                         obtained from least squares estimation of (7) and by using
 [h2 +   hle(L)]X*t_l
equation (3) to replace the unobservable [hltX*t +              h2X*t_l]    with L1ny and

an error component. These changes lead to
                                     — 10 —




(14)   lnC =      1tlny + [q2—1][h2 + hiO(L)jLx*t_i +
where the composite error term       is equal to



(15) ct =    [2—1]{[h2   + h10(L)} — [h2 + hlO(L)]}X*t_l —        +   yt +

       quation (14) may be estimated by two stage least squares using        and

         as instrumental variables for Llny*t. We discuss computation of standard

errors in a footnote.'4

       We can now show the consequence of ignoring measurement error in income in

the testing procedure. If measurement error is absent, then Llny*t_i is a valid

instrument for lny* in equation (14). However if lfly*t contained a serially

uncorrelated measurement error as in equation (4), 1lny*_1 will be correlated

with         the measurement error in Llny*t. In fact the empirical results below

show that we will wrongly reject the RE—lifecycle model if the measurement error

problem is ignored.

       For computational convenience we have followed the lead of Hall and Mishkin

[1982] and Hayashi [19851 and have removed the effects of economy wide

disturbances and a variety of demographic characteristics from the variables

used in the analysis by first regressing the change in the log of consumption,

the change in the log of income, and the income determinants against a set of

year dummies, age, age2, age3, education, the change in a dummy variable for

marital status, the level and squared value of the change of family size, the

change in the number of children in the family unit, the change in the number of

children under age 6, and current and lagged values of dummy variables for 8

Census regions, residence in an SMSA, and residence in a city with more than

500,000 people. The residuals from these regressions form the basis for the
                                       — 11 —



analysis   below. Given the large samples which were used to form the residuals,

the fact that the estimation was performed in two stages is of little

consequence.



3.1 Power of the Tests

     Because the distribution of the estimators is known under both the

Keynesian model and RE—lifecycle model (subject to the caveat in fn 14) one may

say more than is usually possible about the power of the tests to reject the RE—

lifecycle model when the Keynesian model is correct, and vice versus. A brief

discussion of this issue may be useful in evaluating the findings below and in

thinking about the suitability of other data sets for the test we use. The test

of the RE—lifecycle model using (14) is a test of 2=• Under the alternative

hypothesis of the Keynesian model, 2 is the elasticity of food consumption

expenditures with respect to income, a. The power of the test depends on the

standard error of       relative to a, and in a footnote we discuss the factors

which determine this standard error.'5 Our estimated standard errors for          are

about .09. This suggests substantial power against the RE—lifecycle model when

the Keynesian model is correct, given that the instrumental variables estimate

reported in the introduction imply that a is .229 when interpreted using the

Keynesian model. However, we doubt if our test is very powerful, given the

quality of the PSID data, against the pure RE—lifecycle model under the

alternative hypothesis of a modest departure from this model.

     The power of the test of the Keynesian model under the null of the RE—

lifecycle model   is   determined by the standard error of the estimate of

relative to its value of —Bob if the RE—lifecycle model is correct.

     We can make some brief remarks about the power of our tests against the RE—

lifecyle model under the null hypothesis that consumption behaves according to a

Modigliani type consumption function and responds to a distributed lag of income
                                    — 12 —



and to assets. (See Modigliani [1971])16. If the Modigliani type model is

correct and the RE hypothesis is false, then one would expect the lagged

determinants of income in the estimates of (11) to play a significant role. One

would also expect the coefficient 2 on [h2 + h1O(L)]X*      to be significant in

tests based on (9) and (14), since income equations imply that variables such

as the lagged wage change and lagged unemployment have a strong relationship

with the lagged income change.



3.1 Data

     The data are from the 1968—1981 Panel Study of Income Dynamics individuals

tape. For a given year, the sample contains individuals who were between the

ages 18—60 inclusive, who were employed, temporarily laid off or unemployed at

the time of the survey. Additional observations are lost due to missing data on

current or lagged variables in the income or consumption equations.'7

       few of the variables require discussion. lnC is the log of the sum of

the familys food expenditures at home and outside of the home, deflated by the

food component of the consumer price index. This is the consumption measure

used in Hall and Mishkin [1982], Altonji [1986], and other recent studies of

lifecycle models based upon the PSID. There appears to be considerable

measurement error in the variable. This is accounted for in our model by the

error component act and does not affect the validity of our tests provided that

it is independent of instruments for the income change. The use of food

consumption in isolation from other goods may be justified in terms of the

lifecycle model presented in the Appendix if the utility function for each

period is separable between food consumption and other goods. The use of dummy

variables for each year control for the effects of shifts in the relative price

of food. The fact that food is a nondurable good is an advantage, since the

theory we presented does not apply to expenditures on durable goods without
                                     — 13 —



further   modifications (Hayashi [1985] and Bernanke [1984] discuss the durables

case). It should also be noted that the fact that the relationship between food

expenditures and income is known to be relatively flat is not a valid objection

to the use of food in the analysis, since        and    are free parameters. But

it obviously would be desirable to extend the analysis to additional categories

of consumption in future work, if the data can be found.

     One of the components of        is the change in the log of the real straight

time wage at the time of the survey. Given our assumptions about measurement

error, it is important to note that for both hourly workers and salary workers

this wage variable is based upon survey questions which are independent of those

used to construct

     Unfortunately, the consumption measure and the hourly wage measure refer to

the time of the survey (typically in March) while family income and a number of

key elements of         including hours of unemployed and hours of lost due to

illness, refer to the calendar year which precedes the survey date'9. This

poses a problem, since the inconsistency of the timing will tend to weaken the

relationship between tlny1 and the wage change variable relative to the true

relationship. One may show that this downward bias in the relationship between

the wage change and lny is likely to result in an upward bias in the the

consumption response to changes Alny which result from changes in the wage.

This will complicate the interpretation of changes in the consumption parameters

which occur when hours of unemployment and hours lost due to illness are dropped

from the first stage equation for Llny*t in (14). This problem, and possible

remedies, are considered further below.

     To limit the influence of outliers, observations were excluded if real food

expenditures rose by more than 400 percent or fell by 75 percent from the

preceding year, or if the real wage or real family income rose by more than 500%

or fell by more than 80%. Very few observations are lost as a result, but the
                                    — 14 —



standard deviations of AlnC' and Llny are reduced substantially.
     The results in the tables are based upon family income rather than after

tax income. Provided that the changes in income resulting from the explanatory

variables used in the model are not associated with large changes from year to

year in the marginal tax rate faced by the particular family, then taxes are

unlikely to have an important influence on the analysis of the response to

changes in income. However, we also report results based on after tax income

and the inclusion of the after tax interest rate in Section 4.2.



                                   IV RESULTS

     In this section, we report tests based on the relationship between

consumption and past income determinants as described in (11). We then turn to

tests based upon (14).



4.1 The Response of Consumption to Past Income Determinants

     Table I reports a series of estimates of (11) and consists of regressions

of the change in the log of real food consumption (the principle consumption

measure in the PSID data set) on a series of variables dated t—1 or earlier

which are determinants of income. These variables include the real wage change,

past quits and layoffs, the log of 2,000 plus hours unemployed, the log of 2,000

plus hours lost due to illness, past promotions, and interactions of the wage

change with quit, layoff and promotion dummy variables. The first lag of the

change in family income is used when bias due to correlation of measurement

errors in adjacent lags of Llny*t is not an issue.

     Before turning to the results we discuss our assumption, mentioned earlier,

that all of the income determinants are assumed to be exogenous with respect to

changes in consumption tastes (part of the disturbance ect). They may be

correlated with preference shifts affecting labor supply (ie, with the term nt
                                   — 15 —



which appears in Appendix equation A.13). The assumption of exogeneity with

respect to consumption preferences is justified for the wage change if most of

the large intertemporal variation in wages for a given individual is due to: (1)

variations in the marginal product of labor within a given job; (2) variation

across jobs which is due to relative demand shifts or noncompetive features of

the wage structure (union effects, for example); (3) differences across firms in

the optimal wage level implied by the turnover costs and supervision costs of

the firm, or (4) job match specific variation in the productivity associated

with complementarities between job requirements and other worker

characteristics.20 The exogeneity assumption is also justified for quits if

they usually are a response to differences in wages across jobs arising for any

of the above reasons. Our use of layoffs also seems justifiable. But it should

be noted that wage changes, quits, and perhaps even promotions might be

correlated with changes in consumption preferences if increases in consumption

needs which raise the marginal utility of income induce workers to seek less

desireable working conditions in exchange for higher wages.

     Ham [1986] examines the issue of whether variation in unemployment reflects

constraints on hours, intertemporal variation in wages, or variation in labor

supply preferences using an intertemporal labor supply model, and he provides

references to earlier sdudies. Our maintained assumption that unemployment is

unrelated to the shifts in consumption preferences Is clearly valid under the

first interpretation of unemployment, which Hams results favor. It may be

valid under both the second and third interpretations as well if consumption

tastes and labor supply tastes are unrelated.

     We are assuming that hours lost due to illness primarily reflects variation

In market productivity and in the disutility of working. On the other hand,

this variable might be correlated with consumption preferences if illness

affects tastes for going to restaurants or entertaining at home, although the
                                      — 16 —



relatively   modest change in estimates which occurs when this variable is dropped

(compare column (1) and (3) in Table 2) suggests that this is not a key

problem.

     We now turn to the results in Table 1. We do not find that the lagged

income determinants have a significant effect on consumption. For example, the

marginal significance level of the first 2 lags of the change in family income

is only 0.342 (see column 2), and the broad array of variables in column 3 are

not jointly significant either, although they are highly significant predictors

of the income change (see column 5.) All of the variables are also

statistically insignificant in the consumption equation when considered

individually (note the standard errors).

     The failure to find a significant role for the past income change Is

surprising in view of Hall and Mishkins [1982, pg. 478] results. The

difference in findings may in part be due to our removal of outliers or use of

logs. However, when we drop the sample selection requirement that valid data be

available on all of the various income determinants used in the analysis, the

sample size more than doubles, and in the larger sample (20,762 observations,

which compares to 9,913 for the other equations In the table and 6,926 for Hall

and Mishkin) the relationship between the lagged income changes and consumption

Is statistically significant (see column 1). Although we have considered a

number of possibilities, we do not have a good explanation for why the result is

sensitive to the choice of sample. In any event, even in the larger sample the

relationship between the past income change and consumption is weak. It Is

noteworthy that Zeldes [1985] finds a significant relationship between the

consumption change and the value of        (as opposed to the lagged first

difference in income) for a subsample of low income families but not for the

high income families.

     In summary, there is only weak evidence against the RE—lifecycle model from
                                      — 17



the analysis of the relationship between the change in consumption and past

determinants of the income change. However, there is reason to question the

power of tests of the RE—lifecycle model in Table I. Many of the point

estimates are subject to large standard errors. The problem arises in part from

the fact that the change in food consumption has a large unexplained variance,

reflecting measurement error and changes in preferences. Consequently, we turn

to the more powerful tests based upon (9), which we implement in the form of

(14).




4.2 Effects of Anticipated and    Partially Unanticipated   Components of Income

        on Consumption

        Table II reports tests based upon equation (14) of the relative role of

predictable and unpredictable changes in income in the consumption function.

Column 7 indicates that the coefficient on the income change is only 0.0907 when

only lagged LX* variables are used as instruments and is not significantly

different from 0. It is basically consistent with the results of Table I. In

column 1 the change in income is added as an additional variable with both LX

and past        variables used as instruments. Note first that the point estimate

of 21 is —.211. The hypothesis that it is 0 is rejected, which runs counter

to the Keynesian consumption function. Perhaps more importantly, the

coefficients on the two income terms, which are estimates of iBb and

—i=—Bb, with 4=0 under the permanent income hypothesis, are in fact opposite

in sign and similar in absolute value. The marginal significance level of the

t—statistlc for a test of equality is 0.64.21

        We now explore the sensitivity of the results to exclusion of transitory

determinants of income from tX*. Column (2) of Table II is identical to column

(1) except that the current value of hours unemployed is excluded from the AX

vector. The estimated effect of the unanticipated change in income rises to
                                   — 18 —



0.351 from 0.302. When both the current value of hours unemployed and hours

lost due to illness are eliminated from the variables in        the estimate of

   rises to 0.397 (Table II, Col 4.). The increase is consistent with the

hypothesis that unanticipated transitory income changes have a smaller influence

on consumption than unanticipated permanent income changes, since inspection of

the income change equation in column 7 of Table I reveals that the large effect

on income of a one time shock to hours lost due to illness and/or hours lost due

to unemployment on income is transitory22. Consequently, elimination of both

current unemployment and current illness from the      vector raises the

relative importance of permanent factors in the income process (such as wage

changes, which appear to persist). In terms of the lifecycle model, the

parameter b linking n to hiut rises, and so c         Bcb) also rises.
     However, two alternative explanations for the rise in q   require
discussion. First, if the assumption of intraperiod separability of preferences

between food consumption and labor supply is false, then, anticipated and

unanticipated changes in wages, unemployment and hours of illness have direct

effects on the change in consumption which go beyond their effects on

consumption through n.23 The coefficient on the change in income will reflect

a weighted average of these effects as well as the value of Bob. We cannot rule

out the possibility that the increase in the estimate of    following removal of

the unemployment and illness variables from      occurs because the direct

effect of these variables on consumption (with n held fixed) is smaller than

that of the wage change. However, the failure to detect a significant

relationship between the consumption change and the lagged values of the wage,

unemployment, and illness variables provides some limited evidence against

nonseparability as an explanation for the rise in q1. (See Table I.)

    The second explanation for the rise in     involves the fact that the timing

of the unemployment, hours lost due to illness, and family income questions
                                        — 19 —



refer   to the previous calendar year, while the food consumption and wage rate

refer to the survey date (typically March). As a check on this, we repeated the

analysis using two year changes rather than one year changes of all variables.

This increases the overlap in the time intervals of the two sets of variables as

a percentage of the overall time interval. The increased overlap should reduce

the effect that inconsistency of timing has on the covariances among the

variables. The results are reported in Table III, where the symbol 2Z refers

to Z —         for   any variable Z. The results are very similar to those in

Table II, and so the evidence does not support the view that the inconsistency

in the timing of the variables is responsible for our findings.

Experiments with After Tax Income and the After Tax Interest Rate

     For a subsample of 3987 observations we were able to match in data on after

income and the after tax real rate of interest constructed by Zeldes [19851.24

When we re—estimate (14) for the subsample and use total income, the estimates

of      and 2 —      are   .334 and —.341 with standard errors of (.134) and

(.179). When we use after—tax income the estimates of         and    —     are   .489

and —.514 with standard errors of (.184) and (.236). Thus, the tax adjustment

results in a rescaling of coefficients but makes no substantive difference. The

point estimates for the subsample are remarkably consistent with the RE—

lifecycle hypothesis. Addition of the after tax real rate of interest to (14)

has almost no effect on these point estimates.25

The Effects of Measurement Error

     To assess the importance of measurement error, we have also produced

estimates treating Alny' as exogenous in (14), which amounts to including it in

               5).   In this case, the estimates of 4   and    —    are   0.138 and
EX*t (column

—.0479 with standard errors of 0.0387 and 0.0961. The Keynesian hypothesis

cannot be rejected. In column 6, Ldny*t....l is also included as an instrument for

Elny. The inclusion is valid if measurement error is not important. The
                                      — 20 —



estimate   of q2 —   is   —.0149 with a standard error of 0.0941. Again the

Keynesian hypothesis cannot be rejected. Thus when measurement error is

ignored, the point estimates closely correspond to the Keynesian model and we

are unable to reject it statistically. One may in fact show analytically that

if the RE—lifecycle model is correct, then ignoring measurement error in income

will bias the estimator of         in favor of the Keynesian model (toward 0).

     In the light of these findings, it interesting to speculate on what the

consequences of measurement error are for Hall and Mishkins and Bernankes

procedures. Bernanke finds little evidence against the lifecycle model, while

Hall and Mishkin obtain an estimate of the discount rate which is too high (from

the perspective of the lifecycle model) using one of their specification and

estimate that about 20% of the families in their sample are Keynesian consumers

using another.

     We have used nonlinear least squares to fit the parameters of Hall and

Mishkins lifecycle model (equation (34) of their paper) to the sample moments

reported in their Table II after incorporating a serially uncorrelated

measurement error to the level of income into their model. We computed

estimates under various assumptions about the variance of the measurement error

term. Since Hall and Mishkin did not report values for all of the sample

moments which play a role in their model, our analysis is only suggestive.

Nevertheless, the results of our sensitivity analysis indicate that if one

ignores measurement error and it is in fact substantial, Hall and Mishkins

procedure Is biased in favor of the Keynesian model. On first glance, this

result seems surprising, since one might expect measurement error to result in a

larger downward bias in the estimated response of consumption to the transitory

component of income than in the estimate of the response of consumption to the

permanent component. But this bias in favor of the lifecycle model is more than

offset by the fact that ignoring measurement error biases the coefficients on
                                      — 21 —



Hall   and Mishkins unrestricted MA(2) process for transitory income to make this

income component appear to be more transitory than it actually is. The net

result is to overstate the discount rate at which consumers discount future

income.

       Bernanke does not report the sample moments used to estimate his model.

However, the fact that he imposes the assumption that transitory income is white

noise in levels (in contrast to Hall and Mishkins unrestricted MA(2) process)

makes it possible to sign the bias analytically in some special cases.

Specifically, we simplified the problem by assuming that consumption is

nondurable. For this case we found that ignoring measurement error would bias

Bernankes results against the Keynesian model. Thus, our limited analysis

suggests that the discrepancy between Flail and Mishkins and Bernankes studies

is due in part to differences in their sensitivity to measurement error in

incoine.' (We were unable to draw conclusions for Hayashis study.)

       To sum up, our results support the RE—lifecycie model and reject the

Keynesian model. Our empirical analysis confirms that measurement error in

income is an Important feature of the PSID data. Nevertheless, our most

important conclusion is that taking account of measurement error does not over

turn Hall and Mishklns, Bernankes and Hayashis qualitative finding that the

vast majority of households obey the lifecycie model. indeed, we doubt if our

tests are sufficiently powerful in the PSID data to detect small departures

from the RE—lifecycie model. We have provided some evidence that the

quantitative difference in the results of Hall and Mishkin [1982] and Bernanke

[19841 may be due to differences in the way in which measurement error affects

these studies.



           V TESTING THE RE—LIFECYCLE W)DEL FOR IMPERFECT CREDIT MRXETS

       The RE—lifecycle model represented by equation (1) assumed that consumers
                                       — 22 —



face perfect capital markets, that their marginal return on net wealth were
independent of their level of assets. However, if the marginal return depends

upon wealth, then anticipated changes in current income affect the change in

consumption even if consumers are lifecycle planners with rational

expectations. Theoretical work by Dolde [1978] and Manger [1985] suggests that

the response depends upon the direction of the income change, in that

anticipated increases in income will lead to a positive change in consumption

while anticipated decreases do not have an effect. The asymmetry may be less

dramatic if the marginal return to wealth decreases smoothly with the level of

assets than if credit constraints are discontinuous (credit rationing).

However, Dolde and Marigers basic point carries over to the version of the

lifecycle model presented in the appendix in that lnC will tend to be larger

for consumers who anticipate positive changes in income than for consumers who

anticipate decreases.

       To see this, consider the following argument. Let (1 + rt_i) R(At_i)

denote the return function relating nominal wealth following consumption and

labor supply in period t—1 (At_i) to nominal wealth prior to consumption and

labor supply in period t (Ar). rt_1 is a base lending rate in period t—1 such

as the Treasury bill rate. The function R(A_i) permits the rate of return on

net wealth to depend on the level of net wealth. (Net wealth is negative for net

borrowers.) If credit markets are perfect, then R(At_i) = At and

R(At_i) = 1.    The RE—lifecycle model in the Appendix implies that



(16)       lnC*t = const   + Bcflt —
                                       B   ln(R(A_i)) ÷ ect.
This equation is similar to (1) but permits R(A_i) to differ from 1. Consider

two consumers who have the same value of A_1 and are alike in all respects

except for the expected income in period t. Consumer 1 learns prior to choice

of C_1 that income is likely to rise for exogenous reasons. The increase
                                      — 23 —



raises   lifetime resources and thus lowers At_i, the marginal utility of wealth.

         is negative.) Consequently, consumption in t—1 rises above the level

which would have been chosen In the absence of the increase in Income. However,

the increase in C_1 lowers A1_1, which increases R(A_i). The coefficient

on lnR(At_i) is positive and the anticipated income change does not affect r1

or the other terms in (16). Consequently LlnC will be larger than if

Is fixed at 1, which would be the case if capital markets are perfect. Now

consider consumer 2, who learns prior to choice of C1 that income is likely to

fall between periods t—1 and t. This will lead to a decrease in C_1. The

lower value for Ct_i leads to an increase in At_i and a fall in R(At_i).

Consequently, the value for lnC*t will be smaller than it would have been in

the absence of the capital market imperfections, and smaller than lnC*, for

consumer 1. The consumption response of consumer 1 to the increase in income

will be larger in absolute value than the response of consumer 2 to the decrease

if the derivative of the marginal rate of return R(At_i) with respect to At_i

decreases with At_i. This would be the case if R(At_i) is sufficiently

negative in the neighborhood of the value of At_i typically found in the

sampie.27

     We have performed an Investigation of the possibility that the response of

consumption to the predicted value of lny* based on AX*t_i is asymmetric, as

is implied by the lifecycle model with imperfect credit markets. Specifically,

measures of positive and negative anticipated changes in income were constructed

from the regression of lny against lagged values of the income determinants

(Table II, column 2) and permitted to have separate coefficients in the

consumption equation. The relative size of the coefficients will depend upon

the shape of marginal return function and the fraction of the sample whose net

wealth is sufficiently low for the marginal return to vary in response to

changes in income prospects. The consumption equation is reported in Table
                                     — 24 —



IV.   The coefficient on the positive change is 0.126 while the coefficient on

the negative change is —.0346, suggesting some asymmetry. However, the

variables are not significally different from 0 or from each other and are

subject to substantial standard errors.

      With less theoretical justification, we have also looked for asymmetries in

the consumption response to positive and negative changes in income predicted

from both current and lagged income determinants. In fact, the response to

positive changes is slightly larger than the response to negative changes, but

the difference in point estimates is not significant (See Table IV, column 1).

It should be noted that Runkle [1983] and Zeldes [1985] check whether the level

of net wealth and the level of income at the beginning at the period are

negatively related to the change in consumption, as is implied by the liquidity

constraint hypothesis, and have obtained mixed results.28



                                  VI. CONCLUSION

      We have implemented tests of alternative consumption models which are valid

in the presence of measurement error in the income variable. On the whole the

results are favorable to the RE—lifecycle model, although our tests probably

are not sufficiently powerful in the PSID data to detect modest departures from

the RE—lifecycle model. We can reject the Keynesian hypothesis that consumption

responds to anticipated and unanticipated changes in income in the same way.

Treatment of measurement error is important in our analysis, since our results

are very favorable to the Keynesian model when measurement error is ignored.

Consideration of measurement error also helps reconcile the differences in

results of Hall and Mishkin and Bernanke. Nevertheless, our most important

conclusion is that taking account of measurement error does not over turn Hall

and Mishkins, Bernankes and Flayashis qualitative finding that the vast

majority of households obey the lifecycle model. Finally, preliminary tests of
                                   — 25 —



the pure RE—lifecycle model against an RE—lifecycle model with liquidity
constraints do not show much evidence against the perfect capital markets

assumption.
                                        — 26   —




               APPENDIX: ThE LIFECYCLE W)DEL WITh RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS

        The lifecycle model of consumer behavior under uncertainty is as follows.

(See MaCurdy [1983] and Browning etal [1985] for more detailed discussions and

references to the literature.) At age t consumers choose consumption C, and

labor supply Nt to maximize the expected value of utility over their remaining

lifetime. We assume through out the paper that preferences are additively

separable over time, which means that past and future consumption and hours

decisions enter todays decision only through the budget constraint. The

consumer objective function V is

                   T—t

(A.1)        V =              Ut+j(Ct+, Nt+)
                   i=0
                               (1 +
where     U41 is   the workers within period utility function, S is a discount

factor, and T is the end of the planning horizon. For notational convenience,

subscripts for individuals are left implicit. In maximizing (A.1) the consumer

must satisfy the constraints

(A.2)      A÷1÷i = (1 + rt÷) R(At+1)     ,         0< i < T—t

(A.3) AT>O
where

At+1 A÷        + wt+iNt+1 —   P+1C+1;
w represents the workers nominal wage at time t;                is the price level at

t.        is nominal wealth at the beginning of period t; At is nominal wealth

at the end of period t; rt is a base lending rate in period t such as the

Treasury bill rate; and the return function (1 + rt)R(At) relates net wealth

at the end of period t (At) to wealth at the beginning of period t + 1 (At÷i)

given the base lending rate rt. For most of the paper we assume taxes are

proportional and absorb the tax rate in the base lending rate. (But see

Section 4.1.) Equation (A.2) allows for tte possibility that the rate of
                                          — 27 —



return   on net wealth (net wealth is negative for net borrowers) may be a

function of the level of net wealth. If credit markets are perfect, then

R(At) =   At and R(At)1.
       Assuming an interior solution, the first order conditions with respect to

C and Nt are

(A.4) V/aN =        Ut/Nt     (l+óYt + wtxt = 0

(A.5) v/ac =        au/ac     (l+yt —     PA   =   0,
where A is the expected value of the marginal utility of period t income and

is influenced by the effect of current net wealth on current and future rates

of return on net wealth. The optimal values of Nt and C must also satisfy

the intertemporal first order condition

(A.6) x = Et[At+i[1 + r] R(At) I            for    0 < t < T—1

where Et is the expectations operator conditional on information available to

the consumer in period t. Equation (A.6) states that the expected gain from

an extra unit of wealth in period t+1 must be equal to its cost in terms of

utility in period t.

       The first order condition (A.6) for X implies (after backdating one

period) that

(A.7) A[1 + rt_i]R(At_i) =      Ati   +                 (   '   t < T ),

where       is the forecast error

        + rt_i]R(At_i)] —    E(At[1   + rt_1JR(At_i)).

Under rational expectations, c is orthogonal to the information available at

t—1.

       To proceed further, it is necessary to substitute a specific form for the

marginal utility of consumption 3U/3C. We assume that


                        c
(A.8) aU/aC = exp           Ct1/BC
This equation holds if within period preferences take the form
                                          — 28 —



 (A.9)   U(Ct,Nt) =   [(B/B+l)        exptC(1+ 1/Be) —        expntNf/,
where B and B are taste parameters (assumed constant across the sample) that

satisfy the restrictions B < 0, B > 0, the terms                     and £nt are taste

shifters which vary over time for a given individual as well as across

individuals, and the parameter y is assumed to equal 1. The assumption that y

is set equal to 1 constrains preferences to be separable between consumption

and leisure within the period. MaCurdy [1983] and Mankiw eta]. (1985) have

used (A.9) with      as a free parameter. Most studies in the literature on the

permanent income hypothesis surpress the labor supply or leisure argument, In

which case the function is the constant relative risk aversion specification.

     The Intertemporal optimality condition may be expressed in terms of the

marginal utility of consumption by combining (A.5) and (A.7), yielding

                                                      =
(A.10) [l+5]_t[l/pt][1 +     rt]R(At_j)Ut/3Ct             [1+J_t_l[1/pt_iJut_i/act_i     + EAt



Substituting   for U/aC from (A.8) into (A.10), taking logs of both sides of the

equation, using a first order Taylor approximation of ln(At_i +               Ext) around EAtO for
each consumer, and using the fact that

ln(1 ÷ rt_l)      rt_l leads to the approximation

(A.11) lnA             —
                           rt.l   —
                                      lnR(At_j)   +

(A.12) lnC const + BcLlnPt + Bcflt —              B   [rti + lnR'(A_i)] —Bct
(A.13) lnNt + lrIwt        const + [1 +B]iUnwt —          Bn[rt_i   + lnR(At..i)j + Bnflt + B2rt,

where ri equals               The first difference equation for earnings implied

by the difference equation for labor supply is presented as (A.13) in order to

highlight the fact that income from labor is endogenous in the model.

     The change in the marginal utility of income n summarizes the effects on

consumer decisions via the budget constraint of changes in lifetime resources

and preferences.

     We next project the revision in the marginal utility of income, n, onto
                                     — 29 —



the scalar variable hiu:

(A.14) n =      b(hiu)   +

where h1 is the coefficient vector relating      to 1ny in (7). We assume

in the text that the coefficient b depends on the size and degree of

permanence in the effects of the components of       on income. We use this

assumption in arguing that b will increase if transitory income determinants

such as hours lost due to illness and unemployment are excluded from

Our justification is as follows. For most preference structures an analytical

solution for     does not exist, and there is little hope of obtaining an

analytical solution for the relationship between     and innovations in the

exogenous factors entering the lifetime budget constraint. However, since one

may easily show in the perfect foresight case that     is a decreasing function

of      and _CNt+j, i=O...T—t, it is reasonable to assume that permanent

shocks to these variables or other variables which affect earnings (such as

spells of unemployment) have larger effects on     than transitory ones. Since

both of these variables are exogenous influences on income, in some of the

discussion we also assume that relative size of the effects on     of

unanticipated changes in the various exogenous factors driving          and

are related to the size of effects of the unanticipated changes on the

expected value of current and future earnings.

     To sharpen the contrast between the RE—lifecycle model and the Keynesian

model we assume in our initial set of tests that credit markets are perfect.

(R(At)=1). Since the effects of changes in the price level and the base

interest rate are removed through the use of dummy variables for each year in

the empirical analysis, we supress these variables in the presentation.

Finally, we replace lnCt with the consumption measure AlnC, which is equal

to the true change in consumption plus measurement error, and use (A.14) to

eliminate      from (A.12). With these modifications equation (A.12) becomes
                                                           — 30       —




                *
(A.15)   LlnC
                t
                      =   const.   +   B
                                           c
                                               bh u
                                                 lxt
                                                       +     e
                                                                 Ct
                                                                      ÷ B
                                                                          Ct
where       is a (serially correlated) composite disturbance combining

measurement error and variation in preferences.

       A comparison of (A.15) with (9) establishes that the RE—lifecycle model

implies that 2=0, as was claimed in the text, and that the parameter q is

equal to Bob. Essentially, the restriction on                                  states that income changes

arising from past                      or from the expected value of                      given          have

no effect on consumption. However, to establish that the coefficients                                      and

   of the linear projection equation (9) are indeed Bcb and 0 it is necessary

to show that hiut and                            are uncorrelated with the error components in

(A.15). hiut is uncorrelated with                            by definition of            in (A.14). Both

and X*_ are uncorrelated with ect by assumption about the properties of

measurement errors and preferences for consumption. Since                                      is known at

t—1,                is uncorrelated with the forecast error                          which implies (given

A.14) that it is uncorrelated with b(hiuxt) +                                    Since         is also

uncorrelated with b(hiu) (by definition of u) it must be uncorrelated with

   as well.



NORTEiWESTERN UNIVERSITY AND NBER

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
                                     — 31



                                      Footnotes

     1. Other recent Panel data studies include Zeldes[1985], Runkle[1983], and
Shapiro [19841. These do not attempt to measure the response of consumption to
the change in income and so are less sensitive to measurement error in the income
variable. MaCurdy [19831 and Altonji [19861 use panel data to examine
consumption behavior within a rational expectations—life cycle framework as part
of studies of intertemporal labor supply. See also the recent studies by
Dynarski and Sheffrin [1985, 1985]. There are additional panel studies on the
permanent income hypothesis without rational expectations (e.g. Bhalla [1979],
Holbrook and Stafford [1971]. Mention should also be made of recent time series
studies of the rational expectations permanent income hypothesis, including the
key papers by Hall [1978], Sargent [1978], which developed the theory used in
several of the panel studies, as well as subsequent work by Hayashi [19821,
Flavin [1981, 1985], and Mankiw [1981]). See Mayer [1972], Deaton and Muellbauer
[1980], and King   [1985] for literature surveys and additional references.
     2. See Griliches [1984] and Griliches and Hausman [1984] for recent
discussions of measurement issues.
     3. Calculated from the ratio of measurement error to the true variance of
the level of income reported in Table 4 of Duncan and Hill. The results of Abowd
and Cards [1986] analysis of the covariance structure of earnings and hours are
also consistent with a large role for measurement error in changes in the log of
labor income in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, although Abowd and Card point
out that their findings have alternative interpretations. Measurement error is
not only a problem in the PSID. Mellow and Sider [19831 also find substantial
discrepancies between employer records and earnings reported by workers in a
matched sample from the Employment Opportunity Pilot Project survey and in a
matched sample from the 1977 Current Population Survey.
     4. If measurement error is serially uncorrelated, then the variance of the
measurement error in the first difference is double the variance in the level.
Furthermore, since a substantial fraction of the variation in income and other
variables is across persons rather than from one period to the next for the same
person, differencing removes much of the true variance in the data. Duncan and
Hill present some evidence that measurement errors are positively correlated for
income. However it is based upon a comparison of the income response in year t
with the persons recollection of income in year t—1 rather than the responses in
year t and year t—1. There is reason to believe that people impose consistency
on such retrospective responses.
                                        — 32 —



        5. As is made clear below, identification requires that the indicators of
income be uncorrelated not only with the measurement error in consumption but
also with transitory disturbances in consumption that arise from changes in
preferences or needs. This assumption is questionable for some variables, but is
weaker than Hall and Mishkins, Bernankes, and Hayashis [1985] assumption that
all components of the income change are uncorrelated with change in consumption

preferences.
        6. Killingsworth [19831 and Pencavel [1984] provide recent surveys of this
literature.
        7. Attention to reporting error problems in work on the consumption function
is not new. For example, the interesting study by Bhalla [1979] makes use of an
Indian panel data containing independent measures of consumption, savings, and
income to study consumption behavior. However, Bhallas analysis differs In many
ways from the work presented here. HayashI [1985] provides a careful discussion
of the problem of measurement error biases which would arise in his estimates of
a model relating the change in consumption expenditures to lagged changes in
consumption expenditures, a survey measure of the unexpected change in Income,
and the actual change in income. For lack of better alternatives in his data
set, Hayashi uses the income measures without instruments.
        8. The study by Holbrook and Stafford [19711 analyzed the link between the
level of consumption and various components of family income using one year of
consumption data and 3 years of income data for a cross section of families.
Although Holbrook and Stafford do not work within a rational expectations
framework, their results suggest that consumption is less responsive to the
elements of family income which are most transitory. An early study by Mincer
[1960] uses wage changes as an indicator of permanent income changes and hours
changes as an indicator of transitory income changes.
     9. If         is measured with error, it is not possible to extract a clean
measure of the innovation in        even if (6) is AR representation of             In
this case u would be serially uncorrelated but would still depend on current
and past innovations in        and current and past measurement errors.
        10. As Chamberlain [1982] pointed out and 1-iayashi observed in a similar
context, the rational expectations hypothesis does not imply that the forecast
error      is uncorrelated with past information when the distribution is taken
across households rather than over time for a given household. If the effect of
an aggregrate disturbance on the marginal utility of income is systematically
related to elements of           then        may be correlated with     in a short
                                    — 33 —



panel.   However, we doubt if this problem is important empirically, since most
of the variation over time in the change in the wage, hours of unemployment,
quits, layoffs, and other key elements of          arises from factors which
largely specific to a given household (rather than as the result of family
specific responses to a common shock.) In this case, we should obtain similar
results using a long panel on a few families as we obtain using a relatively
short panel on a large cross section of families. Furthermore, we have removed
the main effects of aggregate shocks through the use of time dummies.
     11. The component of lny*, due to LX*t_l and the component arising from
    have the same effect on LlnC*t. hiut and            are both orthogonal to v
and ect given the definition of Vt in (3), the assumption that the measurement
error components are independent of the true variables and each other, and the

assumption that     is unrelated to shifts in consumption preferences.
Consequently, coefficients    and    of linear projection equation (9) are equal
to a if the Keynesian model is correct.
     12. Kydland and Prescott[19821, Hotz etal [1985], and Eichenbaum et al
[1984] all emphasize intertemporal nonseparability. Barro and King [1984]
provide a useful discussion of the use of the assumption of intertemporal
separability in macroeconomics and the restrictions it imposes on behavior.
     13. For example, past wage levels or unemployment may be related to past
hours or consumption decisions, which in turn will affect the marginal utility of
current consumption if preferences are not separable between periods.
Alternatively a predictable change in the wage (and income) may be related to the
consumption change due to intra—period substitution between consumption and
leisure. Indeed, Altonji [1986] works with the RE—lifecycle model as a
maintained hypothesis and examines the relationship between the change in
consumption and anticipated changes in the wage in an effort to determine whether
intra—period separability holds. His results are inconclusive.
     14. The composite error term in (14) is probably serially correlated over
time for the same individual and heteroscedastic. For this reason, we have used
a variant of the formulae in Chamberlain [1982, pg. 561 and White [1984, pg. 143]
to compute standard errors which account for non—parametric forms of
heteroscedasticity and correlations over time for a given family at one and two
lags. Another complication in the error term in (14) arises from the fact that
we use a two step procedure involving the use of the estimate
[h2 + hlO(L)]}X*t_l in estimating equation (14).     If the Keynesian hypothesis
correct, then the reported standard errors are consistent (see Pagan [1984]).
                                     — 34 —



If   the RE—lifecycle model is correct, the reported standard errors may be
inconsistent. The simple corrections suggested by Murphy and Topel [1985] and
Pagan [1984] cannot be applied in our case because our errors in both equations
do not have simple parametric structures. However, the reported standard errors
do account for any additional heteroscedasticity which might be induced by the
two step procedure.
       15. The standard error of 2 depends upon the variance of [h2 +

hl0(L)jx*t_l   relative to the variance of the error term in (14). The test would
have no power if X_1 has no effect on income (h2 = 0) and either LX does not
affect income (h1 =   0) or       does not help predict        (0(L) =   0).   The
parameters h1 and h2 depend upon the extent to which the       vector and its lag
are good predictors of income and the amount of measurement error in LX'. Below
we find that current and past X variables are significant predictors of the
change in measured income. Many of the elements of         are strongly
autocorrelated, sO 0(L) is far from 0. On the other hand, there a great deal of
unexplained variance in LlnC'. This may reflect both preference shifts and
measurement error. A data set with more accurate or more extensive consumption
measures would permit more powerful tests.
      16. Note that the RE—lifecycle model also implies a distributed lag in the
regression relationship between the change in consumption and the change in
income even though consumption only responds to the innovation in income. The
coefficients on the lagged income changes will be zero only if one enters the
anticipated and the unanticipated component of the income change into the
equation as separate variables. Also, the RE—lifecycle model is perfectly
consistent with a distributed lag in levels (as opposed to first difference).
But under the rational expectations hypothesis the form of the lag should depend
on the nature of the income process.
      17. The sample is a subset of observations on individuals who were male
heads of household in 1981. Although the survey starts in 1968, many individuals
entered the survey in later years. However, individuals who were not heads of
household in 1979, 1980, and 1981 and/or who retired prior to 1973 are excluded
from the analysis. Note that we do make use of observations on families who were
originally part of the nonrandom poverty subsample of the original PSID sample.
Also, in constrast to MaCurdy [1981], Altonji [1986] and a number of other
studies but in keeping with Hall and Mishkin, we do not exclude observations on
heads of household who change marital status or change wives during the sample
period. Within the context of the model in the appendix, this means that we
                                      — 35 —



 identify   the household with the male head. Changes in family composition,
 including marital status, alter the current and expected future values of the
 taste components c and Cct of the utility function (A.1). That is, changes in
family structure alter the utility which the head of household assigns to a given
level of labor supply and family food consumption and labor supply. Changes in
family structure may also alter expected future income from sources other than
earnings of the male household head (eg, wifes earnings). Both the income
shifts and the preference shifts associated with changes in family structure are
responsible for shifts in      and so contribute to the variance in fl.   There are
obvious shortcomings with this treatment of the family unit.
     18. For hourly workers this variable is the response to a direct question
about the hourly wage rate and is available from 1970—1981. For salary workers
the variable is only available from 1976 on and is imputed from the response to a
question about salary per year, per month, per week, etc. For years prior to
1978 hourly wage responses above $9.98 per hour were coded as $9.98 on the data
tape. Observations affected by this bound were excluded from the sample.
     19. The layoff, quit and promotion variables also refer to the 12 month
period prior to the survey date rather than to the previous calendar year. The
layoff variable excludes temporary layoffs.
     20. See Mortensen (1986) and Katz (198b) for references to the labor
economics literature.
     21. We experimented with inclusion of the change in hours worked in
although use of this variable might lead to biased results if a strong
correlation exists between changes in preferences for consumption and labor
supply. The results were fully consistent with those in the table.
     22. Ignoring the minor complication posed by the small coefficient on the
second lag of real family income in the income change equation, the long run
effect of unemployment on income be may estimated from the results in Table IL,
Col 2 as the sum of the coefficients on income of the current value, first lag
and second lag of unemployment. The sum is near 0 even though the individual
coefficients are large. This is also true for the illness variable.
     23. See page 8 and footnote 12 and 13 above. The literature on unemployment
as a constraint on labor supply (see Ashenfelter [19801, and Deaton and
Muellbauer [1980] and Browning etal [1985] suggests that the form of the
consumption and marginal utility of income equations are affected by constraints
on labor supply.
     24. We owe a special debt to Stephen Zeldes for making his data available to
                                      — 36 —



us.
      25. Permanent differences across families in taxes associated with
differences in income and wealth may produce variation in the after tax interest
rate faced by the family. The lifecycle model implies that this variation will
affect rates of growth of consumption, although we have surpressed this term in
the discussion in Section II. Shapiro [19831 and Zeldes [19851 have investigated
this issue using the PSID, while Runkle [1983] has done so using the data from
the negative income tax experiments. When adding the after tax real interest
rate we use the second lag of this variable as an additional instrumental
variable for the income change. We treat the after tax real interest rate as
endogenous, using Its second lag and the lagged income determinants as
instrumental variables. The estimated coefficient for the interest rate was
—.67, which has the wrong sign. However, its standard error of 1.03.

      26. Using the indicators of income determinants, it is possible to modify
the econometric framework used by Hall and Mishkin to allow for measurement error
in income and a more general income process. We are pursuing this line of
research in Altonji etal [1986]. It requires much stronger assumptions about
the form of the income process and the serial correlation properties of
measurement error than do the tests used in the present paper.
      27. The above discussion and Appendix I implicitly assume that the marginal
tax rate is constant. If this assumption is false, anticipated increases in
income may   increase   the after tax marginal interest rate. Anticipated decreases
might reduce the after tax marginal interest rate. Since we do not control for
the marginal tax in the empirical analysis, we suspect that this mechanism would
tend to reinforce the asymmetry which might arise from imperfect credit markets.
      28. In his innovative paper Runkle finds that the net wealth variable is
positive and significant for families with low wealth. However, the positive
sign is inconsistent with liquidity constraint hypothesis, since presumably the
marginal interest rate is negative function of wealth, in which case the change
in consumption would be a negative function of net wealth. One possible
explanation for the positive sign is measurement error, since the consumption
measure used by Runkle is constructed from the data on net wealth (among other
variables). A measurement error in the estimate of net wealth as of t will be
positively related to the estimate of consumption in period t + 1.
                                  REFERENCES

Abowd, John M. and David E. Card, "Intertemporal Substitution in the Presence
     of Long Term Contracts," National Bureau of Economic Research working
     paper No. 1831 (February 1986).

Altonji, Joseph G., "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from
     Micro Data", Journal of Political EconomX XCIV No. 3 Part 2 (June 1986),
     S 176—15.

         Ana Paula Martins and Aloysius Siow, "Dynamic Factor Models of
     Consumption, Hours and Income", Unpublished paper, Columbia University
     (April 1986).

Ashenfelter, Orley., "Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate
     Labor Supply," Econometrica, XLVIII (April 1980), 547—64.

Barro, Robert J. and Robert G. King, "Time Separable Preferences and
     Intertemporal—Substitution Models of Business Cycles", Quarterly Journal
     of Economics XCIX (May 1984), 817—39.

Bernanke, Ben, "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on Automobiles:
     Evidence from Panel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCIX (1984),
     587—14.

Bhalla, Surjit S., "Measurement Errors and the Permanent Income Hypothesis:
     Evidence from Rural India", American Economic Review, LXIX (June 1979),
     195—07.

Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish, "A Profitable Approach to
     Labor Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life—Cycle," Econometrica
     LIII (May 1985), 503—44.

Chamberlain, Gary. "Panel Data." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper No. 913 (1982).

Deaton, Angus, and John Muell.bauer, Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge (1980).

           and ___________, "Functional Forms for Labour Supply and Commodity
     Demands with and without Quantity Restrictions," Econometrica, XLIX
     (November 1981), 1521—32.

Dolde, William, "Capital Markets and the Short Run Behavior of Life—Cycle
     Savers," Journal of Finance, XXXIII (1978), 413—28.

Duncan, Gregory, and Daniel Hill, "An Investigation of the Extent and
     Consequences of Measurement Error in Labor Economic Survey Data", Survey
     Research Center, The University of Michigan (July 1984).

Dynarkski, Mark and Steven M. Sheffrin, "Consumption and Unemployment",
     Working Paper No. 29, Department of Economics, University of California,
     Davis (June 1985).
           and —        —, "Hoursing Purchases and Transitory Income: A Study
with Panel Data," Review of Economics and Statistics, (1985).

Eichenbaum, Martin S., Lars P. Hansen and Kenneth J. Singleton, "A Time Series
     Analysis of Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure Choice
     under Uncertainty", unpublished paper (January 1984).

Flavin, Marjorie A., "Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income:
     Liquidity Constraints or MyopiaV', Canadian Journal of Economics, XVIII
     (February 1985), 117—36.

          "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future
     Income," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIX (1981), 974—09.

Fleminirig, J.S., "The Consumption Function when Capital Markets are Imperfect:
     The Permanent Income Hypothesis Reconsidered," Oxford Economic Papers,
     xxv (1973), 160—72.

Griliches, Zvi, "Data Problems in Econometrics", in Z. Griliches and M.
     Intriligator (eds.) Handbook of Econometrics Vol III Amsterdam: North
     Holland (1984).

           and Jerry A. Hausman, "Errors in Variables in Panel Data", NBER
     technical working paper No. 37 (May 1984).

Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income
     Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI
     (1978), 971—987.

___________ and Frederick S. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
     Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households,"
     Econometrica, L (March 1982), 261—81.

Ham, John C., "Testing Whether Unemployment Represents Life—Cycle Labor Supply
     Behavior" (forthcoming, The Review of Economic Studies, July 198b).

Hayashi, Fumlo., "Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption Durability:
     Analysis Based on Japanese Panel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics C
     (November 1985), 1083—13.

            "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and Testing by
     Instrumental Variables," Journal of Political Economy, XC (1982), 895—18.

Holbrook, Robert, and Stafford, Frank., "The Propensity to Consume Separate
     Types of Income: A Generalized Permanent Income Hypothesis,"
     Econometrica, XXXIX (January 1971), 1—22.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Finn Kydland, and Guliherme Sedlacek, "Intertemporal
     Preferences and Labor Supply," Unpublished paper, Carnegie—Mellon
     University (December 1985).

Katz, Lawrence, 1'Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation", in S.
     Fischer (editor), NBER Macroeconomics Journal Cambridge: M. I. T. Press
     (forthcoming, 1986).
Killingsworth, Mark R, Labor Supply, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
     (1983).

King, Mervyn, "The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent Contributions," in
     K. Arrow and S. Hartiapohja, (editors), Frontiers of Economics, Oxford:
     Basil Blackwell (1985).

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate
     Fluctuations," Econometrica, L (December 1982), 1345—70.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal Model of
     Labor Supply and Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and Uncertainty,"
     International Economic Review, XXIV No. 2 (June 1983), 265—290.

_________ "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle Setting",
     Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIX (December 1981), 1059—85.

Mankiw, N. Gregory. "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest
     Rate," Economics Letters, VII (1981), 307—11.

            Julio Rotemberg, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Intertemporal
     Substitution in Macroeconomics," Quarterly Journal of Economics C
     (February 1985), 225—51.

Manger, Randall P. "A Life—Cycle Model with Liquidity Constraints: Theory and
     Empirical Results" unpublished paper, University of Washington (1985).

Mayer, Thomas, Permanent Income, Wealth, and Consumption: A Critique of the
     Permanent Income Theory, the Life—Cycle Hypothesis, and Related Theories,
     Los Angeles: University of California Press, (1972)

Mellow, Wesley, and Hal Sider, "Accuracy of Response in Labor Market Surveys:
     Evidence and Implications", Journal of Labor Economics, I No. 4,
     (October 1983), 331—44

Mincer, Jacob, "Consumption and Employment", Review of Economics and
     Statistics, XLII No. 1 (February 1960), 20—26.

Modigliani, Franco, "Monetary Policy and Consumption", in Consumer Spending
     and Monetary Policy" The Linkages, Monetary Conference Series No. 5,
     Boston: The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (1971).

Mortensen, Dale T., "Wages, Separations, and Job Tenure: On the Job Specific
     Training or Matching?" manuscript, Northwestern University (March 1986)

Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel, "Estimation and Inference in Two—Step
     Econometric Models", Journal of Business Economics and Statistics, III
     (October 1985), 370—79.

Pagan, Adrian, "Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with
     Generated Regressors", International Economic Review, XXV No. 1 (February
     1984), 221—47.
Pencavel, John, "Labor Supply of Men", (1984, forthcoming in Handbook in Labor
     of Economics, edited by 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard).

Runkle, David E., "Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent Income Hypothesis:
     Evidence from Panel Data." Manuscript, MIT, (May 1983).

Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity and
     Consumption," Journal of Political Economy LXXXVI (1978), 673—700.

Shapiro, Matthew D., "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest
     Rate: Some Evidence from Panel Data," Economics Letters, XIV (1984), 93—
     100.

White, Halbert, Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians Orlando Florida:
     Academic Press, (1984).

Zeldes, Stephen, "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
     Investigation", working paper no. 24—85, Wharton School, University of
     Pennsylvania (November 1985).
                                                                       Table I
                                      The iffects of Lagged Variables on the Change in Consamptiori and income
                                                          (standard errors in parenthesis)




                                       (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)                  (0)          (7)
  Dependent Variable                 8log(food     6log(food         iog(food     ilog(food      Alog(fainiiy      Alog(famiiy     Alog(tamily
                                     consumptlon)t consumption)t    consumption)1 consumption)1 income)1           income)t        Income)1
  Constant                          —.000158       .OIJ(J0494        -.00190      .00180         .0104             .00455          .1)13477
                                     (.00115)      (.00168)          (.00201)     (.00200)       (.00208)          (.00167)        (.00197)

  8log( family income)t_j           —.0292         —.0187           —.0180
                                    (.00956)       (.0154)           (.0161)

  ilog(wage)1_1                                                      .0265        .0223          —.00264                           .0719
                                                                     (.0274)      (.0270)        (.0222)                           (.0201)

  layoff1_1                                                          .00924       .00979         .0313                             .0286
                                                                     (.0205)      (.0204)        (.0197)                           (.0196)

  quit_j                                                            .00757        .00803         .00689                            .00830
                                                                    (.0175)       (.0175)        (.0135)                           (.0137)

  1o(hours unemployed+2000)1_1                                      .0689         .0794          .346                              .543
                                                                    (.0558)       (.0550)        (.0596)                           (.0655)

  proc,otion1j                                                      .0323         .0322          —.00690                            .OlsS
                                                                    (.0207)       (.0207)        (.0145)                           (.0143)

  ilog(wage)_j*quit1..1                                             .0166         .0185          .331                             .425
                                                                    (.05b1)       (.0501)        (.0515)                          (.0461)

  ilog(wage)tl*layofft_l                                            —.0955        —.0950         .0725                            .730
                                                                    (.0720)       (.0718)        (.0833)                          (.0151)

  log(hours ill 2000i                                               —.000287      .00337         .0917                            .154
                                                                    (.0469)       (.0470)        (.0355)                          (.0390)
 Slog(wage)1*promotIon1...j                                         —.158        —.158           .106                             .118
                                                                    (.0877)      (.0879)         (.0944)                          (.0928)

 Alog(famlly income)1.2             .0195         .00500            .00585        .0105          —.0557            .0b05          —.0522
                                    (.00904)      (.0140)           (.0141)       (.0144)        (.0113)          (.0116)         (.0111)

 iayoff12                                                           .0225         .0216          —.0146                           —.0112
                                                                    (.0179)      (.0179)         (.0174)                          (.0166)

 quit12                                                             —.00172      —.00107         —.00941                          —.00491
                                                                    (.0139)      (.0139)         (.0123)                          (.0119)

 log(hours unemployed +2000)t..2                                    —.0144       —.0231          .0293                            .0730
                                                                    (.0542)      (.0534)         (.0494)                          (.0479)

 promotlon12                                                        —.0214       —.0215          —.000187                         —.000184
                                                                    (.0198)      (.0198)         (.0132)                          (.0131)

 iog(hours 11120007t2                                               —.00912      —.0110          .0185                            .0507

                                                                   (.0507)       (.0500)        (.0392)                          (.0370)
Alog(wage)1                                                                                                                      .241
                                                                                                                                 (.0250)

layoff                                                                                                                           —.ULUb
                                                                                                                                 (.0226)
quit1                                                                                                                            —.0100
                                                                                                                                 (.U142)
iog(bours    unemployed+2000)                                                                                                    —. 502
                                                                                                                                 (.00 19)

promotion1                                                                                                                       —.00895
                                                                                                                                 (.0 148)

Alog(wage)1*qult1                                                                                                                —.099)
                                                                                                                                 (.13494)
Aiog(wage)1*iayoff1                                                                                                              —.0502
                                                                                                                                 (.0b07)
log(hours    itl+2000)1                                                                                                          —. 194
                                                                                                                                 (.0300)

Alog(wage)1*promotlon1                                                                                                           .149
                                                                                                                                 (.0912)

                                   .0140         .0003             .0016        .0014           .0204            .0040           .0700
number   of observations           20762         9913              9913         9913           9913              9913            9913
M.S.6.                             .1170         .1085             .1085        .1085          .0650             .0063           .0017
                                                                                  Table II
                                                            Estimates   of the Consumption Model   (Equation 14)


                                                             Second Stage Equations for Consumption Change
                                                                 Dependent variable: log(consumptiori)
                                                                    (standard errors in parenthesis)

                                       (1)         (2)                    (3)          (4)              (5)          (b)        (7)

Constant                           —.000360      —.000360               —.000360     —. 000360       —. 000360     —.000360   —. UUOJOU
                                   (.00167)      (.00170)               (.00169)     (.00171)        (.00168)      (.00170)   (.00172)

log(family income)t' (4)           .3U2          .351k                  •332         •3976           .138          .o75
                                   (.0670)       (.0791)                (.0709)      (.0836)         (.0387)       (.0164)

log(family income)t2               —.211         —.260                  —.241        —.307           —.0479        .0149      .0907
                                   (.101)        (.115)                 (.103)       (.119)          (.0961)       (.0941)    (.0908)


K2                                 .0029          .0025                 .0031        .0028            .0019        .0036      .0001

number of observations             9913          9913                   9913         9913            9913          9913       9913

M.S.E.                             .1115          .1131                 .1124        .1148            .1084        .1081      .1085


'Treated as endogenous. The 1st stage regression for each column is discussed in the footnote for each coefficient in the row.
2
  Alog(      family income)  is the predicted value of income from variables dated t—1 or earlier [column 5, Table IJ.
  Lnstrumental variables for Alog(     family income) include all variables in column (7), Table I.
'
  Instrumental variables for Mog(      family income) include all variables in column (7), Table I
except log(hours unemployed+2000)
  jnstrumental variables for &Iog(     family income)   include all variables in column (7), Table I
except log(hours ill+2000)t
b_Instrumental variables for                              include all variables in column (7), Table          1
                               log(.    family income)
       log(hours unemployed+2000)t and iog(hours ill+2b00).
xcept
  log(family income) treated as exogenous.
8
  Instrumental variables for Alog(tamily incolne)t include all variables in column (7), Table I and
log(family income)t,
                                                                                Table LII
                                    iffects of Anticipated and Unanticipated Changes in Income on Consumption: Two Year Ociterences.

 First Stage iquations for Income Change                              Second Stage iquations for Consumption Change
 Dependent Var: A2log(famlly incorue)t'                               Dependent Var.: A2log(food consumption)t

 (standard errors In parenthesis)                                     (Standard errors in parenthesis)

                      (1)               (2)                                           (3)            (4)              (5)        (b)

 Constant           .0115             .0206                           Constant      .00225         .00255         .00255       .00255
                    (.00469)          (.00465)                                      (.00363)       (.00364)       (.00307)     (.00368)

                    .0362            —.0261                           2log(fami1y •3444            .360           •3976        .419
 A2iog(wage)_2
                    (.0301)          (.0320)                          income)t.2 •i (.0765)        (.0793)        (.0837)      (.0868)

                    .0456             .0197                           A2iog(famlly —.272           —. 286         —.324        —.346
 21og(wage)1_2
 *quit_2            (.0704)           (.0752)                         income)t.3 +2+1 (.141)       (.142)         (.152)       (.155)

                    .0936             .0726                           R2            .0051          .0050          .0047        .0047
 A21og(wage)_2
 *layoff2           (.117)            (.124)
                                                                      no. of
                    —.0460           —.0626                           observations 6028            6028           6028         0028
 821og(wage)_2
 *promotlon         (.0758)           (.0772)
                                                                      M.S.E.        .1290          .1303          .1323        .1330
                                      .0450
 qut2               .0431
                    (.0228)           (.0234)

 iayofft_2          .0417             .0463
                    (.0382)           (.0388)

 promotioa_2        .00454            .0150
                    (.0218)           (.0226)

 log(hours iii      .125              .0533
 20003t—2           (.0584)           (.0566)

 log(hours          .662              .509
 unempl.+2000)t2 (.104)               (.0992)

 A21og(wage)        .279
                    (.0357)

 21og(wage)         .134
 *quit              (.0674)

 A2log(wage)        —.0486
 *layoff t          (.0884)

 A2log(wage)        .0855
 *promntion         (.105)

 quite              —.0442
                    (.02 19)


 layofft            .0206
                    (.0393)

 promotion          —.0170
                    (.0234)

log(hours iii      —.227
+200Q)             (.0574)

log(hours          —.651
unemployed+20(J0) (.108)
112                .0756             .0185

no. of observations 6028             6028

M.S.E.             .0884             .0937



             —
                     2.—2 —2 —       Z_4,
 Treated as endogenous. The instrumental
                                                for any variable Z.
                                         variables are described in the footnote to each column.
A21og(family income)t is the predicted value of Income from variables dated t—2 or earlier (column 2).
  Instrumental variables for 2log(family lncome) include all variables in column (1).
5lnstrumental variables for 2log(family Income)t include all variables in column (1)
except log(hours ilI+Z00Q)
6lnstrumental variables for 2log(family income)t Include all variables in column (1)
qxcept iog(hours unemployed+2000)
 'instrumental variables for A2logfamily Income)t include all variables In column (1)
except log(hours ill+2000) and log(hours unemployed+20(JO)
