                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE ECONOMIC STIMULUS PAYMENTS OF 2008 AND THE AGGREGATE DEMAND
                         FOR CONSUMPTION

                                          Christian Broda
                                         Jonathan A. Parker

                                        Working Paper 20122
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20122


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




We thank the Sloan School of Management at MIT, the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern
University, the Initiative for Global Markets at the University of Chicago, and the Zell Center at the
Kellogg School of Management for funding for the survey and data. Parker thanks the Laboratory
for Applied Economics and Policy at Harvard for funding. For helpful comments on our research,
we thank: Jordi Gali, Daniel Green, Greg Kaplan, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Nicholas Souleles, two
anonymous referees on our grant application, and participants in numerous seminars and conferences.
We would also like to thank Ed Grove, Matt Knain and Molly Hagen at ACNielsen. All results are
calculated based on data from the Nielsen Company (US), LLC and provided by the Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. This paper updates and replaces the
earlier analysis in Broda and Parker (2008). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Christian Broda and Jonathan A. Parker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and the Aggregate Demand for Consumption
Christian Broda and Jonathan A. Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 20122
May 2014
JEL No. D12,D91,E21,E62

                                             ABSTRACT

Using a survey of households in the Nielsen Consumer Panel and the randomized timing of disbursement
of the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments, we find that a household’s spending rose by ten percent
the week it received a Payment and remained high cumulating to 1.5–3.8 percent of spending over
three months. Our estimates imply partial-equilibrium increases in aggregate demand of 1.3 percent
of consumption in the second quarter of 2008 and 0.6 percent in the third. Spending is concentrated
among households with low wealth or low past income; a household’s spending did not increase significantly
when it learned about its Payment.


Christian Broda
Duquesne Capital Management
40W 57th
Floor 24th
New York, NY 10019
Broda@duquesne.com

Jonathan A. Parker
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
JAParker@MIT.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20122
1. Introduction
        This paper measures the spending responses of households to the Economic Stimulus
Payments of 2008 and quantifies the partial-equilibrium increase in aggregate demand for consumer
goods and services caused by the Payments. While our estimates are partial-equilibrium, they are
designed to provide quantitative discipline for model-based inferences about the general-equilibrium
efficacy of such tax-based stimulus policies.
        The US government passed the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 in February 2008 in response
to the recession that started in December 2007. The main part of Act was a $100-billion program of
Economic Stimulus Payments (ESPs) designed to raise consumer demand. The ESPs averaged $900
and were disbursed to US taxpayers in the spring and summer of 2008. Around the time of the
stimulus program, measured aggregate consumption is relatively smooth while measured disposable
income rises and falls sharply with the disbursement of the Payments, providing “no evidence that the
stimulus has had any impact in raising consumption” (Taylor (2010); see also Feldstein (2008)). On
the other hand, previous research finds significant increases in expenditures in response to
predictable, predetermined and plausibly-exogenous changes in household-level income.1 Most
relevant, Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006), Agarwal, Lui, and Souleles (2007), and Johnson,
Parker, and Souleles (2009) all find significant spending responses to the receipt of previous Federal
tax rebates.2
        This paper measures the effect of the receipt of the ESPs of 2008 on the demand for
consumption by first measuring changes in the timing of household spending caused by differences in
the timing of the receipt of ESPs, and then aggregating these changes using the temporal distribution
of ESPs as reported by the U.S. Treasury and several different extrapolations from the observed
goods to a broader measure of spending. ‘Receipt’ is emphasized because our main analysis
measures only changes in spending correlated with the date of receipt, so does not include for
example changes in spending on the date of announcement. ‘Demand’ is emphasized because the
calculation is partial equilibrium and omits any multiplier effects or crowding-out from the policy.
        To measure the spending effects of the ESPs, we conducted a multi-wave survey of roughly
60,000 households in Nielsen’s consumer panel (NCP, formerly Homescan consumer panel) during


1
  See for example Jonathan A. Parker (1999), Nicholas S. Souleles (1999, 2002), and Chang-Tai Hsieh (2003), or the
reviews of Deaton (1992), Browning and Lusardi (1996), and Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010).
2
  And households when surveyed about what they would do or have done with tax rebates report spending a significant
fraction (Shapiro and Slemrod (1995 and 2003) and Coronado, Lupton, and Sheiner (2006)).

                                                          1
the spring and summer of 2008. The NCP contains annual information on household demographics
and income, and weekly information on spending on a set of household goods. Participating
households are given barcode scanners which they use to report spending on trips to purchase
households goods and to answer occasional surveys designed by Nielsen and typically used to study
the efficacy of marketing campaigns. Our survey, designed in conjunction with Nielsen, uses this
existing survey technology to collect information on the date of arrival of the first Economic Stimulus
Payment received by each household, as well as its amount, whether it arrived by check or direct
deposit, and when the household learned about the Payment. In addition, our survey contains several
additional questions useful for our analysis, such as about expectations, access to liquidity and the
amount of the ESP spent on NCP and non-NCP items. This data has several advantages relative to
those in comparable studies: the sample is larger, spending is observed weekly, and the ESP
information is collected with a short recall window; the main disadvantage is the limited set of goods
covered.
        We identify the change in spending caused by the receipt of an ESP at the household level
following the Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006) methodology using the fact that the law
randomized the disbursement of ESPs over time. Because it was not administratively possible for the
IRS to mail all checks or letters accompanying direct deposits at once, Payments were mailed out to
households during a nine-week period between mid-May and the end of July, or deposited into
households’ accounts in one of the first three weeks of May. Among mailed checks and among
deposited funds, the particular week in which the funds were disbursed depended on the second-to-
last digit of the taxpayer's Social Security number, a number that is effectively randomly assigned.3
        This randomization is used to identify the causal effect of the receipt of a Payment by
comparing over time the spending of households that received their ESPs earlier relative to the
spending of households that received their ESPs later, within each method of disbursement. This
identifies the causal effect of the receipt of a Payment because the variation in the timing of receipt is
unrelated to differential characteristics of households receiving the ESPs at different times and that
might affect household spending differentially, such as differences is seasonal spending patterns,
contemporaneous changes in wealth, information about future income, or monetary policy. To be
clear, households may have adjusted their spending due to the Act and to the macroeconomic effects


3
 The last four digits of a Social Security number (SSN) are assigned sequentially to applicants within geographic areas
(which determine the first three digits of the SSN) and a “group” (the middle two digits of the SSN).

                                                            2
of the Act and to the changes in spending caused by the Act. Our methodology measures the extent
to which, in this new world with the Act in place and each household’s budget constraint fixed at its
new level, the temporal pattern of spending differs for households that received their ESPs at
different times but are otherwise (in expectation) identical. If the temporal pattern differs, we infer
that the different timing of receipt caused this difference in the timing of spending, and from this
difference we measure the household-level impulse response of spending to the receipt of an ESP.
        The average household’s spending rises on receipt of a Payment and remains elevated for
some time. A household raises its spending on NCP-measured household goods in the week of
receipt by roughly 14 dollars, 10 percent of average weekly spending, or 1.5 percent of the average
ESP. This spending effect decays over the following weeks, so that during the four weeks starting
with the week of receipt, spending on NCP-measured goods is higher by 30 to 50 dollars, 5 to 7
percent of average weekly spending, or 3.5 to 5.5 percent of the ESP, with ranges reflecting different
point estimates across specifications. Finally, over the quarter starting with receipt, spending rises by
60 to 90 dollars, 2 to 4 percent of spending (but statistically insignificant), and 7 to 12 percent of the
ESP. In most specifications, there is no pre-treatment effect, that is, no economically or statistically
significant change in spending prior to receipt.
        Do households also spend more on announcement of the stimulus program, as predicted by
standard models of consumer behavior? Because the time of announcement is common across
households and so uncorrelated with the timing of receipt, our estimates omit any such spending
response. However, we investigate whether households changed spending at the different dates at
which they learned about their EPSs. While not ruling out small effects consistent with the textbook
lifecycle theory, there is no economically or statistically significant change in spending in the month
in which the household learns that it will receive an ESP, even among households with significant
liquid wealth.4
        Because the NCP only measures a small slice of consumer spending, our spending effects
need to be scaled in order to make our estimates comparable to other studies and to moments from
structural models. This scaling is done in three different ways: i) scaling NCP spending per capita to
match National Income and Product Account (NIPA) spending per capita, ii) scaling the change in
spending on NCP goods by the average reported ESP spending on all goods relative to that on NCP


4
 This result has more in common with tests of excess smoothness (Flavin (1981)) and papers that measure the change in
spending that occurs on announcement or concurrent with changes in tax policy (e.g. Blinder (1981), Poterba (1988)).

                                                          3
goods alone, iii) and scaling the change in spending on NCP goods by a factor based on the relative
share of spending and relative responsiveness across subcategories of goods as measured in
Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey by Parker, Souleles, Johnson and McClelland (2013). These
calculations imply that in a quarterly model, the propensity to consume at the individual level from an
equivalent tax rebate in a quarter is between 50 and 75 percent. In a more realistic continuous-time or
higher-frequency model, if tax rebates were uniformly distributed during a quarter, the average
partial-equilibrium spending response would be 30 to 45 percent of the rebate amount during the
quarter of disbursement and 20 to 30 percent during the following quarter.
       Turning to the real-world aggregate effects, the increase in demand for goods during and
shortly after the program caused by the receipt of the Payments in 2008 is given by applying the
household-level impulse responses to the observed aggregate disbursements of the ESPs over time as
reported by the US Treasury Department (2008). Figure 1 shows the results of subtracting the
estimated effects from the actual PCE series observed in the U.S. The disbursement of the ESPs
directly raised the demand for consumption by between 1.3 to 1.8 percent in the second quarter of
2008 and by 0.6 to 0.9 percent in the third quarter of 2008, with ranges reflecting differences across
scaling factors. Again, these are partial-equilibrium, accounting exercises and the ultimate effect on
consumption may have been more or less.
       It is important to note that, because our household-level estimates also omit all changes in
spending that are uncorrelated with the timing of receipt, our aggregation of spending effects is not
atheoretical. As discussed in Section 4, however, it is consistent with all the models of consumer
behavior of which we are aware.
       Finally, to inform both the macroeconomic modeling of household behavior and the targeting
of future rebate programs, we investigate how income levels and liquidity are related to the
propensity to consume. Households in the bottom third of the 2007 income distribution had larger
propensities to spend out of their EPS’s in the month of arrival than households in the top third. This
difference narrows over time and becomes indistinguishable by the end of the quarter. There is
statistically weak evidence that households in the middle third of the income distribution spend less
than those above or below them.
       More significantly, households in the bottom forty percent of the distribution of liquid wealth
spend at roughly triple the rate of the rest of the households during the month of receipt, and at



                                                    4
roughly double the rate during the three months starting with receipt, so that households with low
liquid wealth account for the majority of the estimated spending response.
           This paper is most closely related to the contemporaneous paper, Parker, Souleles, Johnson
and McClelland (2013) (PSJM), which studies the increased aggregate demand caused by the receipt
of the 2008 ESPs in the CE survey. In similar specifications, PSJM finds quite similar effects to
those in the present paper: a 3.6 to 4.5 percent increases in household nondurable spending in
response to the receipt of a rebate during the three months of receipt, and an increase in aggregate
demand of 1.3 to 2.3 percent in the second quarter of 2008 and 0.6 to 1.0 percent in the third. Due to
a larger sample size and better measurement, the present study is able to measure more precisely
differences in spending by relative income and liquid assets as well as the average spending effect
using only random variation (within each method of disbursement).
           Several other papers exploit the same random variation to show how other economic
outcomes are affected by the receipt of tax rebate. The arrival of an ESP also causes lower usage of
payday loans by households using loans before receipt (Bertrand and Morse, 2009), a higher rate of
bankruptcy (Gross, Notowidigdo, and Wang, 2012), and a higher rate of death (Evans and Moore,
2011). Finally Bureau of Labor Statistics (2009), Shapiro and Slemrod (2009), and Sahm, Shapiro,
and Slemrod (2010) report that 20 – 30 percent of households report that they mainly spent their
ESPs, numbers that are consistent with the present paper’s findings.5
           This paper is structured as follows. The following section describes the ESP program, Section
3 describes the Nielsen Consumer Panel data and our supplemental survey, and Section 4 presents our
estimation methodology. Section 5 contains our main results about household level spending and
Section 6 aggregates these to give increases in aggregate demand designed for use in models.
Sections 7 and 8 present estimates of spending changes caused by learning about the ESPs and how
the response to receipt differs with liquidity and previous income. A final section concludes.


2. The 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments
           The Economic Stimulus Act of 2008, passed by Congress in January and signed into law on
February 13, 2008, authorized the distribution of stimulus payments consisting of a basic payment
and -- conditional on eligibility for the basic payment -- a supplemental payment of $300 per child



5
    This alternative methodology does not find greater spending by low-income or low wealth households.

                                                            5
that qualified for the child tax credit. 6 The basic payment was generally the maximum of $300 ($600
for couples filing jointly) and a taxpayer’s tax liability up to $600 ($1,200 for couples). Households
without tax liability received basic payments of $300 ($600 for couples), so long as they had at least
$3,000 of qualifying income (which includes earned income and Social Security benefits, as well as
certain Railroad Retirement and veterans’ benefits). Further, the ESP was reduced by five percent of
the amount by which adjusted gross income (AGI) exceeded a threshold of $75,000 of for individuals
and $150,000 for couples. Thus the amount was zero both for households with high enough incomes
that the payment was phased out and for households with low enough incomes so that they had
neither positive net income tax liability nor sufficient qualifying income.7 As a whole, the ESP
program distributed just under $100 billion dollars, which is about double the size of the 2001 rebate
program, which sent $38 billion to 90 million taxpayers.
         In terms of timing, the disbursement of ESPs over time was effectively randomized
conditional on disbursement by paper check or direct deposit. Within each method of delivery, the
week that the payment was disbursed was determined by the last two digits of the recipient’s Social
Security number, which we treat as random as discussed in the introduction. For recipients that had
provided the IRS with their personal bank routing number (i.e., for direct deposit of tax refunds), the
stimulus payments were disbursed electronically over a three-week period ranging from the end of
April to the middle of May.8 The IRS mailed a statement to each household informing it about the
deposit a couple of business days before the electronic transfer of funds.9 The Supplemental
Appendix contains an example of this letter. For recipients that did not provide a personal bank
routing number, the ESPs were disbursed by paper checks over a nine-week period ranging from the
middle of May to the middle of July.10 The IRS sent a notification letter one week before the check
was mailed. Table 1 shows the schedule of ESP disbursement.


6
  See Auerbach and Gale (2009) for a description of fiscal policy in 2008.
7
  All income information was based on tax returns for year 2007. If subsequently a household’s tax year 2008 data
implied a larger payment, the household could claim the difference on its 2008 return filed in 2009. However, if the 2008
data implied a smaller payment, the household did not have to return the difference.
8
  The ESP was directly deposited only to a personal bank account, a debit card, or a “stored value card” from a personal
tax preparer. The payment was mailed for any tax return for which the IRS had the tax preparer’s routing number, as for
example would occur as part of taking out a refund anticipation loan or paying a tax preparation fee from a refund. These
situations are common, representing about a third of the tax refunds (not rebates) delivered via direct deposit in 2007.
9
  Banks also were notified a couple of days before the date of funds transfer, and some banks showed the amount on the
beneficiary's bank account a day or more before the actual credit date. For example, some EFTs deposited on Monday
April 28 were known to the banks on Thursday April 24, and some banks seem to have credited accounts on Friday.
10
   Taxpayers who filed their tax returns after April 15 received their ESPs either in their allotted time based on their SSN,
or as soon as possible after this date (about two weeks after they would receive a refund). Taxpayers filing their return

                                                              6
         According to the Department of the Treasury (2008), $78.8 billion in ESPs were disbursed
during the second quarter of 2008, which corresponds to 2.2% of GDP or 3.1% of personal
consumption expenditures in that quarter, and $15 billion in ESPs were disbursed during the third
quarter, which corresponds to about 0.4% of GDP or 0.6% of personal consumption expenditures.


3. NCP Household-level data on expenditures and ESP receipt
         The relation between ESPs and expenditures is measured using information from Nielsen’s
Consumer Panel (NCP) for 2008 (formerly Nielsen’s Homescan Consumer Panel), a survey of U.S.
households that tracks spending mainly on household goods with Universal Product Codes (UPCs,
referred to as “barcodes”). 11 This data has four main advantages for our purposes.
         First, the sample of household is much larger than in comparable panel datasets that measure
household spending. While there were about 120,000 households in the consumer panel at any point
in 2008, only about half of these households meet the static reporting requirement used by Nielsen to
define actively participating households for the period January to April 2008. This implies that the
regular reporting NCP panel has just under ten times the number of households as the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) for example.
         Second, due to a short recall window and the survey technology, the amount of spending is
measured relatively accurately. Spending data is collected electronically through the use of barcode
scanners. Households in the NCP are given barcode scanners and asked to use them after each
shopping trip for household items to report the total amount spent and to scan-in the barcodes of the
purchased items. In exchange for regularly uploading information, participants are entered in prize
drawings and receive Nielsen points that can be accumulated and used to purchase prizes from a
catalogue. Participants also get newsletters and personalized tips and reminders via email and/or
mail. Low performing households are dropped. About 75% of Nielsen households are retained from



after the extension deadline, October 15, were not eligible for ESPs. Since 92 percent of taxpayers typically file at or
before the normal April 15th deadline (Slemrod et al., 1997) and the vast majority of late returns occur close to the
extension deadline, there should be very few EPSs that are distributed during the main program that have their distribution
date set by the lateness of the return. Finally, due to an error, about 350,000 households (less than 1%) did not receive the
child tax credit component of their ESP with their main ESP. The IRS disbursed paper checks for the missing amounts
starting in early July. Since we only survey households about the first ESP received, this non-randomized second ESP is
not in our data. Some of our households might have been surprised by the small size of their first ESP.
11
   The data employed in this study is a combination of data licensed from Nielsen and data available through the Kilts-
Nielsen Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The Kilts-Nieslen data are
available at http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen/

                                                             7
year to year. Both the compensation for regular reporting and the use of scanners in real time
increase the accuracy of reported expenditures.
           Third, not only is the amount that is spent relatively well measured, but so is the timing of
spending which is reported on daily basis that is collapsed to weekly to match the frequency of ESP
disbursement. Since the ESPs were distributed by the week, the accurate measurement of high-
frequency spending increases the statistical power of our analysis.
           The final advantage of the NCP is that Nielsen has in place a system to survey the households
in the NCP. Nielsen typically uses these supplemental surveys to conduct marketing studies for
corporate clients. Our survey, described shortly, uses this technology to collect information about the
receipt of the ESPs.
           In other ways the NCP data is comparable to that available in other surveys. Toward the end
of each calendar year, households are surveyed about a number of characteristics including
demographics and income in the previous calendar year. The sample is not representative, but, when
recruiting participants, Nielsen seeks to add new households with characteristics that make the panel
more representative across cells in nine demographic dimensions – including family structure, four
income groups, and three occupation categories – to match the 2000 Census population in each cell.12
Nielsen also produces weights that scale up the observed number of households in each cell to be
representative by cell.
           The NCP panel has one significant disadvantage for our analysis: the scope of spending that it
covers is limited to spending on trips to stores to buy household items. The detailed spending data is
limited to goods with barcodes, which are concentrated in grocery, drugstore and mass-merchandise
sectors, and so the recorded expenditures primarily cover goods such as food and drug products,
small appliances and electronic goods, and mass merchandise products excluding apparel. Our
analysis uses information on reported trip totals rather than the large amount of detail available on
products (approximately 700,000 different goods are purchased at some point by household in the
sample), which has the advantage of capturing a larger amount of spending. But to put this issue in
perspective, (weighted) spending per capita in the NCP is about $57/week which is about 10 percent
of NIPA per capital PCE. At the household level, spending is 35 percent of spending on broad




12
     Unweighted, the sample we use is tilted towards low income households.

                                                            8
nondurable goods reported in the 2008 CE Survey, or 19 percent of total consumption spending.13 As
a result, to measure aggregate responses, dollar spending responses are scaled up to a measure of total
spending, as described in Section 6.
         Our supplemental survey was fielded in multiple waves, with each wave following the
standard procedures that Nielsen uses to survey the consumer panel households. For households with
Internet access and who were in communication with Nielsen by email, the survey was administered
in three waves in a web-based form; for households without access and in contact with Nielsen by US
mail the survey was administered in two waves in a paper/barcode scanner form, since the
distribution time was slower and the preparation time greater. Repeated surveying was conditional on
earlier responses.
         The survey has two parts, each of which was to be answered by “the adult most
knowledgeable about your household's income tax returns.” Part I (household characteristics)
contains a question asking households about their liquid assets (as well as four other questions about
behavior not used in this paper). Households completing Part I of the survey in any wave were not
asked Part I again. Part II first describes the ESP program and then asks “Has your household
received a tax rebate (stimulus payment) this year?” Households responding “Yes” were then asked
about the amount and date of arrival of their ESP, whether it was received by check or direct deposit,
when they learned that they were getting the payment, and the amount of spending that receipt caused
across categories of goods. Households reporting ESP information were not re-surveyed.14
Households responding “No, and we are definitely not getting one” were not asked further questions
and received no further surveys. Households responding “No, but we are expecting to,” or “No, and I
am unsure whether we will get any,” or “Not sure/don’t know” were not asked further questions but
were re-surveyed with Part II (if not the final wave).




13
   The NCP expenditure data cover around 40 percent of all expenditure on goods in the CPI. Note, this is not a statement
about the dollar share of these goods relative to the dollar cost of one “basket” of CPI. In contrast, the Consumer
Expenditure Survey covers about 85 percent of household expenditures. See Broda and Weinstein (2008).
14
   The survey thus only measures the first ESP received by a household, or, if more than one was received prior to
answering Part II of the survey, the household was instructed to report the larger. The decision not to allow reporting
multiple ESP’s and not to re-survey households that report ESP’s significantly reduced the cost of the survey at the cost of
missing only a few ESP’s. In the CEX for example, only about 5% of households and 10% of recipients report receiving
multiple ESP’s.

                                                             9
         In terms of timing, the surveys covered the main period during which ESPs were distributed
with random timing.15 The Supplementary Appendix gives the time-plan, contact letter and email,
mail and on-line surveys, and response rates.
         The repeated nature of the survey implies that the recall window for the ESP is relatively
short: one month for the email/web survey and just over one and a half months for the mail/scanner
survey. The survey was administered to all households meeting a Nielsen static reporting
requirement for January through April 2008, which amounted to 46,620 households by email/web and
13,243 by mail/barcode scanner.16 For both types of survey, the response rates were 72% to the first
wave, and 80% after all waves, giving 48,409 survey responses (of which some are invalid).
         Our analysis drops all households that: i) do not report receiving an ESP (roughly 20 percent
of the respondents); ii) do not report a date of ESP receipt; iii) report not having received an ESP in
one survey and then in a later survey report receiving an ESP prior to their response to the earlier
survey; iv) report receiving an ESP after the date they submitted the survey; v) report receiving an
ESP by direct deposit (by mail) outside the period of the randomized disbursement by direct deposit
(mail), and households not reporting means of receipt and reporting receiving an ESP outside both
periods of randomized disbursement. With respect to this last cut, we allow a two day grace period
for reporting relative to survey submit dates, and a seven day grace period for misreporting relative to
the period of randomization (and do not adjust the reported date of receipt). These cuts reduce the
sample to 28,937 households. This selection is not random. But it is (presumably) uncorrelated with
the randomization, and so creates no bias for estimation of the average spending effect in the
remaining sample. Given heterogeneity in treatment effects however, invalid survey responses may
create bias for population inference if there are differences in treatment effects between these dropped



15
   On May 29, 2008, households that had access to the Internet were sent by email a request to take the survey with a link,
the amount of Nielsen points they would earn by participating, and the deadline by which they must respond. Those who
had not responded were sent reminder emails with links on May 30, June 5, and June 11 and the survey wave closed on
June 16. Those households not responding and those whose responses dictated that they should be re-surveyed with Part
II of the survey were re-surveyed in a second wave with an email request on June 26, received up to three reminders, and
had the survey close on July 16. A third wave of the on-line survey ran from July 25 to August 18. Households that did
not have access to the Internet were first sent surveys by mail on June 18, received up to five reminders by telephone
conditional on non-response (roughly every 6 days with the last one on July 17), and the survey closed on July 19. Non-
respondents and those whose responses dictate it were re-surveyed in a second wave mailed on July 25, received up to
five reminders, and the survey closed on September 9, 2008.
16
   Thus we survey 79% by email/web. According to the October 2009 Current Population Survey, 69% of households
have computer access at home (U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division, Education & Social Stratification Branch
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/computer/2009.html).

                                                            10
households and those not dropped. The maintained assumption is that this bias is small enough to be
neglected.
        These responses are merged with the information on total spending on each trip taken by each
household during 2008 from the KILTS NCP which includes only households that meet the Nielsen
static reporting requirement for all of 2008. These data are made weekly and weeks in which no
expenditures are reported are considered to be weeks with zero expenditures.17 All analysis uses the
population weights that Nielsen produces for the sample of households that meet the NCP static
reporting requirement for expenditures for the year 2008.
        Table 2 shows summary statistics for the data and sample used. In terms of spending, average
(weighted) weekly spending in the baseline, static sample is $149. The weekly spending of
households receiving ESPs by mail is $16 less than that of households receiving an ESP by direct
deposit. The average ESP conditional on receiving one is $898. Households receiving ESP by direct
deposit on average have higher ESPs by about $190, consistent with their having on average 0.4
larger households.18
        How accurate is our data on ESPs? First, many features of the distribution of the amount and
timing of ESPs (documented in Tables A and B in Supplemental Appendix) match statistics from
similar surveys in the SIPP and the CE. For example, the pattern of Payment amounts cluster at
multiple of $300; the average ESP in the CE Survey is $940; and the average ESP received by direct
deposit is $180 more than the average received by check.19 Second, one way to judge the
representativeness of the sample and how well the survey measures Payments is to compare the
weighted, summed survey ESPs to the known aggregate amounts disbursed as reported in the Daily
Treasury Statements during the same period. Rescaling household weights to account for missing
data, our weighted sample contains 65 billion in reported Payments as compared to the 91 billion that
the Treasury reports disbursing over the same period. Finally, to compare timing, Figure 2 plots the
weekly distribution over time in Figure 2, where to focus on timing, the NCP weekly amounts are
rescaled so that the sum of NCP ESPs matches the sum of DTS EPS’s. The survey of NCP
households captures the same temporal pattern of disbursement as the Treasury reports. The NCP
17
   With one exception. If a household stops reporting expenditure during 2008, we consider spending data from that point
on missing rather than zero for these ending weeks of the year. This has almost no effect on the results. The average
number of weeks of valid data is 51.7 and the minimum 40.
18
   Each additional child eligible for the CTC leads to $300 larger ESP, while most married couples receives $600 more
than the equivalent single-headed household.
19
   The average household sizes, both among recipients and on-time recipients, are very similar to those in the CEX
Survey. These distributions for the CE are reported in Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McCelland (2011).

                                                           11
survey displays a slightly higher share of Payments disbursed by electronic deposit and a slightly
lower share later disbursed by mail than the Treasury data.


4. Estimation methodology
        Our analysis uses the following regression equation to estimate the average impact of the
receipt of an ESP on spending for household i in week t receiving a payment by method m:
                Ci,t = µi + b(L) ESPi,t + tm,t + hi,t                                           (1)
where Ci,t is either the dollar amount of spending in week t for household i or the ratio of that level of
spending to the average weekly spending of that household during 2008 prior to the ESP
disbursements (the first twelve weeks of the year). µi is a household-specific intercept that captures
differences in spending across households. ESPi,t, the key stimulus payment variable, is either a
dummy variable indicating whether any payment was received by household i in week t or that
dummy variable times the average amount of the ESP received, where the average is different by
method of receipt m. b(.) is a lead and lag polynomial (L is the lag operator), so that b(L) ESPi,t
represents the sum of a coefficient times the contemporaneous ESPi,t and a series of coefficients
times lags and potentially leads of ESPi,t . To ensure consistency, the b(L) cover all possible lags in
the sample. The b(L) are the key parameters of interest and measure the spending effects of the ESP
prior to its arrival, upon its arrival, and following its arrival. The variable tm,t is an indicator variable
for the method of disbursement (whether the household reported an ESP delivered by mail or by
direct deposit) interacted with an indicator variable for each week. Thus, tm,t is an effect which
absorbs any seasonal or average changes in spending for each group of recipients separately in each
week. Finally, hi,t captures all expenditures unexplained by the previous factors. Standard errors are
adjusted to allow for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-household serial correlation.
        Consistent estimation of the causal impact of receipt on spending requires that the variation in
ESPi,t be uncorrelated with all other factors that might influence household expenditure besides the
receipt-driven variation of interest. Since the timing of the ESP mailing is effectively random, our
results exploit only variation in timing of ESP receipt (not amount) among recipients in each method
of disbursement. Equation (1) does this by i) using only timing variation in ESP within each means
of receipt, ii) removing individual effects to remove difference in the average level of spending, and
iii) controlling for the average spending of recipients by mail and recipients by direct deposit
separately in each period. Selection into method of disbursement raises the possibility of correlation

                                                        12
between type and average treatment effect. With this specification, such a correlation would not bias
estimates of average effects within type, nor of the average effect across the two groups.
         To interpret the amount disbursed times b(L) as causing an increase in aggregate consumption
demand further requires that the time effects, tm,t are not lowered during the period of disbursement
by the disbursement.20 While the increase in spending caused by the receipt of an ESP must be offset
by lower spending at some point, the maintained assumption is that this lower spending occurs after
our period of estimation or is tied to the timing of the disbursement and so measured in b(L). To
elucidate this assumption, consider the following counterexample. Suppose that households all
changed the timing of their consumption to match the arrival of their EPS’s, but from within the
common period of disbursement, so that households that receive their ESPs early in the program on
average accelerate spending while households that receive their ESPs late in the program on average
delay it. In this case, b(L) estimates the causal effect of a Payment on an individual household’s
spending but aggregate spending during the period of disbursement is unchanged (because everyone
lowers their baseline spending during the period). While such heterogeneity in treatment effect
(dynamically correlated with the random treatment) is possible, we know of no existing model of
consumer behavior that would generate this behavior.
         In addition to studying the average treatment effect, equation (1) is also estimated separately
for different households by characteristics like asset levels or income levels. For these analyses, the
main question of interest is whether there are differences in average treatment effect across
households with different characteristics.
         Selection into the NCP and/or nonrandom missing data would bias population inference of
average treatment effects if it were correlated with treatment effect. While the experiment provides
randomization that aids identification, our analysis can only estimate the causal effect of ESP receipt
for the population of households represented by those in the NCP that respond to our survey with
valid responses. Use of the NCP weights ensures that the sample is representative along several
observable measures, but the potential for bias remains. 21
         While finding a significant effect of ESP receipt on spending represents a rejection of the
canonical consumption smoothing condition of the frictionless, textbook lifecycle/permanent income


20
   This may be the case due to general equilibrium effects of course, but that does not change the validity of our partial-
equilibrium estimates of the effect on aggregate demand.
21
   Another assumption, implicit in b(L) not varying with t, is that any time-variation in the treatment effect is not
correlated with the aggregate economy (tm,t).

                                                             13
hypothesis (LCPIH), this experimental methodology is distinct from tests of the LCPIH based on the
Euler equation. Euler equation estimation uses time-series moments derived from first-order
conditions to test the null hypothesis/moment restriction that the effect of an anticipated income
change on spending is zero. Instead, our method uses the randomized timing of ESP receipt to
provide orthogonality between the residual and the timing of ESP receipt. This alternative approach
allows estimation of the causal effect of the receipt of a pre-announced income change on spending
independent of the theory being tested. Our approach does still provide a direct test of the rational
expectations LCPIH without constraints since the passage of ESA 2008 predates the experiment.


5. The average response of spending to the receipt of an ESP
       This section begins by identifying the average effect of the receipt of an ESP on weekly
spending in the sample of all households from all available variation in timing, including that due to
different method of disbursement, so tm,t =tt in equation (1). The first three columns of Table 3
display estimates of b(.) – the coefficient on the one included lead, the contemporaneous ESP
variable, and the first three lags (of the complete set of included lags).
       First, on average, there is a highly statistically significant increase in spending on NCP
household goods upon arrival of an ESP. For example, the first column reports coefficients from a
regression of total spending (in dollars per week) on the lead and lag polynomial of an indicator
variable for week of ESP receipt so that the reported coefficients are interpreted as the dollar
spending caused by the receipt of an ESP in that week. Households on average increase their
spending by a reasonably precisely estimated 14 dollars in the week that the ESP arrives. The second
column show the results of switching the dependent variable to dollars spent as a percent of average
weekly spending in the first 12 weeks of the year, which gives a spending effect in the week of arrival
of just under 10 percent of average weekly spending. These estimates are consistent with each other
in the sense that a ten percent response at the average weekly spending level of $149 implies a
spending response of $14.90.
       The third column reports the most important specification for later analysis. Dollar spending
is regressed on the lead/lag polynomial of the indicator variable for receipt times the average amount
of ESP for all households, which gives β(L) the interpretation of a marginal propensity to consume
out the rebate (MPC). Thus, these coefficients measure the average propensity to spend out of the



                                                    14
ESP. In the week that the ESP arrives, its arrival causes a highly significant increase in spending of
1.55 percent of the ESP. This is consistent with other columns given an average ESP of $898.
       There is no evidence of any greater spending in the week before the arrival of the ESP in any
specification. This lack of pre-treatment effects also suggests that there is very little reporting error in
date of receipt, as for example due to recall error, at least after dropping the clearly erroneous reports.
       While there is no spending effect of receipt immediately before receipt, there is a continued
spending effect for weeks after receipt. This spending effect declines slightly the week after arrival
and continues declining reasonably smoothly so that the coefficients on weekly spending in all
specifications are no longer individually statistically significant by the third week. The last row of the
table reports the spending effects over the four weeks starting the week of receipt: the cumulative
dollar spending is $35, the percent increase in spending over the period is 5.6 percent of spending,
and the total share of the ESP spent is 3.9 percent.
       The second triplet of columns in Table 3 show the results of estimating the same three
specifications but now treating the two different methods of disbursement as two separate
experiments, as in equation (1). The results in the second three columns are very similar to those in
the first three columns. Using only experimental variation in timing, the point estimates of the
contemporaneous spending effect of receipt are slightly lower but still highly significant: 13 dollars,
11 percent of spending, and 1.5 percent of the ESP on average. There are no significant spending
effects prior to receipt. And over four weeks, the cumulative spending effects are highly statistically
significant 28 dollars, 6.0 percent of spending, and 3.4 percent of the ESP on average.
       These results are reasonably robust. Similar patterns emerge (adjusting for differences in
average spending) when restricting to households reporting spending in at least half the weeks or in
every week, and when trimming the top and bottom 1% of spending. Similar percentage changes and
spending effects relative to average dollar spending are found measuring spending as the (smaller)
sum of all individual barcode items reported instead of the (larger) sum of all total trip spending.
With this dependent variable, we are also able to use a larger sample of households that includes
those that do not meet the Nielsen static reporting requirement for the year, and a weight specially
constructed for us by Nielsen for this larger sample. While statistical precision is slightly lower and
dollar spending is lower, the pattern of coefficients remains similar as a share of average spending to
those reported.



                                                     15
       Are there further small but measurable spending effects of receipt of an ESP beyond the first
month? To investigate this question, the impulse response to the receipt of an ESP is smoothed by
making β(L) constant across four-week periods, starting with the week of receipt. By estimating
fewer parameters, longer-term spending effects of the receipt of an ESP may be estimated more
precisely.
       Table 4 shows the monthly impulse responses of spending to the receipt of an ESP. The
increase in spending caused by the receipt of an ESP is estimated to be $42.7 (column 1) or $47.4
(column 4) in the month following receipt, both slightly larger than found in Table 3 (four week
increase). After the initial month, spending is estimated to be increased by $9.4 or $26.3 in the first
following month, and by $8.7 or $20.6 in the month after that, although only the larger (column 4)
estimate in the first month is statistically significant. Measured as percent changes in spending,
spending rises by between 5.27 and 6.86 percent the month of arrival, but the lagged effects over the
next two months are estimated to be negative in column 2 and economically significant and decaying
in column 5. Finally, the third column and the last column of Table 4 show that households spent
about five percent of their ESPs the month they arrived and a continued one to three percent over the
following two months. Unlike in the analysis at the weekly frequency, there are some economically
significant (although not statistically significant) spending effects the month prior to the receipt of an
ESP, particularly for the analysis that treats each method of disbursement as a separate experiment
(column 4 in particular). This fact combined with the fact that there are no pre-treatment effects in
the weekly analysis (and in similar weekly analysis with more leads) suggest that the spending effects
in columns 1 and 3 are probably more reliable estimates of the longer term effects than the larger
spending effects shown in columns 4 and 6. The estimates of cumulative spending over four weeks
reported in Table 3 also support the analysis of columns 1 and 3 over 4 and 6 in Table 4.
       In sum, our preferred estimates imply that cumulative spending totals over the three months
following receipt are 61 dollars, 1.6 or 3.8 percent of average spending, and 7 percent of the ESP
amount on average. We now use the results from column 3 of Table 4 to calculate the implications
of this ESP program for aggregate demand both in economic models and in reality.


6. The partial-equilibrium, aggregate effect of the stimulus payments
       What do these household-level estimates imply for macroeconomic models of fiscal policy
and for the efficacy of the actual policy in 2008? This section presents calculations of the change in

                                                    16
aggregate consumption demand associated with a given disbursement of stimulus payments. This
calculation involves two steps: first scaling the increase in demand for NCP goods to a broad measure
of spending on goods and services, and then second aggregating these responses to moments useful
for matching by DSGE models or for matching aggregate spending in the spring and summer of
2008.22 As discussed in the introduction, this calculation omits any effects that are not correlated
with timing of receipt, and excludes all multiplier effects. This section measures only the effect of
receipt on demand.
        Scaling spending from just NCP items to spending on more complete measures of
consumption expenditures is done in three different ways.
        The first method simply multiplies the estimated MPC’s by the ratio of National Income and
Product Account (NIPA) quarterly personal consumption spending per capita to NCP quarterly
spending per capita. This method has two weaknesses. This method ignores that some aggregate
consumption is not discretionary, out-of-pocket spending by households (e.g. consumption of health
goods and services) which biasing our estimate of total spending upward. On the other hand, this
method ignores that the propensity to spend on NCP goods is likely lower than that on all goods and
services, which biases our estimate of total spending downward. NCP purchases that can be
categorized (the subset that have barcodes and are scanned in) disproportionately comprise spending
on necessities and goods that Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006) found to have low MPC’s in
response to the 2001 tax rebate (e.g. food at home).
        Second, our supplemental ESP survey ended with questions asking each household how they
spent their ESP (the survey is in the Supplemental Appendix). First, the household was asked the
question pioneered by Shapiro and Slemrod (1995), “Thinking about your household’s financial
situation this year, is the tax rebate leading you mostly to increase spending, mostly to increase
savings, or mostly to pay off debt?” The household was then asked five more questions: “For
questions #6 through #10, please think about the extra amount you are spending because of this rebate
on each type of purchase outlined below . . . How much (in dollars rounded to the nearest dollar) are
you spending on each of the following?” The second method scales the estimated MPC’s by the ratio




22
  The existing household-level estimates have already been used by a number of partial-equilibrium models, such as Reis
(2006), Huntley and Michelangeli (2014), and Kaplan, G., and G. Violante (forthcoming).

                                                          17
of average reported ESP spending on all goods (sum of questions 6 to 10) to average reported ESP
spending on NCP goods alone (question 6).23
        Our third and final method is to scale our spending estimates up based on the distribution of
spending in the NCP and the total MPC that is due to each category of spending as estimated in the
CE data by PSJM. Specifically, Table 6 in PSJM reports the share of total MPC in each category of
spending. For each category, this share is multiplied by the ratio of NCP spending to CE spending
and summed to provide an estimate of the share of total MPC captured by NCP spending. To
calculate NCP spending by category, all purchases that have a comparable CE category are allocated
to spending on that category and the remainder of NCP spending is divided evenly among all CE
categories except purchases of vehicles (because such purchases would not be reported in the NCP)
and food at home, alcoholic beverages, and tobacco products (because such purchases are mostly
scanned in and reported in these categories).
        Table 5 reports the results of three calculations for each of these three methods of aggregation.
The first two calculations provide statistics useful for disciplining models of consumer behavior
embedded in a DSGE model. Panel A assumes that a stimulus program is implemented that
distributes stimulus payments in the first week of the quarter, so that all spending effects measured in
Table 4 occur within the quarter. The total increase in aggregate demand for consumption is between
51 and 75 percent of the distributed payments. Panel B assumes instead that the payments are
distributed evenly across the weeks of a single quarter so that the spending effects of Table 4 are
distributed across the current and subsequent quarter. The aggregate response of demand is 31 to 46
percent of the rebate amount during the quarter of disbursement and 20 to 29 percent during the
following quarter.
        If there is heterogeneity in spending response to receipt across households, a key issue in
matching a model to these causal moments is that the distribution of Payments across households in
the model match that across households in the real world. The ESP’s were not sent to households
with the lowest and highest incomes in 2007. ESPs were disbursed to low-income household with at
least $3,000 of qualifying income in 2007 and who filed a tax return, which implies that few low
income households were omitted from the program. Relative to a mean household income of $63,200
BLS (2009) reports that 21% of households with income below $10,000 received an ESP and that

23
   More complex procedures were tried with essentially the same results. For example, the numbers are almost unchanged
if the reported spending amounts are predicted from a regression on household characteristics and then spending is scaled
up at the household level.

                                                           18
these ESPs averaged $599. Similarly, 43% of households with incomes over $70,000 (with average
income of $130,200) received a Payment and these ESPs averaged $1,227. According to the law, a
married couple filing jointly without children would receive no ESP if their AGI exceeded roughly
$150,000, which covers the top 14% of families (or 9% of households) by income (according to the
ACS).
        Turning to the real-world aggregate effects, the estimated increase in demand for goods during
and shortly after the program caused by the receipt of the Payments in 2008 is the household-level
impulse responses applied to the observed aggregate disbursements of the Payments over time as
reported by the Daily Treasury Statements (2008). These calculations imply significant aggregate
spending effects. Panel C of Table 5 shows that the disbursement of the ESPs directly raised the
demand for consumption by between 1.3 and 1.9 percent in the second quarter of 2008 and by 0.6 to
0.9 percent in the third quarter. These estimates relative to the time series of aggregate consumption
spending were presented in Figure 1 in the Introduction. The estimates suggest that consumption
spending was maintained during the first 9 months of the recession by the ESP program. Of course
whether the ESP program’s effect was larger or smaller than that given by these accounting
calculations depends on the extent of the multiplier or crowding out not included in these
calculations, and on any other effects of the ESP program on aggregate demand not correlated with
the timing of receipt.
        The next section considers whether there was any noticeable additional increase in spending
when households first learned about their ESPs, while the following section analyzes heterogeneity in
spending response by income and liquid wealth.


7. The average response of spending to learning about an ESP
        This section investigates whether households increased their spending on NCP measured
goods at the different times at which they learned about their ESPs. After households reported
receiving an ESP, our ESP survey asked “Was this about the amount your household was expecting?”
Households could respond, “no and we were surprised to get any rebate at all,” “no and it was less
than we were expecting,” or “no and it was more than we were expecting.” They could also respond
“yes, and we’ve known the approximate amount since February,” and the same with “since March,”
“since April,” and “yes, but we only learned about it recently.” Finally a household could respond
“not sure/don’t know.”

                                                  19
         To measure the spending effect of learning about a Payment, equation (1) is estimated but
with an indicator variable for the month in which the household learned about their ESP (denoted
LESP) instead of an indicator variable for receipt.24 Households who report ‘don’t know’ or that they
were negatively surprised are dropped. This method thus compares the spending of households that
learned about the ESPs in different months prior to arrival. Since the variation is monthly, β(L) is set
to monthly. While this analysis exploits variation in timing to measure a spending effect, unlike in
the previous section, this variation in timing is not random and so is possibly correlated with other
reasons for temporal changes in spending.
         Panel A of Table 6 shows that there is very little evidence of any spending response.
Analogous to previous tables, the regressions reported in columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 include distributed
lags of the indicator for the month in which the household learns about the ESP, while columns 3 and
6 include distributed lags of the average ESP amount times this variable. All estimated effects are
economically small and statistically insignificant.
         Why are there no measureable responses? First, it is always possible that the self-reported
recall about learning is poor. Second, and perhaps more important, the LCPIH predicts only a small
increase in lifetime resources associated with the ESP and so only an economically small spending
response.
         Third, some household might not respond to news about future income due to liquidity
constraints or high costs of borrowing so that in the population of constrained and unconstrained
households there is no noticeable response. If so, the spending response may be larger in a sample
restricted to households who have access to liquidity. Part I of the supplemental survey asked
households “In case of an unexpected decline in income or increase in expenses, do you have at least
two months of income available in cash, bank accounts, or easily accessible funds?” Note that this
question is asked of households when they are first surveyed, potentially before they report receiving
an ESP in a later survey, but after the period in which most variation in learning about ESPs occurs.
Panel B of Table 6 repeats the analysis of Panel A but only for households who answer that they have
sufficient funds. Even for households with adequate liquid wealth, there is no evidence of any
spending response upon learning about the ESP, although as noted, the variation is not exogenous and
the LCPIH would predict little spending response.


24
  The sample is restricted to data before the first full week of July. The results are very similar if the sample in instead
restricted to the first 18 weeks of the year to avoid the period of the main experiment entirely.

                                                              20
       In sum, there is no evidence of a quantitatively important increase or decrease in spending by
households when they learn about their ESPs.


8. Heterogeneity in the response of spending across households
       This section investigates the differential spending response of households across 2007 income
levels and across different levels of liquid wealth. Temporarily low income may indicate low
liquidity and a high propensity to consume. Alternatively, low income may indicate greater
impatience or other characteristics of people who are more (or less) likely to spend income when it
arrives. Similarly, low liquidity when combined with sufficiently high impatience or expected
increases in income may indicate that a household is liquidity constrained and has a high propensity
to consume from expected income increases.
       To investigate the role of liquid wealth and income, equation (1) is estimated separately on
subsets of households grouped by income and liquidity. Because there are differences in the average
ESP and average spending level across groups of households with different levels of income and
liquidity, the specifications that use only indicators of receipt may estimate different amounts of
spending because average spending differs across groups or because the average dollar amount of the
ESPs differ across group, rather than because behavior differs by group. As a result, this section
focuses on the specification that regresses dollars spent on the average amount of the ESP by group,
which is the specification estimating the propensity to spend in each group.
       In the NCP, income is measured in ranges and 2007 annual income is reported at the
beginning of 2009. For our analysis, households are divided into three groups that represent, in the
weighted data, the bottom 35% of households, the middle 34%, and the top 30%. Table 7 show that
the bottom third of households by income – those with annual labor incomes of less than $35,000 –
consume at greater rates than the other groups. Focusing on the second triplet of columns in both
Panel A and Panel B, in the month of arrival, the propensity to consume of the bottom income group
is roughly double that of the middle and top income groups. But these differences narrow over time.
By three months after receipt, households in the bottom third of the distribution of 2007 income have
consumed a similar share of their ESP as those in the top third, a both economically and statistically
significant 9 – 15 percent of their ESPs on NCP goods. This is in contrast to households in the
middle of the income distribution whose MPC is significantly lower. That is, as found in Parker
(1999) there is weak evidence that high-income households smooth consumption as poorly as low

                                                   21
income households over predictable income changes of this size. Finally, because the amount of the
ESP increases with income, the total dollar spending across households is not as different across
income groups (first three columns of both Panel A and Panel B of Table 7).
       Turning to liquidity, Part I of the survey contains the question “In case of an unexpected
decline in income or increase in expenses, do you have at least two months of income available in
cash, bank accounts, or easily accessible funds?” and the respondent can answer yes or no. In the
weighted sample, 41 percent of households answers that they do not have this much liquidity.
       Table 8 shows that spending responses are concentrated among those households without
sufficient liquidity. In the first month, the receipt of an ESP causes households without access to
sufficient funds to spend roughly 9 percent of their ESPs on NCP goods, which is three to four times
the amount spent by households out sufficient funds. In the months following, these differences
narrow only slightly, so that in both Panels A and B, illiquid households spend more than twice as
much of their ESPs over three months following receipt as households reporting sufficient liquidity.
This conclusion is also visible in the dollar spending caused by the arrival of an ESP, displayed in the
first two columns in each Panel, with illiquid households spending triple the dollar amount on arrival
of illiquid households and more than double the amount over a three month period.


9. Conclusion
       In normal times, monetary policy is the main instrument of stabilization policy arguably
because the effects of monetary policy are reasonably well understood and because central banks can
react rapidly to the possibility of a recession. But monetary policy has limitations – lags in its effect,
increases in inflation, and reduced efficacy when financial institutions are capital-poor or when the
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates binds. At such times, fiscal policy in the form of tax
rebate programs have been able to respond quickly and temporarily to economic slowdowns. But the
increased use of tax rebate programs raises two central questions. First, do these programs generate
more spending? And second, does this spending have social benefits that exceed the future costs of
the program?
       This paper uses novel data to speak directly to the first question. At the household level,
spending on NCP goods spikes up by ten percent the week in which an ESP arrives. Continued
spending implies that spending is roughly 6 percent higher over the month starting with arrival and 3
to 5 percent higher the three-month period starting with arrival. To move to aggregate effects, these

                                                    22
results are aggregated across households and extrapolated to include spending on unobserved goods
and services.
        In terms of macroeconomics models, these calculations imply that in a quarterly model, the
propensity to consume at the individual level from an equivalent tax rebate in a quarter is between 50
and 75 percent. In a more realistic continuous-time or higher-frequency model, if tax rebates were
uniformly distributed during a quarter, the average partial-equilibrium spending response would be 30
to 45 percent of the rebate amount during the quarter of disbursement and 20 to 30 percent during the
following quarter. In terms of the real-world, the disbursement of the ESPs directly raised the demand
for consumption by between 1.3 to 1.8 percent in the second quarter of 2008 and by 0.6 to 0.9 percent
in the third quarter of 2008, with ranges reflecting differences across scaling factors.
        This paper speaks only indirectly to the second question. Our results imply that DSGE-based
calculations of the efficacy of fiscal policy should incorporate a share of households that spend
significant amounts of transfers when they arrive, a modeling assumption that would imply behavior
substantially different than the Ricardian assumptions typically embodied in DSGE models used to
evaluate fiscal policies.




                                                   23
References
Agarwal, Sumit; Liu, Chunlin and Souleles, Nicholas S., 2007, “The Response of Consumer
       Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates – Evidence from Consumer Credit Data,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 115(6), December, pp. 986-1019.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Gale, William G., 2009, “Activist Fiscal Policy to Stabilize Economic
       Activity,” in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
       City.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Morse, Adair, 2009, “What do High-Interest Borrowers Do with their Tax
       Rebate?” American Economic Review, 99(2), pp. 418-23.
Blinder, Alan S., 1981, “Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 89, pp. 26-53.
Broda, Christian, and Parker, Jonathan, 2008, “The Impact of the 2008 Tax Rebates on Consumer
       Spending: Preliminary Evidence,” working paper, July.
Broda, C. and D. Weinstein, (2008) “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price
       Implications,” American Economic Review, 100(3) June, pp. 691-723.
Browning, Martin and Lusardi, Annamaria, 1996, “Household Saving: Micro Theories and Macro
       Facts,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34(4), pp 1797-1855.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, 2009, “Consumer Expenditure Survey Results
       on the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments (Tax Rebates),” October,
       (http://www.bls.gov/cex/taxrebate.htm).
CCH, 2008, “CCH Tax Briefing: Economic Stimulus Package,” February 13.
Coronado, Julia Lynn, Lupton, Joseph P., and Sheiner, Louise M., 2005, “The Household Spending
       Response to the 2003 Tax Cut: Evidence from Survey Data,” Finance and Economics
       Discussion Series 2005-32. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Deaton, Angus, 1992, Understanding Consumption, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Evans, William N. and Timothy J. Moore, 2011, “The Short-Term Mortality Consequences of
       Income Receipt,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(11), pp. 1410-1424.
Feldstein, Martin, 2008, “The Tax Rebate Was a Flop. Obama's Stimulus Plan Won't Work Either”
       The Wall Street Journal, August 6.
Flavin, Marjorie, 1981, “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future
       Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), pp. 974-1009.

                                                 24
Gross, Tal, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang, “Liquidity Constraints and Consumer
       Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 2003, “Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from the
       Alaska Permanent Fund,” American Economic Review, 99, pp. 397-405.
Huntley, Jonathan and Valentina Michelangeli, 2014. “Can Tax Rebates Stimulate Consumption
       Spending in a Life-Cycle Model?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(1), pp.
       162-89.
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, 2010, “The Consumption Response to Income Changes,” Annual
       Review of Economics, Annual Reviews, 2(1), pp 479-506, 09.
Johnson, David S., Parker, Jonathan A., and Souleles, Nicholas S., 2006, “Household Expenditure
       and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 96, pp. 1589-1610.
Johnson, David S., Parker, Jonathan A., and Souleles, Nicholas S., 2009, “The Response of
       Consumer Spending to Rebates During an Expansion: Evidence from the 2003 Child Tax
       Credit,” working paper, April.
Kaplan, Greg and Gianluca Violante, 2011, “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
       Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
       Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, September, 89(4), pp. 959-973.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, 2011,
       “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008” NBER working paper
       16684, January 2011.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, 2013,
       “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American Economic
       Review, October, 103(6), pp. 2530-53.
Poterba, James M., 1988, “Are Consumers Forward Looking? Evidence from Fiscal Experiments,”
       American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), May, 78(2), pp. 413-418.
Reis, Ricardo, 2006, “Inattentive Consumers,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(8), 1761-1800.
Sahm, Claudia R., Shapiro, Matthew D. and Slemrod, Joel B., 2010, “Household Response to the
   2008 Tax Rebates: Survey Evidence and Aggregate Implications,” in Tax Policy and The
   Economy, ed. Jeffrey R. Brown, Cambridge: MIT Press.



                                                25
Shapiro, Matthew D., and Slemrod, Joel B., 1995, “Consumer Response to the Timing of Income:
       Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding,” American Economic Review, March, 85, pp.
       274-283.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Slemrod, Joel B., 2003, “Consumer Response to Tax Rebates,” American
   Economic Review, 85, pp. 274-283.
Shapiro, Matthew W. and Slemrod, Joel B., 2009, “Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate Spending?”
   American Economic Review, May, 99(2), pp. 374-79.
Slemrod, Joel B., Christian, Charles, London, Rebecca, and Parker, Jonathan A., 1997, “April 15
       Syndrome,” Economic Inquiry, October, 35(4), pp. 695-709.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,”
       American Economic Review, September, 89(4), pp. 947-958.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 2002, “Consumer Response to the Reagan Tax Cuts,” Journal of Public
       Economics, 85, pp. 99-120.
Stephens, Melvin, Jr., 2003, “3rd of tha Month: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth Consumption
       Between Checks?” American Economic Review, 93, pp. 406-422.
Stephens, Melvin, Jr., 2006, “Paycheck Receipt and the Timing of Consumption,” The Economic
       Journal, August, 116/513, pp. 680-701.
Taylor, John B., 2010, “Getting Back on Track: Macroeconomic Policy Lessons from the Financial
       Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 92(3), May/June, pp. 165-176.
Department of the Treasury, “Daily Treasury Statement,” Washington: GPO, 2008, various issues.
Wilcox, David W., 1990, “Income Tax Refunds and the Timing of Consumption Expenditure,”
       working paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, April.
Zeldes, Stephen P., 1989a, “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 305-346.
Zeldes, Stephen P., 1989b, “Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from
       Certainty Equivalence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(2), pp. 275-298.




                                                26
Figure 1: Actual NIPA personal consumption expenditures and accounting alternatives

             10,200


             10,100


             10,000
  Billions




              9,900


              9,800
                           Actual PCE
                           PCE without ESP's; NIPA to NCP ratio scaling
              9,700        PCE without ESP's; reported spending response scaling
                           PCE without ESP's; CE response scaling
              9,600
                  07 Q3   07 Q4          08 Q1           08 Q2            08 Q3    08 Q4         09 Q1


Notes: Estimates based on Table 4 Panel A last column. Alternative scenarios subtract the sum of the ESPs
distributed in each month times the MPC's reported in Table 5 from the actual NIPA PCE series. Calculated
based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Figure 2: Economic stimulus payments in the NCP and as reported by the Treasury

    (billions of dollars)
         30
                                                                   Total amounts from Daily Treasury
                                                                   Statements
                                                                   All surveyed households meeting static
         25
                                                                   reporting requirement (scaled)
                                                                   All households used in analysis (scaled)

         20




         15




         10




          5




          0
              3-30 4-6 4-13 4-20 4-27 5-4 5-11 5-18 5-25 6-1 6-8 6-15 6-22 6-29 7-6 7-13 7-20 7-27 8-3 8-10 8-17 8-24 8-31

                                             weeks, Sunday to Saturday, dated by starting Sunday


Note: Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketting Data Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, from a Economic Stimulus Payment Survey of Nielsen Consumer
Panel households, and from Daily Treasury Statements, April through December 2008. Survey data are weighted using
Nielsen Projection factors scaled up to match aggregates, and amounts for Daily Treasury Statements are adjusted for the
July 4 holiday.
Table 1: The timing of the disbursement of the economic stimulus payments of 2008


                Panel A: Payments by electronic       Panel B: Payments by mailed
                         funds transfer                          check

                Last two digits   Date ESP funds    Last two digits
                 of taxpayer       transferred to    of taxpayer      Date check to
                     SSN             account by          SSN          be received by

                   00 – 20            May 2             00 – 09           May 16

                   21 – 75            May 9             10 – 18           May 23

                   76 – 99           May 16             19 – 25           May 30

                                                        26 – 38           June 6

                                                        39 – 51           June 13

                                                        52 – 63           June 20

                                                        64 – 75           June 27

                                                        76 – 87            July 4

                                                        88 – 99           July 11



   Source: Internal Revenue Service (http://www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/0,,id=180247,00.html)




                                                     27
Table 2: Summary statistics for the 2008 NCP survey data

                                                          Static reporting sample      Static sample with only
                  Sample: Static reporting sample         with only ESPs by mail       ESPs by direct deposit
                               Mean       std dev              Mean       std dev           Mean      std dev
Observations
Number of observations               1,131,208                     593,372                     534,196

Weekly spending                   149             185          141             178          157             191
Spending | Spending>0             179             189          167             182          191             195

ESP amount                         17          143              15          129              19          156
I(ESP amount>0)                  0.019        0.137           0.019        0.137           0.019        0.137
ESP amount | amount >0            898          521             801          481             994          542

Households
Number of households                     21,754                       11,411                       10,273

I(2007 Income < 20,0000)          0.15            0.36         0.20            0.40         0.10            0.30
I(20,000  Inc<50,0000)      0.37            0.48         0.40            0.49         0.35            0.48
I(2007 Income ≥ 100,0000)         0.13            0.33         0.11            0.31         0.15            0.35
Household size                    2.6             1.5          2.4             1.4          2.8             1.5
I(Number children>0)              0.38            0.49         0.30            0.46         0.46            0.50
I(Children under 6>0)             0.15            0.36         0.11            0.31         0.20            0.40

Notes: Each sample includes only households that meet the standard NCP static reporting requirement for the yea
and report both receipt during the period of the experimental variation and sufficient ESP information for that
variable and sample. All samples statistics are weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Calculated based
on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketting Data Center at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business.
   Table 3: The average household spending response by week
                                                                                                        Using only variation in timing
                                         Using all variation in time of receipt                         within each method of receipt
                                      Dollars                                                  Dollars
   Regression Specification:         spent on Spending as pct of Dollars spent                spent on Spending as pct of Dollars spent
                                     indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average                  indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average
                                      of ESP     indicator of ESP    ESP/100                   of ESP     indicator of ESP    ESP/100
             (Interpretation)        ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)                ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)



   Week before                          -0.1             (1.4)               -0.02               0.0                 -0.1             0.03
                                       (1.8)             (1.5)              (0.21)              (2.0)               (1.7)            (0.24)

   Contemporaneous week                14.0               9.9                1.55               12.9                10.7              1.47
                                       (2.1)             (1.8)              (0.24)              (2.3)               (2.0)            (0.27)

   First week after                    12.6               8.7                1.41               10.3                 8.9              1.22
                                       (2.1)             (1.8)              (0.24)              (2.5)               (2.2)            (0.29)

   Second week after                    4.8               1.8                0.51                3.0                 2.0              0.37
                                       (2.1)             (1.9)              (0.23)              (2.6)               (2.3)            (0.30)

   Third week after                     3.8               1.9                0.45                2.1                 2.4              0.34
                                       (2.1)             (2.0)              (0.24)              (2.8)               (2.4)            (0.33)
   Four week cumulative dollar
                                       35.3                                  3.92               28.3                                  3.40
   increase or cumulative MPC
                                       (5.7)                                (0.64)              (7.8)                                (0.93)

    Four week average percent
                                                          5.6                                                        6.0
       increase in spending
                                                         (1.4)                                                      (1.8)

Notes: The first triplet of columns includes fixed effects for each month in the sample, the second triplet includes fixed effects for each month for
each means of reciept. All regressions also include household fixed effects. Each sample includes only households that report sufficient ESP
information for that specification and receipt during the period of the experimental variation, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. All samples statistics are weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
   Table 4: The average household spending response by month
                                                                                                        Using only variation in timing
                                         Using all variation in time of receipt                         within each method of receipt
                                      Dollars                                                  Dollars
                                     spent on Spending as pct of Dollars spent                spent on Spending as pct of Dollars spent
                                     indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average                  indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average
                                      of ESP     indicator of ESP    ESP/100                   of ESP     indicator of ESP    ESP/100
                                     ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)                ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)

   Month before                         3.5              -1.9                0.44               10.3                -1.1                  1.32
                                       (5.4)            (1.14)              (0.60)              (6.6)              (1.31)                (0.77)

   Contemporaneous month               42.7              5.27                4.80               47.4                6.86                  5.72
                                       (7.2)            (1.65)              (0.81)              (9.2)              (1.95)                (1.09)

   First month after                    9.4              -0.12               1.11               26.3                3.15                  3.49
                                       (9.0)            (2.12)              (1.01)             (12.0)              (2.55)                (1.42)

   Second month after                   8.7              -0.39               1.07               20.6                1.52                  3.05
                                      (11.2)            (2.50)              (1.25)             (14.6)              (3.02)                (1.71)

  Three month cumulative dollar
                                       60.8                                  6.96               94.4                                     12.28
   increase or cumulative MPC
                                      (25.7)                                (2.88)             (33.6)                                    (3.97)

   Three month average pecent
                                                         1.59                                                       3.84
       increase in spending
                                                        (1.99)                                                     (2.38)

Notes: The first triplet of columns includes fixed effects for each month in the sample, the second triplet includes fixed effects for each month for
each means of reciept. All regressions also include household fixed effects. Each sample includes only households that report sufficient ESP
information for that specification and receipt during the period of the experimental variation, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. All samples statistics are weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Table 5: Aggregate partial-equilibrium quarterly propensities to consume

                                            Method used to scale from NCP MPC to aggregate MPC
                                                       Household-reported spending        MPC's for different spending
                   NIPA PCE per capita relative to   caused by ESP on all goods and   categories in the CE and spending by
                      NCP spending per capita         services relative to NCP goods   category in the NCP relative to CE

Panel A: quarterly response as if ESP's distributed at start of quarter

 ∂C t /∂Y t                      0.75                                  0.51                               0.65
                                (0.31)                                (0.21)                             (0.27)

∂lnC t /∂lnY t                   1.13                                  0.77                               0.99
                                (0.47)                                (0.32)                             (0.41)


Panel B: quarterly response as if ESP's distributed uniformly through quarter

 ∂C t /∂Y t                     0.46                                      0.31                            0.40

 ∂C t+1 /∂Y t                   0.29                                      0.20                            0.25

∂lnC t /∂lnY t                  0.70                                      0.47                            0.61

∂lnC t+1 /∂lnY t                0.44                                      0.30                            0.38



Panel C: quarterly response to actual ESP program (billions or percent)

 ∂C 08Q2                        46.85                                 31.79                              40.99

 ∂C 08Q3                        23.22                                 15.76                              20.32

 ∂C 08Q4                        1.76                                      1.19                            1.54

∂lnC 08Q2                       1.85                                      1.26                            1.62

∂lnC 08Q3                       0.92                                      0.62                            0.80

∂lnC 08Q4                       0.07                                      0.05                            0.06

Notes: ∂Ct/∂Ys is the change in spending on NCP goods during the three months in quarter t scaled up and divided by the
dollar amount of ESP's distributed in quarter s . Changes in logs are approximated by dollar change divided by dollar amount,
where the levels are given by GDP and PCE in the relevant quarter (so elasticities would be roughly 2/3 of this size if calculated
with respect to disposable income). All estimates based on the MPC's estimated in Table 4 Panel A column 3. Calculated based
on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business.
Table 6: The average household spending response to learning about getting an ESP
                                                                                Panel A: All households
                                                                                                       Using only variation in timing
                                          Using all variation in time of receipt                       within each method of receipt
                                       Dollars                                                   Dollars
                                      spent on     Spending as pct of Dollars spent             spent on    Spending as pct of Dollars spent
                                      indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average                   indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average
                                      of LESP      indicator of LESP        LESP/100            of LESP      indicator of LESP      LESP/100
                                      ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)                 ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)

   Month before                         10.1               2.2                1.12                 9.5               2.2                0.94
                                        (7.8)             (1.3)              (0.85)               (7.8)             (1.3)              (0.86)

   Contemporaneous month                 0.0               0.6                0.11                 -0.5              0.7                -0.13
                                        (6.6)             (1.2)              (0.71)               (6.5)             (1.2)              (0.72)

   First month after                     2.5               0.3                0.25                 2.8               0.6                0.10
                                        (6.8)             (1.3)              (0.74)               (6.9)             (1.3)              (0.76)

   Second month after                    -2.6              0.4                -0.07                -2.3              0.7                -0.12
                                        (7.0)             (1.4)              (0.76)               (7.0)             (1.4)              (0.77)
  Three month cumulative dollar
                                        -0.1                                  0.28                 0.0                                  -0.16
   increase or cumulative MPC
                                       (13.1)                                (1.42)              (13.1)                                (1.46)
   Three month average percent
                                                           0.4                                                       0.6
       increase in spending
                                                          (0.8)                                                     (0.8)

                                                                 Panel B: Households with sufficient accessible funds
                                                                                                      Using only variation in timing
                                          Using all variation in time of receipt                      within each method of receipt
                                       Dollars                                                  Dollars
                                      spent on     Spending as pct of Dollars spent            spent on     Spending as pct of Dollars spent
                                      indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average                  indicator 2008Q1 spending on on average
                                      of LESP      indicator of LESP        LESP/100           of LESP      indicator of LESP      LESP/100
                                      ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)                ($ spent) (% chg in spending) (MPC, in %)

   Month before                         10.4               2.6                1.08                10.5               2.6                1.08
                                        (9.6)             (1.7)              (1.07)               (9.7)             (1.7)              (1.10)

   Contemporaneous month                 -1.7              0.1                -0.13                -1.5              0.1                -0.37
                                        (8.2)             (1.6)              (0.91)               (8.2)             (1.6)              (0.92)

   First month after                     -3.0              -0.7               -0.37                -2.1              -0.5               -0.41
                                        (8.3)             (1.6)              (0.92)               (8.4)             (1.6)              (0.94)

   Second month after                    -7.8              0.2                -0.86                -7.2              0.3                -0.82
                                        (8.6)             (1.7)              (0.96)               (8.5)             (1.7)              (0.96)
  Three month cumulative dollar
                                        -12.5                                 -1.36               -10.8                                 -1.60
   increase or cumulative MPC
                                       (16.6)                                (1.84)              (16.7)                                (1.91)
   Three month average percent
                                                           -0.1                                                      0.0
       increase in spending
                                                          (1.1)                                                     (1.1)

Notes: The first triplet of columns includes fixed effects for each month in the sample, the second triplet includes fixed effects for each month for
each means of reciept. All regressions also include household fixed effects. Each sample includes only households that report learning about their
ESP in February (44%), March (16%), April (15%) or "only recently" (7%), and meet the standard NCP static reporting requirement for the year.
All samples statistics are weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and
provided by the Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Table 7: Differences in average spending response by previous income
                                                            Panel A: Using all variation in time of receipt
                                                                                                    Dollars spent on
                                         Dollars spent on indicator of ESP                       average group ESP/100
                                                  (dollars spent)                                    (MPC percent)
                                                        35,000<                                        35,000<
                                      Income            Income         70,000<        Income           Income         70,000<
                                      <35,000           <70,000        Income         <35,000          <70,000        Income

   Month before                          7.2               7.5           -1.6            1.11            0.90             -0.06
                                        (8.9)             (9.5)         (13.4)          (1.54)          (1.01)           (1.22)

   Contemporaneous month                 42.0             46.9           34.3            7.16            4.96             3.21
                                        (11.2)           (13.1)         (17.5)          (1.96)          (1.38)           (1.59)

   First month after                     13.2              8.4           22.3            2.59            0.90             2.06
                                        (14.1)           (16.9)         (22.0)          (2.48)          (1.78)           (1.99)

   Second month after                    14.1              2.0           36.5            2.93            0.02             3.63
                                        (16.7)           (21.2)         (26.6)          (2.92)          (2.23)           (2.41)
  Three month cumulative dollar
                                         69.2             57.3           93.2           12.68            5.88             8.92
   increase or cumulative MPC
                                        (39.7)           (47.8)         (62.0)          (6.96)          (5.04)           (5.60)

Number of households                       6,171             6,536          4,878          6,077              6,408         4,789


                                                 Panel B: Using only variation in timing within each method of receipt
                                                                                               Dollars spent on
                                        Dollars spent on indicator of ESP                   average group ESP/100
                                                 (dollars spent)                                (MPC percent)
                                                    35,000<                                        35,000<
                                      Income         Income         70,000<           Income        Income      70,000<
                                      <35,000       <70,000         Income            <35,000      <70,000       Income

   Month before                          15.5             -1.1           17.1            2.48            0.08             1.83
                                        (11.4)           (11.2)         (15.9)          (1.99)          (1.24)           (1.48)

   Contemporaneous month                 51.6             30.5           38.9            9.16            3.28             3.99
                                        (13.8)           (16.6)         (22.7)          (2.50)          (1.82)           (2.14)

   First month after                     27.0              7.4           52.6            5.64            0.76             5.32
                                        (17.1)           (23.7)         (29.9)          (3.09)          (2.59)           (2.80)

   Second month after                    17.8             -2.0           54.8            4.56            -0.28            5.96
                                        (20.5)           (29.3)         (35.0)          (3.64)          (3.18)           (3.27)
  Three month cumulative dollar
                                         96.3             35.9          146.3           19.32            3.76            15.28
   increase or cumulative MPC
                                        (48.1)           (65.4)         (82.4)          (8.68)          (7.12)           (7.72)

Number of households                       6,151             6,536          4,866          6,059              6,387         4,778

Notes: The results in each column in each panel are from separate regressions. In Panel A regressions include fixed effects for
each month in the sample, while in Panel B they include fixed effects for each month for each means of reciept. ESP averages
are taken within groups, so that MPC's represent true differences across groups in propensity to spend from the average ESP for
that group. All regressions also include household fixed effects. Each sample includes only households that report 2007 income
(early in 2009), report sufficient ESP information for that specification, receive an ESP during the period of the experimental
variation, and meet the standard NCP static reporting requirement for the year. Observations are weighted by the NCP
projection factor for 2008. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data
Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Table 8: Differences in average household spending response by liquidity

                                                        Panel A: Using all variation in time of receipt
                                                   Dollars spent on                       Dollars spent on
            Regression Specification:
                                                   indicator of ESP                       average ESP/100
            (Interpretation)
                                                    (dollars spent)                         (MPC, in %)

    Sufficient accessible funds?                   No          Yes                       No          Yes

            Month before                          10.2          0.1                     1.17         0.06
                                                  (8.8)        (6.7)                   (0.97)       (0.77)

            Contemporaneous month                 77.8         20.3                     8.56         2.26
                                                 (12.2)        (8.8)                   (1.34)       (1.00)

            First month after                     13.6          9.2                     1.76         0.93
                                                 (15.6)       (10.9)                   (1.71)       (1.24)

            Second month after                     4.8         15.2                    0.92          1.58
                                                 (19.0)       (13.8)                   (2.08)       (1.56)
            Three month cumulative dollar
            increase or cumulative MPC            96.2        44.7                     11.24         4.76
                                                 (43.9)       (31.5)                   (4.84)       (3.58)

            Number of households                    7,787      13,967                     7,683      13,698

                                                Panel B: Using only variation in timing within each method
                                                                        of receipt
                                                  Dollars spent on                      Dollars spent on
            Regression Specification:
                                                  indicator of ESP                     average ESP/100
            (Interpretation)
                                                   (dollars spent)                       (MPC, in %)

    Sufficient accessible funds?                   No          Yes                       No          Yes

            Month before                          16.6          6.5                     1.79         1.04
                                                 (11.3)        (8.0)                   (1.28)       (0.96)

            Contemporaneous month                 84.0         24.1                     9.60         3.11
                                                 (16.0)       (11.0)                   (1.85)       (1.33)

            First month after                     32.3         22.8                     4.20         3.00
                                                 (20.8)       (14.4)                   (2.39)       (1.74)

            Second month after                    22.6         19.6                    3.48          2.73
                                                 (25.3)       (17.6)                   (2.88)       (2.10)
            Three month cumulative dollar
            increase or cumulative MPC           138.9        66.4                     17.28         8.84
                                                 (58.6)       (40.4)                   (6.72)       (4.84)

            Number of households                    7,749      13,935                     7,648      13,667

Notes: The results in each column in each panel are from separate regressions. In Panel A regressions include fixed effects for each
month in the sample, while in Panel B they include fixed effects for each month for each means of reciept. ESP averages are taken
within groups, so that MPC's represent true differences across groups in propensity to spend from the average ESP for that group. All
regressions include household fixed effects. Each sample includes only households that answer the question, report sufficient ESP
information for that specification, receive an ESP during the period of the experimental variation, and meet the standard NCP static
reporting requirement for the year. Observations are weighted by the NCP 2008 projection factor. Calculated based on data from Th
Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
