NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAS THE FINANCIAL CRISIS PERMANENTLY CHANGED THE PRACTICE OF
MONETARY POLICY? HAS IT CHANGED THE THEORY OF MONETARY POLICY?
Benjamin M. Friedman
Working Paper 20128
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20128
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Benjamin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Has the Financial Crisis Permanently Changed the Practice of Monetary Policy? Has It Changed
the Theory of Monetary Policy?
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 20128
May 2014
JEL No. E52,E58
ABSTRACT
I argue in this paper that one of the two forms of hitherto unconventional monetary policy that many
central banks have implemented in response to the 2007 financial crisis – large-scale asset purchases,
or to put the matter more generically, use of the central bank’s balance sheet as a distinct tool of monetary
policy – is likely to become part of the standard toolkit of monetary policymaking in normal times
as well. As intended, these purchases have lowered long-term interest rates relative to short-term
rates, and lowered interest rates on more-risky compared to less-risky obligations. Moreover, their
introduction fills a conceptual vacuum that has long stood at the heart of monetary policy analysis
and implementation.
By contrast, forward guidance on the future trajectory of monetary policy has been less successful.
Public statements by central banks about their actions and intentions will no doubt continue, but
transparency for the sake of transparency is not the same as the deliberate attempt to shape market
expectations for purposes of achieving specific monetary policy objectives.
Finally, there is a conceptual component to all this as well. In contrast to the last century or more
of monetary theory, which has focused on central banks’ liabilities, the basis for the effectiveness of
central bank asset purchases turns on the role of the asset side of the central bank’s balance sheet.
The implications for monetary theory are profound.

Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 127
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu

!

1!

Revised
April, 2014

HAS THE FINANCIAL CRISIS PERMANENTLY CHANGED THE PRACTICE OF
MONETARY POLICY? HAS IT CHANGED THE THEORY OF MONETARY
POLICY?*
Benjamin M. Friedman
William Joseph Maier Professor of Political Economy
Harvard University

The global financial crisis of 2007-9, together with the economic downturn that it
triggered in much of the advanced industrial and post-industrial world, has constituted one of the
most significant economic events since World War II. In many countries the decline in
production and the associated loss of jobs and incomes and profits have exceeded what occurred
in any prior post-war fluctuation. In some countries output and employment have yet to regain
their pre-crisis levels. In the financial arena the collapse of major firms, the decline of asset
values and consequent destruction of notional wealth, the interruption of credit flows, the loss of
confidence both in firms and in credit market instruments, and the fear of default even by well
known counterparties likewise represented an experience unseen since the 1930s.
It is no surprise that these events presented particular challenges, and therefore elicited
extraordinary responses, from economic policy. Most immediately, governments and central
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
*

This lecture was prepared for the conference on Monetary Analysis and Monetary Policy
Frameworks organized by Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, April 9-10, 2014. In part it draws
on some of my recent work, including especially Friedman and Kuttner (2011) and Friedman
(2013).

2!!
!

banks undertook rescue operations of hitherto unprecedented scope as well as scale. In many
countries the government, or the central bank, or both, extended extraordinary credits to banks
and other key firms, created new facilities for directed lending and for purchasing new (for the
central bank) classes of assets, recapitalized banks, and even acquired majority ownership of
some banks as well as firms in financial lines of business well removed from banking –
insurance, for example. The U.K. government took an 81 percent share in Royal Bank of
Scotland. At the peak, the U.S. government owned more than one-third of the equity in
Citigroup, and more than 90 percent of that in AIG. Nor did governments limit these bail-out
operations to financial firms. Most prominently, the U.S. Government rescued from failure two
of the three large American automobile manufacturers. Which among these diverse actions
qualify as classic “lender-of-last-resort” policy will no doubt be the subject of debate for years to
come.
The crisis and the ensuing economic downturn placed demands on conventional
macroeconomic policies as well. Here, however, significant impediments emerged. In many
countries the latitude (or at least the perceived latitude) to use fiscal policy was constrained by
what had already been large government borrowing in the years before the downturn. Once
incomes and profits began to decline, shrinking tax revenues along the way, concern over rising
levels of government debt relative to national income therefore limited the willingness to expand
government spending or cut taxes even further.
Moreover, by 2007 the discretionary use of fiscal policy for purposes of damping
fluctuations in output and employment had been in more general disrepute for some decades.
One practical reason was simply the awareness of lags: lags in recognizing that fiscal stimulus
was appropriate in light of current economic conditions, lags in enacting legislation and

3!!
!

implementing a more expansionary policy stance (especially if it entailed new spending
programs), and then lags in the response of private-sector economic behavior. With the typical
business downturn lasting only a short time – in the United States, only ten months from peak to
trough, on average during the post-war period – a widely accepted view was that by the time
discretionary fiscal policy was in place it would most likely be unneeded, and perhaps even
destabilizing.
The presumption against discretionary fiscal policy had a theoretical component too.
Ever since Milton Friedman’s classic work on the permanent income hypothesis and Franco
Modigliani’s on the life-cycle theory of saving, economists had discounted the effect on
spending due to changes in disposable income that are recognizably temporary, and therefore had
mostly downplayed the potential usefulness of stimulative tax cuts during a recession. At the
same time, the difficulty of modeling involuntary unemployment in a tractable way, together
with the economic profession’s ever growing fetish for mathematical formalization,
progressively led to excluding from the analysis the main reason government spending stimulates
economic activity in times of widespread unemployment. (If everyone who wants to work
always has a job, then hiring workers to build roads or make products the government buys
simply means moving them from one job to another.) Further, both of these specific theoretical
biases fit nicely within the profession’s more generic presumption that all economic actors are
always at interior optima along every relevant dimension of choice, rather than at corner
solutions, and the corresponding systematic over-estimation of interest rate and other price
effects and under-estimation of income and other quantity effects.
By contrast, what limited the use of conventional monetary policy in responding to the
crisis was mostly the force of practical circumstance: the fact that many countries, having

4!!
!

entered the crisis after a sustained period of low price inflation, soon into it found their shortterm interest rates hitting the zero lower bound. In the United States the Federal Reserve System
lowered its target for the federal funds rate from 5 ¼ percent in early 2007 to 0 – ¼ percent in
late 2008. As of the time of writing, more than half a decade later, the target remains 0 – ¼
percent. The European Central Bank was raising its main refinancing operations rate as late as
mid 2008, but then quickly lowered it from 4 ¼ percent to 1 percent by mid 2009. One percent
is not the same as zero, of course, but the perception that the rate was about as low as the bank
could make it clearly limited further cuts. After a confused flurry of actions in 2011, when the
bank raised the refinancing rate twice, it then quickly returned it to 1 percent. In a series of steps
over the next two years, it then cut the rate to just ¼ percent.
With conventional monetary policy therefore unable to respond further, many central
banks sought out new ways of using the tools at their disposal to stimulate economic activity in
the face of the protracted downturn and then sluggish recovery. One way of doing so was, and
for many central banks continues to be, further asset purchases on the central bank’s account,
even with the policy interest rate already at (or near) the zero bound. A second was, and likewise
for many central banks continues to be, making public statements intended to influence market
participants’ expectations of future monetary policy actions. An important question, looking
ahead, is whether these innovations in monetary policymaking will prove temporary –
emergency measures, taken in time of duress, and to be eschewed once the emergency is past –
or instead will become part of the standard toolkit of monetary policymaking in normal times.
I argue in this paper that one of these two forms of hitherto unconventional monetary
policy, large-scale asset purchases – or, to put the matter more generically, use of the central
bank’s balance sheet as a distinct tool of monetary policy – is likely to persist. The reason for

5!!
!

thinking so is twofold. First, these actions have been reasonably successful on their own terms.
As intended, when used they have lowered long-term interest rates relative to short-term rates,
and lowered interest rates on more-risky compared to less-risky obligations. And second, as I
explain below, their introduction fills a conceptual vacuum that has stood at the heart of
monetary policy analysis for the better part of the last century, ever since the working out of
modern central banking.
By contrast, central banks’ attempts at guiding market participants’ expectations of the
future trajectory of monetary policy have been less successful. In part, such statements are
merely an aspect of the widely hailed movement to bring central banks more closely within
established notions of democratic governance by rendering their operations and decision-making
more transparent to the general public. In this respect, public statements by central banks about
their actions and intentions will no doubt continue. But transparency for the sake of transparency
is not the same as the deliberate attempt to shape market expectations for purposes of achieving
specific monetary policy objectives. Whether such attempts have been effective, or can be
effective, is a question that requires much research not yet done; and even then, establishing
clear evidence is likely to be difficult. Moreover, owing to the nature of speculative securities
markets, central banks may never be able to provide “enough” transparency to satisfy market
participants. As one astute market observer has put it, full transparency of monetary policy may
simply be a will-o’-the-wisp (see Wojnilower 2014).
Finally, there is a conceptual component to all this as well. To the extent that new ways
of conducting monetary policy – specifically, asset purchases not associated with changes in the
central bank’s policy interest rate – remain part of the standard central bank toolkit, in time they
will become part of the standard theory of monetary policy as well. (Macroeconomics is a field

6!!
!

in which theory lags behind experience and practice, not the other way around.) As I argue in
concluding, the implications are profound. To put the matter in Tibergen’s vocabulary, for
decades the relevant theory has conceived of monetary policy as a matter of deploying one
policy instrument. Some economists have, on that account, argued for limiting the central bank
to pursuing one policy target; others have favored retaining multiple targets and recognizing, as
Tinbergen showed, the inevitable incompleteness in attaining them. It is now clear, however,
that a central bank operating in an economy with well developed asset markets has at its disposal
two policy instruments (and, under some conceptions, perhaps three). Moreover, in contrast to
the last century or more of monetary theory, which has focused on central banks’ liabilities, the
basis for the effectiveness of this new policy instrument turns on the role of the asset side of the
central bank’s balance sheet. On both counts, to repeat, the implications are profound.
Use of the Central Bank Balance Sheet: Likely to Remain
Two aspects of central banks’ use of their balance sheets as a policy instrument during
and following the crisis stand out. One is how quickly, once short-term interest rates approached
the zero lower bound, central banks began to purchase large quantities of assets. The second is
how much they bought. At the beginning of 2007 the Federal Reserve System’s assets totaled
$880 billion. By yearend 2008 total assets held were $2.2 trillion, although most of the increase
consisted of advances to banks and other financial firms, and holdings of instruments like
commercial paper acquired through directed facilities intended to support specific markets. At
yearend 2009 total asset holdings were still $2.2 trillion, but in place of these advances and
special facilities the Federal Reserve had purchased large quantities of Treasury notes and bonds
and, even more so, of mortgage-backed securities. The pattern has continued ever since. By
yearend 2013 – five years into the period of zero short-term interest rates – total assets held

7!!
!

reached $4 trillion. The balance sheet had more than quadrupled since the beginning of the
crisis.
The Federal Reserve was not alone in pursuing this course, nor was it the most extreme.
The Bank of England nearly quintupled its balance sheet, from L85 billion at the beginning of
2007 to L415 billion at yearend 2012. Sweden’s Riksbank almost quadrupled its balance sheet,
and within a very brief period of time: from Kr 199 billion at the beginning of 2007 to Kr 763
billion at mid 2009. Even the European Central Bank (which, to recall, was still raising its
policy interest rate well into the crisis) expanded its balance sheet from just over E1 trillion at the
beginning of 2007 to more than E3 trillion in mid 2012.
The point of these asset purchases was sharply different from the usual working of central
bank open market operations. There, the object is to move the market equilibrium downward
along the interest-elastic demand for reserves on the part of banks and other reserve-holding
institutions. Because the central bank must pay for any assets it acquires, open market purchases
of assets are simply the way in which the central bank brings about an increase in the quantity of
reserves that it supplies to the market. Whether the central bank frames the operation as
choosing a larger quantity of reserves, and letting the market determine the corresponding new
(presumably lower) equilibrium interest rate, or choosing a lower interest rate and supplying
whatever (presumably larger) quantity of reserves the market requires to get there, is irrelevant
for this purpose. What matters in practical terms is the impact on the market-clearing short-term
interest rate. And the focus is squarely on the liability side of the central bank’s balance sheet.
The point of the asset purchases that central banks made in the most recent episode, once
short-term interest rates were already at or near zero, was plainly different. Now the object was
to lower the interest rates that mattered for the private sector’s demand for goods and services,

8!!
!

taking into account that no private-sector borrower issues default-free obligations or finances its
expenditures with overnight borrowing. On grounds of both maturity and default risk, privatesector obligations are not perfect substitutes for default-free overnight instruments in investors’
portfolios. When the market is populated primarily by risk-averse investors – as in fact it is – the
return on the relevant private-sector obligations therefore depends on more than just the current
and expected future level of the overnight rate. In particular, it depends on the quantity of
private-sector obligations that investors, collectively, must hold.
Figure 1 illustrates the economics involved. The downward-sloping line labeled AD (for
aggregate demand) in the right-hand panel shows the relationship between spending on goods
and services and a representative private-sector interest rate – perhaps the long-term corporate
bond rate, perhaps the residential mortgage rate – conditional on given expectations of future
output and inflation. The downward-sloping line in the left-hand panel, labeled CS, depicts
households’ and firms’ supply of private securities, as a function of the interest rate on these
securities, also for given expectations of future output and inflation. Because market investors
can choose between holding long-term securities or rolling over a comparable-duration sequence
of short-term instruments, their demand for these private securities depends, among other things,
on the interest rate they bear, on the short-term interest rate set by the central bank today, and on
investors’ expectations of the short-term interest rate in the future. The solid upward-sloping
line labeled CD + CCB, depicts private investors’ demand for private-sector securities as a
function of the interest rate they carry, for given expectations of future incomes, a given value of
the policy interest rate set by the central bank today and given expectations of the policy interest
rate in the future, plus a given level of holdings of these securities by the central bank. Figure 1
arbitrarily portrays the initial supply-demand equilibrium in the asset market in the left-hand

9!!
!

panel, labeled point A, at the private-sector interest rate level that, when transposed to the righthand panel, intersects with the aggregate demand curve at the full-employment value, labeled y*.
The story told in Figure1 begins with some adverse shock of the kind that figured
prominently in triggering the recent financial crisis: a decline in house prices, or realized loan
losses that deplete lenders’ capital, or even simply investors’ concern that the economy may be
heading into a period of slow growth of incomes and profits in which private-sector borrowers’
creditworthiness will be under stress. Any or all of these events reduces private investors’
demand for private-sector securities and therefore, all else equal, shifts the demand curve CD +
CCB in the left-hand panel backward to the respective broken line. The result is a higher marketclearing private-sector interest rate, and therefore (in the right-hand panel) a reduced value of
output, at the respective points labeled B.
When short-term interest rates are not limited by the zero lower bound, the central bank
would traditionally choose to reduce its policy interest rate. Because the overnight instrument
being priced in the reserves market is substitutable (though, importantly, not a perfect substitute)
for longer-term private-sector securities in investors’ portfolios, doing so would then shift the
demand for private-sector securities so as to reduce the private interest rate as well (though not
one-for-one). If the central bank lowers its policy interest rate by enough, it can thereby restore
output to its original level, after sufficient time for the relevant behavioral lags to work
themselves out.
Ever since the 2007-9 crisis, however, the policy interest rate has been at or near zero and
so further cuts were not an available option. The asset purchases that central banks made
therefore had a different purpose. In Figure 1 these purchases are a straightforward addition to
the total market demand for private-sector securities, and so they shift the demand curve CD +

10!
!
!

CCB in the left-hand panel outward to the dotted line, thereby lowering the market-clearing
private interest rate for given expectations and a given (presumably zero) policy interest rate.
The corresponding result in the right-hand panel is an increase in output. In each panel the
intersection that results from this central bank asset purchase is labeled as point C. The figure
illustrates the presumably realistic case in which the central bank’s purchases are not sufficient to
restore output to the initial full-employment level.
The analytics behind central bank asset purchases are clear enough. But is there evidence
that they actually worked in this way? As of yearend 2013 there were more than a dozen
empirical studies of the experience of this kind of policy action in the United States during and in
the wake of the financial crisis (see Williams 2013, Table 1). (There was also some empirical
work on this subject, including some of mine, from long before the crisis.) The point estimates
of the policy’s effectiveness in lowering long-term interest rates, scaled to a $600 billion asset
purchase (the size of the Federal Reserve’s “QE2” round of bond buying), ranged from a low of
10 basis points to a high of 100 basis points. Excluding the high and low, the mean point
estimate across the others was 24 basis points – not enormous, especially in light of conventional
estimates of the interest elasticity of aggregate demand, but a worthwhile contribution to the
economic recovery process nonetheless, and one that Federal Reserve policymakers were clearly
glad to embrace.
Given the reliance of households and firms on borrowing that is both long-term and
potentially subject to default, the attractions to monetary policymakers of this kind of direct
influence on private-sector interest rates are readily apparent. Moreover, as numerous Federal
Reserve statements argued, the interest rate effect illustrated in Figure 1 was probably reinforced
by corresponding movements in equity prices and in the foreign exchange value of the dollar

11!
!
!

(although in the case of exchange rates any conclusion is of course conditional on the assumption
made about the policy stance underlying the other currency).
Further, the composition of the assets that the central bank buys matters too. In the U.S.
experience, the Federal Reserve has not merely bought long-term assets but mortgage-backed
securities in particular; as of yearend 2013 the Federal Reserve held nearly $1.5 trillion of such
securities, out of a total balance sheet of just under $4 trillion. The intended effect has been to
narrow the spread between the interest rates on mortgage borrowing versus comparable-maturity
Treasury obligations, and thereby to arrest the downward trend in house prices as well as to
stimulate new residential construction. In light of the role of the mortgage market as the
epicenter of the financial crisis, with consequent effects on residential construction – U.S.
homebuilding declined from 2.1 million new houses started in 2005 to just 554,000 in 2009 – the
central bank’s interest in stimulating demand in this one sector of the economy in particular is
easily understandable. Although clear evidence on the effectiveness of these mortgage purchases
on new construction remains to be gleaned from careful research yet to be done, on the surface it
appears that at least the attempt to narrow mortgage-versus-Treasury interest rate spreads was
indeed effective.
The value to monetary policy of this kind of influence – on long-term interest rates in
general and specific interest rates like the mortgage rate in particular, on equity prices, on
exchange rates – does not vanish just because the short-term interest rate that the central bank
normally uses as its policy interest rate is above zero and potentially subject to being lowered.
As a result, in all likelihood central banks will continue to use some form of asset purchases –
and, conversely, asset sales – at least from time to time, once the zero lower bound is no longer
binding. Nor does the story hold merely for the Federal Reserve. There is little reason to think

12!
!
!

policymakers at other central banks that operate in economies with well developed asset markets
are not subject to the same economic logic.
The potential usefulness of such portfolio actions is not limited to attempts to stimulate or
restrain aggregate economic activity. During the years before the crisis, for example, when U.S.
house prices were rising at very rapid rates and homebuilding had likewise reached extremely
high levels, many observers of monetary policy urged Federal Reserve policymakers to tighten
monetary policy to arrest the developing “bubble” in the mortgage and housing markets. The
frequently expressed concern, however, was that raising short-term interest rates was a “blunt”
instrument with which to attack a “bubble” in one specific sector of the economy. By contrast, if
the central bank can deploy its balance sheet separately from its setting of its policy interest rate
– and, if a part of its balance sheet is its holdings of mortgage-backed securities, which it can
either enlarge or reduce in order to lower or raise mortgage rates relative to other interest rates –
it can take more directed action in the event of a situation like the one that preceded (and, in the
eyes of many economists, precipitated) the crisis.
What are the potential drawbacks associated with using asset purchases or sales,
especially on a large scale, as an instrument of monetary policy? The public discussion to date
has brought out two. One is the risk that the central bank may suffer portfolio losses, either from
fluctuation in the market value of longer-maturity obligations or from default by private-sector
issuers. To date neither has eventuated. Conversely, holding the securities that central banks
purchased during and in the aftermath of the crisis has delivered record portfolio profits to those
that pursued this course. Moreover, while central bank portfolio losses would represent a form
of negative seigniorage, and therefore ultimately impose a burden on taxpayers should they

13!
!
!

occur, there is no real risk to the central bank itself; unlike private banks, central banks do not
need positive capital.
The other risk that some economists have alleged follows from the fact that, because
asset purchases require payment, when a central bank enlarges its asset holdings it
simultaneously increases its outstanding liabilities – and, according to traditional monetary
theory, a larger quantity of central bank liabilities means a higher general price level for goods
and services in the economy. I return to this matter before concluding.
Forward Guidance: A Matter More Theological than Practical
A second policy tool to which some central banks turned in the crisis and its aftermath, in
the absence of the ability to cut the policy interest rate any further, was forward guidance with
respect to their own future actions. When the Federal Reserve reduced its target for the federal
funds rate to 0 – ¼ percent, in December 2008, the Open Market Committee publicly stated that
“the Committee anticipates that weak economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally
low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.” Apart from a change in wording from “some
time” to “an extended period,” the Committee repeated the same public statement following each
meeting that it held through June 2011. In August 2011, it then switched to a more explicit,
calendar-based statement that “the Committee currently anticipates that economic conditions …
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid2013.” Thereafter, the Committee extended the specific horizon for this forward guidance
several times, by late 2012 indicating the anticipation of low short-term interest rates “at least
through mid-2015.” In December 2012 the Committee shifted to yet a new form of statement
explicitly conditioned on observed and forecast economic outcomes rather than a specific
calendar date: “the Committee … currently anticipates that this exceptionally low level for the

14!
!
!

federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6
½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half
percentage point above the Committee’s 2-percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation
expectations continue to be well anchored.”
In January 2014 the Open Market Committee changed the language of its regular
statement once again, to emphasize that if the U.S. unemployment rate (then measured as 6.7
percent for the month before) were to fall below 6 ½ percent, this event alone would not
necessarily trigger an increase in the target federal funds rate: “In determining how long to
maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider
other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The
Committee continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that
the unemployment rate declines below 6-1/2 percent, especially if projected inflation continues
to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal.”
Figure 2, analogous to Figure 1, illustrates the working of forward guidance of the kind
that the Federal Reserve has been employing ever since its target for the federal funds rate
reached zero. The initial movement from the respective points labeled A in each panel to those
labeled B again follows from a decline in the value of borrowers’ collateral, or realized loan
losses that deplete lenders’ capital. Longer-term securities are imperfect substitutes for a
comparable-duration sequence of short-term instruments in private investors’ portfolios, but they
are substitutes nonetheless. Lowering the policy rate that investors expect to prevail in the future
therefore shifts the demand curve for longer-term securities downward, once again also lowering

15!
!
!

the market-clearing private interest rate, as indicated by the dotted line in the left-hand panel of
the figure, and correspondingly raising output in the right-hand panel, in each case to the point
labeled C. (With the linear demand for securities curve drawn here, the downward movement
due to a lower expected future policy rate in Figure 2 is visually indistinguishable from the
outward movement due to greater central bank purchases in Figure 1; but the movement in the
demand curve due to forward guidance is vertical, not horizontal.) Here again, the figure
illustrates the case in which the effect of the central bank’s forward guidance is not sufficient to
restore income to the initial level – presumably because of the zero lower bound on the policy
interest rate.
As in the case of asset purchases, therefore, the economic logic is clear enough. But is
there evidence of market effects along these lines? And are there other potential problems
associated with forward guidance regarding future monetary policy actions?
There is some evidence, from experience before the crisis as well as after, of limited
effects on market interest rates associated with this kind of announcement by the Federal Reserve
(see, for example, Gurkaynak et al. 2007 and Williams 2013, Table 2). As other central banks
have taken up the practice as well, albeit more recently and mostly in more limited ways, no
doubt further evidence will accumulate. But there are familiar episodes as well in which the
effect of such statements of intentions regarding future central bank actions has been counterproductive, at least from the perspective of the objective apparently motivating the statements in
the first place.
Most prominently, when Federal Reserve officials first referred publicly, in the spring of
2013, to the likely cut-back and eventual termination of its ongoing program of continual
purchases of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities, the immediate reaction in the U.S. bond

16!
!
!

market raised interest rates on these obligations by well more than almost all available estimates
of the bond purchase program’s total effect to that time. Attempts by the Open Market
Committee to blunt the impact of having begun to discuss the end of the bond purchase program
were of little success. (In January 2014, for example, the Committee stated that it “will continue
its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities … until the outlook for the
labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability.”) When, and at what
pace, the Federal Reserve will diminish the volume of these purchases has continued to be a
subject of intense market speculation. Whether, and if so at what pace, the Federal Reserve will
then reduce the size of its asset portfolio by outright sales is even more so.
Part of the problem here lies in the nature of speculative asset markets. Theorists of
monetary policy often work with models in which the structure of the relevant expectations on
the part of financial market participants, and of private economic agents more generally, is
extremely simple. In some familiar models, the only aspect of monetary policy that influences
economic agents’ behavior is the central bank’s long-term inflation target. The world in which
actual central banks operate is different. Even if the central bank steers its monetary policy
according to a fixed inflation target, as in the case of the Bank of England, participants in the
securities markets still want to know just how much departure from the inflation target
policymakers will tolerate, and under what circumstances, before they decide to raise or lower
the bank’s policy interest rate, or buy or sell assets, or engage in any of a variety of other policy
actions. If the central bank follows a more loosely defined inflation targeting regimen, as in the
case of the European Central Bank, or has explicit multiple policy objectives, as the Federal
Reserve does, the opportunities for such speculation are all the richer.

17!
!
!

The crucial point is that market participants are in the business of speculating, for profit,
on the actions that the central bank takes and the timing with which it takes them. No matter
what level of transparency and disclosure the central bank provides, therefore, unless it locks its
policy trajectory into determination under a rigid formula, which it publicly discloses and
pledges to follow without departures, the market will inevitably want to know more than
policymakers can possibly disclose. And even then, the central bank’s no-departures pledge may
well not be fully credible, so that market participants will continue to speculate about
policymakers’ actions – although in this case the speculation is framed in terms of whether, and
if so under what circumstances, they will violate their pledge to adhere to the formula.
As a result, the likely future of forward guidance as an explicit tool of monetary policy
implementation – rather than an adjunct to ongoing policy, simply seeking, for reasons of good
governance, to deliver as much transparency as is practically achievable – is dubious. In the
absence of new research showing an effect of the forward guidance undertaken since the crisis
that is not yet evident, this addition to post-crisis monetary policymaking is not likely to feature
prominently in future practice.
Implications for the Theory of Monetary Policy
The experience of the 2007-9 crisis and its aftermath is also likely to change how
macroeconomic theorists view monetary policy. The most straightforward change affects the
traditional “quantity theory” – more fully, the quantity-of-money theory of the price of money.
The huge increase in asset holdings with which many central banks responded to the crisis meant
an equally huge increase in their outstanding liabilities. Theorists who view the macroeconomy
through the lens of central bank (or “high powered”) money supply therefore expected not just
some increase in these economies’ rates of inflation but a hyperinflation, perhaps even

18!
!
!

reminiscent of what occurred in Germany and Russia after World War I or in Hungary after
World War II. Some well known economists predicted just such a consequence of these
extraordinary central bank actions.
But no such increase in inflation – not even a few percentage points – has yet appeared,
in any of these economies. To be sure, no one can preclude with certainty even that a
hyperinflation, or something like it, may ensue some time somewhere. But even if inflation in
these countries does pick up pace at some point, a response of some percentage points to this
magnitude of increase in central bank liabilities, and only after a delay of more than half a
decade, is sharply at variance with the core implications of standard quantity-theory models
relating prices to central bank money. The familiar idea, from generations of textbooks, is that
doubling the quantity of central bank liabilities (or “monetary base”) would lead to a doubling of
the price level – not just a few percentage points’ increase in the temporary rate of inflation. In
some of the major economies, the quantity of central bank liabilities has not just doubled but
quadrupled.
There is an empirical side to this theoretical challenge as well. Corresponding to the
generations of textbooks based on the quantity theory, several generations of empirical research
in monetary economics – article after article, in one scholarly journal after another – documented
empirically the relationship between one or another economy’s price level and the quantity of
liabilities issued by its central bank. Now, however, given the huge magnitude of the expansion
in central bank balance sheets during and following the 2007-9 financial crisis, and especially in
light of the weight that least-squares statistical methods attach to outlier observations, for at least
the next generation no one will again be able to find economically sensible estimates, for any of

19!
!
!

the large high-income economies, from what were once standard regressions relating the price
level (or its rate of change) to the quantity (or change) of central bank liabilities.
But there is a more fundamental theoretical implication of what has happened as well.
For decades, the common understanding has been that monetary policy has only one independent
instrument at its disposal: it can set the quantity of its outstanding liabilities, or it can set their
market price – that is, the interest rate at which they are exchanged – but it cannot independently
set both. In modern times, with some exceptions like the period of monetary targeting in many
countries in the 1970s and 1980s, most central banks have chosen to carry out monetary policy
by setting the interest rate corresponding to banks’ holdings of reserves at the central bank. In
their response to the 2007-9 crisis, most of the major central banks initially used the interest-rate
instrument and then, once the policy interest rate had reached the lower bound, turned to the
quantity instrument. Viewed from this perspective, in each phase of the response to the crisis the
central bank was, as in the traditional understanding, still using only one monetary policy
instrument at a time.
But the ongoing discussion of monetary policy in the post-crisis recovery has made clear
that, under arrangements now in place in most of the high-income economies – specifically, with
the central bank able to pay interest on banks’ reserve balances – monetary policymakers need
not deploy only one of these instruments at a time. The central bank’s ability to choose what
quantity of assets to purchase (with consequent increase in its liabilities) is not merely an artifact
of the policy interest rate’s being at the lower bound. Paying interest on reserves establishes a
floor to short-term market interest rates, and importantly, it does so without the central bank’s
needing to carry out conventional open market operations. Lending reserves to the market at a
given interest rate, as central banks have traditionally done, likewise establishes a ceiling to

20!
!
!

short-term market interest rates, and again does so without the requiring open market operations.
Not only does the central bank therefore not need to use changes in its asset holdings and
liabilities outstanding to move the policy interest rate, but under these institutional arrangements
it can even change the quantity of its assets and liabilities in the opposite direction to what would
correspond, under the traditional theory of open market operations, to whatever change in the
policy interest rate it is implementing at the same time. Given today’s institutions, therefore, the
central bank can choose, independently, both the quantity of its outstanding assets and liabilities
and the market price at which its liabilities trade – in other words, the policy interest rate. In
short, monetary policy has not one independent instrument but two.
Further – although here the evidence is not fully in – the composition of the central
bank’s asset holdings plausibly matters as well. It certainly did during the crisis, when central
banks stepped in (or in some cases merely announced that they were prepared to step in) to
restore functionality to broken markets by buying assets from which private investors had turned
away: in the United States, first commercial paper and then mortgages, and in Europe the
sovereign debt of specific countries facing extraordinary fiscal burdens. Fixing broken markets
is not the same as conducting monetary policy in ordinary times, and so it remains to be seen
whether the composition of the central bank’s asset portfolio represents yet a third instrument of
monetary policy, in addition to the size of the asset portfolio and, of course, the short-term
interest rate. But at a minimum, the theory of monetary policy now needs to recognize the
existence of two independent policy instruments – a short-term interest rate and the size of the
central bank’s asset portfolio – rather than just one as in traditional theory.
And implicit within this recognition is a further, equally fundamental, change in the
theory of monetary policy. Since its inception as a recognizable line of economic thinking, the

21!
!
!

focus of monetary theory has been on the liability side of the central bank’s balance sheet. By its
very name, “monetary” theory concentrates on the “money” that central banks issue, sometimes
distinguishing currency versus reserves but sometimes simply aggregating the two forms of
liabilities into “high-powered money” or the “monetary base.” This is what the quantity theory,
for example, was about. The fact that central banks also hold assets has largely been ignored.
To be sure, the open market operations conventionally used to move the central bank’s policy
interest rate involve asset purchases or sales, but these transactions are, according to the usual
theory, merely the way in which the central bank creates or withdraws reserves.
By contrast, the new tool that central banks have deployed during and in the wake of the
crisis is the size of their asset portfolios. Because the balance sheet must balance, for a central
bank no less than any other entity, this increase in assets held has meant a corresponding increase
in liabilities outstanding. But instead of the change in assets being a sideshow in the creation or
withdrawal of reserves, as in traditional open market operations, during this period the change in
the asset portfolio has been essential, while the corresponding increase in central banks’
liabilities has been merely the passive – and, for macroeconomic purposes, mostly irrelevant –
counterpart of the increase in assets that stands at center stage. Policymakers’ decisions, and
whatever economic effects have ensued, have been a matter of the asset side of central banks’
balance sheets, not their liabilities.
Further, between these two now-independent instruments of monetary policy – the size of
the central bank’s asset holdings and the policy interest rate, to be set by other means – it is
presumably the short-term interest rate to which policymakers will look, under most
circumstances, to steer aggregate demand, and thereby to influence the economy’s price level.
The size of the central bank’s balance sheet, whether measured by assets or liabilities, may move

22!
!
!

in accordance, but may not. There is no reason to expect the quantity of central bank assets held
or liabilities outstanding to bear any particular relationship to the short-term interest rate, or to
aggregate demand, or to the price level. The quantity theory has become meaningless, regardless
of which quantity the theorist chooses to look at.
As always in macroeconomics, the theory will recognize the new reality only reluctantly.
But the reality is now different in the wake of the 2007-9 crisis, and in time the theory must
recognize this aspect of it too or become even more irrelevant.
References
Friedman, Benjamin M., and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2011). “Implementation of Monetary Policy:
How Do Central banks Set Interest Rates?” Friedman and Woodford (eds.), Handbook of
Monetary Economics, vol. 3B. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Friedman, Benjamin M. (2013). “The Simple Analytics of Monetary Policy: A Post-Crisis
Approach.” Journal of Economic Education, 44 (October-December), 311-328.
Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007). “The U.S. Treasury Yield
Curve: 1961 to the Present.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (November), 2291-2304.
Williams, John C. (2013). “Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Unconventional Monetary
Policy.” NBER Conference, Boston (October 18).
Wojnilower, Albert M. (2014). “Calm on the Surface.” New York (March 14).

!

23!

!
!

Private&&
Interest&
Rate&

Private((
Interest(
Rate(
(
(

B"
Asset&
Purchase&
Shock&
0"

C"
A"

CD"+"CCB""
CS"

0"

Credit&

FIGURE'1'
EFFECT'OF'AN'ASSET'PURCHASE'

'
'
!

"
C"
A"

!

'

B"

AD"
y*"

Aggregate(
Demand(

!

24!
!
!
!
!
!

Private&&
Interest&
Rate&
&

Private((
Interest(
Rate(
(
(

B"
C"

Forward&
Guidance&
Shock&
0"

B"

A"

CD"+"CCB"
CS"

"
C"
A"

Credit&

0"

AD"
y*"

Aggregate(
Demand(

!

FIGURE'2'
EFFECT'OF'FORWARD'GUIDANCE''

