                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       FINANCIAL EDUCATION AND ACCESS TO SAVINGS ACCOUNTS:
  COMPLEMENTS OR SUBSTITUTES? EVIDENCE FROM UGANDAN YOUTH CLUBS

                                          Julian C. Jamison
                                            Dean Karlan
                                          Jonathan Zinman

                                        Working Paper 20135
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20135


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




This paper is the result of independent research and does not necessarily represent the views of the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the United States Government, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We thank the Financial Education Fund from DFID for funding. Institutional Review Board
approval for human subjects protocols from Innovations for Poverty Action(#113.10February-006
and Yale University #1002006384. From Innovations for Poverty Action, we thank Sarah Kabay, Daniel
Katz, Sana Khan, Charity Komujurizi, Matthew Lowes, Justin Loiseau, Joseph Ndumia, Doug Parkerson,
Pia Raffler, Elana Safran, Marla Spivack, and Glynis Startz for research support throughout the project
and analysis. We thank the Freedom from Hunger and Straight Talk team for collaboration on development
of the financial education curriculum, FINCA for the provision of the bank accounts, and four dioceses
of the Church of Uganda for their cooperation throughout.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Julian C. Jamison, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Education and Access to Savings Accounts: Complements or Substitutes? Evidence
from Ugandan Youth Clubs
Julian C. Jamison, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 20135
May 2014
JEL No. D12,D91,O12

                                             ABSTRACT

Evidence on the effectiveness of financial education and formal savings account access is lacking,
particularly for youth. We randomly assign 250 youth clubs to receive either financial education, access
to a cheap group account, or both. The financial education treatments increase financial literacy; the
account-only treatment does not. Administrative data shows the education plus account treatment increases
bank savings relative to account-only. But survey-measured total savings shows roughly equal increases
across all treatment arms. Earned income also increases in all treatment arms. We find little evidence
that education and account access are strong complements, and some evidence they are substitutes.


Julian C. Jamison                                   Jonathan Zinman
Senior Economist                                    Department of Economics
Office of Research                                  Dartmouth College
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau                314 Rockefeller Hall
1700 G Street NW                                    Hanover, NH 03755
Washington, DC 20552                                and NBER
julison@gmail.com                                   jzinman@dartmouth.edu

Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20133
   Interventions to facilitate saving are touted worldwide as anti-poverty tools.
These interventions are motivated by evidence suggesting that the poor have
substantial, potentially latent, demand for accumulating financial assets (Karlan,
Ratan, and Zinman 2013). Surveys indicate poor households do tend to have some
surplus that they use for non-essential expenditures (Banerjee and Duflo, 2007).
Similarly, detailed “diary” studies document complexity in poor households’
financial portfolios and highlight the demand for small irregular flows to be
aggregated into lump sums for household or business investment (Rutherford,
2000; Collins et al., 2009). When formal savings products are unavailable or
unaffordable, the poor often save under mattresses, in informal groups, and/or in
livestock.
   One increasingly prevalent pro-saving intervention is to increase access to
basic formal saving accounts. This approach is motivated by an apparent lack of
access, particularly for the world’s poor: only 22% of adults worldwide report
having saved at a formal financial institution in the past 12 months, and only 23%
of adults living on less than $2 a day report having an account at a formal
financial institution (Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper 2012). Many microfinance
institutions (MFIs) are responding by broadening their initial focus on microcredit
to include the provision of savings products. MFIs have 72 million microsavings
clients to date, compared to 94 million microcredit clients (www.mixmarket.org).
   Recent evidence supports the hypothesis that efforts to expand access to basic
accounts can have large, positive effects on household saving, income, and well-
being. Burgess and Pande (2005) uses a natural experiment on bank expansion
(i.e., both credit and savings) in India from 1977 to 1990 and finds a 2.22
percentage point reduction in rural poverty per one percentage point increase in
the share of savings held by rural banks. More recently, several field experiments
find large impacts of expanding access to formal accounts on savings rates
(Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin 2006; Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin 2010; Dupas and




                                        1
Robinson 2013a; Dupas and Robinson 2013b; Brune et al. 2013; Prina 2013;
Schaner 2013). Most of these studies also find impacts on downstream outcomes
like income, expenditures, and decision power, and the magnitudes hint at more
transformative impacts than found thus far in similar evaluations of microcredit
(Banerjee 2013).
   Financial education is another prevalent pro-saving intervention. This
approach is motivated by descriptive evidence that most people lack basic
financial knowledge. In India for instance, 26% of respondents provided no
correct answers to four questions on basic financial principles, and only 3%
answered all four questions correctly (Cole, Sampson, and Zia, 2011). Applying
the same instrument in other less-developed countries yields similarly low levels
of basic financial literacy (Xu and Zia, 2012).
   However, the evidence that financial education, or other interventions
designed to increase financial literacy, increases saving is mixed at best. Two
recent meta-analyses of dozens of studies make different inferences, with
Fernandes et al (2013) concluding “different approaches to financial education are
required if one expects to produce effects on behavior larger than the very small
effects we found”, and Miller et al (2013) concluding “financial literacy and
capability interventions can have a positive impact in some areas (increasing
savings….)”. Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn (2013) concludes “the current
literature is inadequate to draw firm conclusions about if and under what
conditions financial education either works or is cost-effective.” Karlan, Ratan
and Zinman (2013) focuses on the handful of completed field experiments in
developing countries and find “mixed (at best) impacts of financial literacy
programs on literacy and downstream behaviors, and truly scant evidence on
whether such interventions change… savings decisions.”
   We bring together the literatures on savings account access and financial
education by randomly assigning each treatment, independently, across 240




                                         2
Ugandan youth groups, containing a total sample of 2680 individuals. A baseline
survey shows that financial knowledge and bank account use are low in our
setting (Section I-A). 60 groups were offered financial education in the form of a
10-week, 15-hour curriculum, designed by NGOs with local and international
expertise, that focused on the formal financial system, savings practices, savings
costs and benefits (relative to borrowing), and other aspects of personal financial
management. 60 groups were offered easy access to a basic savings account with
FINCA, a local and international microfinance institution with a banking charter
in Uganda. To eliminate fees and minimize time costs, accounts were offered at
the group level (one account per group), with groups responsible for maintaining
a ledger with individual members’ savings, and selected group members serving
as bank field agents for handling deposits and withdrawals. 60 groups were
offered both education and the group account, and 60 groups were offered neither
(the control group).
    Financial education and account participation rates are sufficient to identify
treatment effects on saving and downstream outcomes. The financial education
participation rate is about 50%.1 The savings account take-up rate is about 66%.2
We measure savings in FINCA using administrative data on the two study arms
offered FINCA group accounts. We measure total/net savings, for all four study
arms, using a follow-up survey conducted about 9 months after random
assignment. The follow-up survey also allows us to estimate treatment effects on
decision inputs (e.g., knowledge, literacy, numeracy, preferences) and
downstream outcomes (income, activities, and expenditures).


1
  Financial education participation is measured as the mean or median attendance rate among
group members in the education study arms. This is unusually high for financial education, and
may be due in part to the distribution channel, which piggybacked on regular group meetings
(Section I-C).
2
  Savings account take-up is measured as the proportion of groups in the two account-offer study
arms that opened an account.




                                               3
    Our study makes several contributions. First, the 2x2 design generates
evidence on whether account access and financial education are complements or
substitutes. The interventions might complement each other if education changes
behavior only when there is an easy “on-ramp” to that behavior in the form of an
account, or if account access changes behavior only when prospective savers have
the knowledge required to navigate the formal financial system and/or use the
account productively. Conversely, accounts may substitute for education if
knowledge is not a prerequisite for saving, or if there is learning-by-doing.
Second, we address concerns that self-reported data leads to upward-biased
estimates of treatment effects by using bank data to complement survey data on
savings. Because financial education for youth is typically implemented via
schools, it is often difficult to use administrative bank data to measure impacts.
Third, there have been relatively few field experiments with younger samples.3
Savings interventions may have different effects on youth than on adults due to
differences in cognition (e.g., youth may be more teachable) and/or choice sets
(e.g., youth may have fewer productive uses for savings and/or more life-cycle
reasons to borrow). Fourth, and closely related, we have rich data on decision
inputs that allows us to estimate effects on various aspects of financial literacy
(broadly defined as finance-specific human capital), numeracy, preferences (risk,
time, and social), and risk perceptions.
    Our treatment effect estimates on decision inputs suggest that financial
education has an impact but that account-ownership alone does not. The results
suggest that, relative to the control group, financial education increases financial
literacy, as measured by quiz questions in the follow-up survey. Some of this may
be due to “teaching-to-the-test” (although even that would be encouraging


3
  Bruhn et al (2013) is the only completed study we know of using a field experiment with youth
in a developing country setting; they find that adding a substantial financial education curriculum
component to high schools leads to large increases in knowledge and self-reported savings.




                                                4
evidence), but not all elements of the curriculum show similar increases, as one
would have expected if this were the primary driver of the results. There is also
some evidence that financial education increases decision power and decreases
risk tolerance and altruism.
      Several sets of results suggest that financial education increases savings
(defined as financial assets) and wealth. First, we use bank data on groups in the
two study arms offered accounts. This administrative data, pulled about nine
months post-treatment assignment, is free of any self-reporting biases but of
course only captures saving at the partner bank, not total or net saving. These
results suggest that there is a large marginal effect of financial education above
and     beyond    account   access,   with       savings   60-180%   higher   in   the
account+education group.
      Turning to comparisons that the bank data cannot address, the survey data
suggest that both the education-only and account+education arms increase total
savings relative to the control group, by 5-50% depending on how we measure
savings. The results are actually stronger for the education-only arm than the
account+education arm (although this difference is only statistically significant
for one out of six measures of savings), and hence do not support the hypothesis
that account access and financial education are complements. Nor do the
education arms produce significantly greater total savings than the account-only
arm. We do not find evidence of significant treatment effects on borrowing or
spending, or reductions in other assets, suggesting that the increases in financial
assets translate into increases in wealth.
      Does the increase in savings translate into substantial downstream impacts, as
has been found in other studies? We start by examining effects on earned income,
since even though our study participants are considered “youth” by Ugandan
standards, they are also of working age (mean age of 24.5; SD of 3.5). We find
that all three treatment arms increase earned income relative to the control group,




                                             5
with increases of 13-29% depending on the measure. We do not find evidence of
significant treatment effects on days worked, occupation, or school attendance.
   All told, the results suggest that the interventions produced a powerful
feedback loop between saving and income, with little evidence of strong
complementarity between account access and financial education with respect to
total savings or downstream impacts, and some evidence of substitutability. In
particular, we see statistically equivalent increases in both total saving and earned
income between the account-only and education treatments. But our results
cannot sharply distinguish between the two likely mechanisms driving the
feedback loop: initial saving being used to fund productive investments, and/or
motivation to save leading to increased work effort.


I. Research Design and Implementation
   This section details our setting and methods, moving chronologically from
sampling, to baseline survey, to treatment design, implementation, and take-up
rates, to endline data collection, and finally to our empirical model for estimating
treatment effects. Appendix Figure 1 shows the timeline of study activities. For
each of the surveys the research team trained, hired, and monitored its own
surveyors.
a. Baseline Survey and Sample Characteristics
   The Church of Uganda provided access to its country-wide network of youth
clubs. The average club has about 40 members (with a standard deviation that is
also around 40 in our data), and engages in activities including bible study, choir,
community service, continuing education, and travel to conventions with other
clubs.
   The research team selected 240 youth clubs from the vicinity of district
capitals in each of Uganda’s four regions (Appendix Figure 2). Clubs were
eligible for the study if they met at least twice a month, had at least 12 members,




                                         6
and were located within a 60 minute-walk of public transportation. We measured
eligibility characteristics using a club-level filter-survey, conducted in our
targeted districts, in April and May of 2010. Amongst the eligible clubs, we then
randomly chose 60 clubs per region for inclusion in the study sample frame.
    After establishing the sample frame of 240 clubs, we conducted a detailed
baseline survey of individual youth club members in May and June of 2010. We
worked with the Church and club leaders to identify active members, and
randomly selected 12 active members to survey. Surveys took place at each club’s
meeting place. Survey participants could earn money from preference elicitation
tasks, with minimum earnings of 500 UGX and typical earnings of 1000-2000
UGX (US$1 = 2,500UGX). We completed 2810 baseline surveys.
    Table 1 (Columns 1-4) shows some baseline characteristics of the clubs and
their members. The first ten variables are measured using the individual survey,
and averaged within-club to generate club-level statistics. We surveyed a little
less than 12 members per club, for a response rate of over 90%. About 40% of
club members are female. The average age is about 24.5. About 38% are currently
attending school, with mean educational attainment of the 10th-grade. Mean
earnings during the last 90 days is about 150,000 UGX, or 120% of the individual
poverty line scaled to 90 days.(Schreiner 2011) We aggregate four proxies for
wealth into a mean-zero index, the components of which indicate that mean
person in our sample: eats meat 1.7 times per week (SD=1.5), eats two complete
meals per day (SD=0.5), lives in a household that owns their home (82%), and has
a high-quality latrine (98%, where high-quality is defined as a covered pit latrine,
a covered, ventilated, improved latrine, or a flush toilet).              Mean baseline
individual savings (i.e., total financial assets) is about 177,000 UGX, and 90,000
UGX after dropping the top 1% of observations.4 Formal bank account ownership

4
 At endline the comparable figure in the control group is about 186,000 UGX (Table 4 Column
6).




                                            7
is low, about 13%, as is baseline financial knowledge (mean score of about 5.5
correct out of 13 basic questions on the regulation of financial institutions and
basic financial concepts like budgeting, interest, and collateral). Trust in the
financial system is about 8.7 on a scale of 3 to 12. The three variables below the
trust variable in Table 1 are measured using the club survey, and show that public
transport to the district capital is cheap, that most clubs pool some money from
club members, but that few clubs have a bank account.


b. Randomization and Balance Checks
    Following the baseline survey, we randomly assigned clubs, 60 each, to
control (no treatment), financial education only, account only, or financial
education and account. The randomization stratified on region and savings.5
    Table 1 suggests that baseline club characteristics are balanced across study
arms. Columns 1-4 show means and standard errors for the 13 different variables
described in Section I-A, separately for each of the four study arms. Column 5
compares these means across the four study arms, separately for each baseline
variable, by regressing a baseline variable on the three treatment dummies and
stratification variables. Each cell in Column 5 reports the p-value on the F-test of
the hypothesis that the three treatment variables are jointly equal to zero. We do
not reject that hypothesis for any of the 13 baseline variables. Column 6 tests the
joint orthogonality of baseline variables by regressing a binary variable for
receiving any treatment on the complete set of baseline variables listed in the
rows. Each cell reports the coefficient and standard error, and the second-to-last
row of the table reports the result from an f-test of the hypothesis that the baseline
variables all equal zero. The p-value is 0.893, again suggesting that treatment
assignment is uncorrelated with the characteristics of clubs and their members.

5
 Savings was stratified by binning clubs into those above and below the median total of individual
member savings, as self-reported in the baseline survey.




                                                8
c. Financial Education Treatment
    Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) developed the financial education
course in cooperation with the NGOs Freedom from Hunger and Straight Talk
Foundation (STF); STF runs a different network of youth groups throughout
Uganda. The course is based on an earlier curriculum by the Global Financial
Education Program (GFEP) that targets those near the poverty line in developing
countries. GFEP is a strategic partnership between the NGOs Freedom from
Hunger and Microfinance Opportunities.
    Beginning in July 2010, the 15-hour course was delivered over ten weekly
meetings. Some clubs scheduled course sessions to piggyback on regular club
meeting times; others arranged for separate times. The curriculum focuses on
saving, with closely related material on formal financial institutions, budgeting,
borrowing, and interest. It covers one topic per meeting: (1) myths about the
formal financial sector, (2) bank regulation by the Bank of Uganda, (3) how banks
function as businesses, (4) the relative costs and benefits of saving versus
borrowing, (5) targeted/goal-oriented saving, (6) budgeting and record keeping,
(7) prioritizing spending decisions, (8) addressing challenges to saving, (9)
making informed decisions about where and how to save, and (10) how to
communicate about money. The pedagogical approach is focused on active and
customized learning, with an emphasis on role playing, mini-cases, and group
activities. Handouts and homework assignments are used to reinforce each lesson.
    IPA hired and trained instructors (with recruiting help from FINCA) who led
the classes and tracked attendance. Among those in either of the education
treatment arms (education, or education + account), estimated mean attendance is
4.66 sessions, with a standard deviation of 3.86 and a median of 5.6 Conditional

6
  We calculate attendance rates using the 1,341 endline respondents in the two education study
arms in the denominator. See Section I-E for more details on the endline survey.




                                              9
on attending at least one meeting, the mean attendance was 6.22 and the median
was 7. 75% of individuals attended at least one session, and 13% attended all ten.


d. Savings Account Treatment
    The savings accounts were offered by FINCA, an international microfinance
institution, headquartered in the US, with a banking charter in Uganda. IPA and
FINCA worked together to design an account that would minimize transaction
costs (pecuniary and otherwise), deciding on a group-based account as the most
practical way to keep costs down while still enabling FINCA to deliver basic
services. Each club had only one account and was responsible for maintaining a
ledger with individual members’ savings, and selected group members serve as
bank field agents for handling deposits and withdrawals. There were no opening
or maintenance costs, although clubs were required to make a deposit within
thirty days of opening the account and had to maintain a minimum balance of
50,000 UGX.
    FINCA began marketing in each of the study regions in November 2010,
roughly in accordance with the study design: we encouraged FINCA to begin
marketing around the time that the financial education course was concluding.
Administrative issues delayed account-opening in the Mbarara district (Western
region) until early February;7 marketing continued during the delay.
    Among clubs assigned to account treatments, an average of 12 club members
attended the first account marketing meeting, with a standard deviation of 6.9 and
a median of 10.33 percent of those surveyed at baseline attended the first meeting,
with no statistically significant difference between those clubs that received
financial education and those who did not. Overall, FINCA data shows that 66


7
  FINCA required Church authorization to open the accounts, and this authorization too longer
than expected to obtain in Mbarara Diocese. Results are similar if we drop the 54 clubs in Mbarara
District/Western Region.




                                               10
percent of clubs offered the account took it up, with no difference in take-up
between the account-only and account + education arms.


e. Outcomes from Administrative Bank Data and Endline Surveys
   Administrative bank data show all transactions made by each individual from
the time of account opening until July 2011. The latter date was chosen to parallel
endline survey data on savings as closely as possible.
   Endline surveys were administered between June 15 and August 28, 2011—
roughly 9-12 months after the completion of financial education, and 7-10 months
after the start of account marketing. We attempted to re-survey all baseline survey
respondents, using the same surveyors and protocols deployed in the baseline
survey. We obtained 2,680 completed endline surveys, for a 95% retention rate.
Appendix Table 1 reconfirms the balance checks from Table 1 on the completed-
endline survey. Appendix Table 2 shows that retention is uncorrelated with
treatment assignment (Columns 1-3), with baseline characteristics (Column 2), or
with interactions between treatment arm and baseline characteristics (Column 3).
The bottom rows of Appendix Table 2 show the p-values on the requisite F-tests.


f. Estimation Strategy
   We estimate the impacts of financial education and account access by
comparing outcomes across treatment arms, and between treatment arms and the
control group, using OLS models of the form:


            is an outcome variable, for member           of club , in time period 1
(endline) or 0 (baseline).    takes several different forms: we measure several
different types of outcomes using the FINCA data and our endline survey. We
measure some of these outcomes as individual variables, and aggregate others into




                                        11
standardized indices to mitigate measurement error and multiple hypothesis
testing.
    The treatment arm variables are FeAcct (financial education + account), Fe
(financial education only), and Acct (account only), with the control group
omitted. These variables take the value of 1 if individual i was randomly assigned
to that study arm, and 0 otherwise. We use only the random assignment, and
thereby identify intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates, because we lack separate
instruments for the extensive and intensive margins of the treatments.
    are the ITT point estimates. We cluster standard errors at the unit of
randomization: the club. StratVarsj is a vector of controls for the randomization
stratification variables: region, and above-median club level savings at baseline.


II. Results: Treatment Effect Estimates
    Each Column in Tables 2-7 presents intent-to-treat estimates from a single
OLS regression of an outcome variable on the treatment variables (with the
control group as the omitted category), randomization stratification variables, and
controls for the baseline value of the dependent variable (where available).


a. On Decision Making Inputs (Table 2)
    We start by estimating treatment effects on directly-elicited measures of
various inputs into (financial) decision making: information and decision making
ability, plans (financial practices), expectations, and preferences. We elicit these
measures using multiple survey questions per input. This multiplicity deals with
the likelihoods that some inputs are multi-faceted (e.g., there are probably
multiple relevant dimensions of knowledge: e.g., of prices, of contract features, of
institutions, etc.), and that many inputs are difficult to measure. We then combine
our various measures of an input (the index “component outcomes”) into a single
index that is meant to summarize that input (“outcome family” in program




                                        12
evaluation parlance), scaling each index such that higher values indicate more of
the outcome. We standardize each index so that the control group has mean zero
and standard deviation one and thus treatment effects are in standard deviation
units.8 We summarize the content of each index here, and provide surveys used in
the Survey Appendix. Appendix Tables 3-15 present treatment effect estimates
for each component of each index.
    For each outcome family below we summarize related content in the financial
education curriculum, to motivate why it is plausible to hypothesize that the
education treatment arms might affect that outcome. For most outcomes it is also
plausible to hypothesize that the savings account alone has an effect, through the
channel of increased market experience.9
    Table 2 Columns 1-4 present estimates of treatment effects on various
measures of how well-informed/skilled/financially literate subjects are. We
measure information and skills that were explicitly covered in the financial
education course, so it plausible to think that the treatment arms with financial
education might have positive effects. One might also acquire information and
skills through market experience, so it is also plausible to think that the account-
only treatment arm might have positive effects.
    Table 2 Column 1 presents treatment effect estimates on financial knowledge,
as measured by an index of 10 questions on bank regulation (e.g,. “what is the
name of the government institution of Uganda that regulates formal banks?”; “Is


8
  Following standard practice (e.g.,Kling et al (2007)), if we are missing some but not all of the
components for an index for the dependent variable, we replace the missing components with the
mean of the control group, i.e. zero.
9
  In principle, the account-only treatment could also affect decision inputs through a feedback
loop: account => more wealth => changes in preferences (e.g., lower risk aversion), expectations,
etc. As we discuss below, this sort of loop is not consistent with the full picture of our results.
More generally however, the possibility of this sort of feedback (which presumably would take
time to materialize), and/or market experience feedback, speaks to the value of measuring inputs at
shorter interval(s) post-treatment, before the full causal chain has occurred. Budget constraints
however made short-run follow-up surveys infeasible in our case.




                                               13
Post Bank regulated by the government of Uganda?”, etc.) and 7 questions on
the definition of basic financial concepts (e.g., budgeting, interest, collateral). The
financial education course covered these concepts, and indeed we find a
significant 0.08 standard deviation increase in the financial education groups,
regardless of whether the savings account was offered as well. Subjects might
also learn about these concepts through the experience of saving in a formal
account, but we find no evidence of that: the point estimate on the account-only
group is -0.01, and the education-only and account+education treatment effects
are nearly identical. Appendix Table 3 presents treatment effect estimates for each
component of the knowledge index (after aggregating the 10 regulation questions
into a single sub-index).
   Table 2 Column 2 presents treatment effect estimates on financial awareness,
as measured by an index of 11 questions re: market prices (interest rates on
savings and loans, exchange rates, mineral water) and currency (“What is the
color of a new 50,000 Shilling note?”; “How can you see if a 20,000 Shilling note
is fake…?”). Again this is information that might be gleaned from the financial
education course and/or from market experience spurred by the bank account. We
find no evidence of significant treatment effects, although the point estimates on
the two education groups are positive. Appendix Table 4 presents treatment effect
estimates for each component of the awareness index.
   Table 2 Column 3 presents treatment effect estimates on numeracy, as
measured by one question on addition (that 91% of respondents answered
correctly), one on calculating a percentage (32% answered correctly), and one on
compounding (59% answered correctly, but it was multiple choice with only two
possible answers). We find an increase of 0.05 standard deviations in the
education+account treatment group (p-value = 0.077). Appendix Table 5 presents
treatment effects estimates for each component of the numeracy index.




                                          14
     Table 2 Column 4 presents estimates on a financial literacy index that
combines the knowledge, awareness, and numeracy indices. We find an increase
of 0.039 standard deviations in the education-only treatment group (p-value =
0.078), an increase of 0.056 standard deviations in the education+account
treatment group (p-value = 0.001), and no significant effect in the account-only
treatment.
     Table 2 Column 5 finds no effects of the treatments on an index of dealing
with financial matters at youth club meetings, suggesting that any effects of
financial education on financial literacy (components) work through individual
learning and not social learning. Appendix Table 6 presents treatment effects
estimates for each component of the club financial matters index.
     Table 2 Column 6 presents treatment effect estimates on financial planning, as
measured by an index of 4 components re: budgeting, tracking, emergency
preparation, and follow-through on financial plans. We do not find any significant
effects. Appendix Table 7 presents treatment effect estimates for each component
of the planning index.
     Table 2 Columns 7-12 present treatment effect estimates on measures of
preferences and expectations. Many of the financial education lessons illustrate
the benefits of patience, and provide tips for controlling spending, so it is
plausible to think that education might induce lower discount rates (Column 7)
and increase self-control (Column 8).10 But we find no significant effects.
Appendix Tables 8 and 9 present treatment effect estimates for each component of
the discounting and self-control indices.



10
  We measure discounting using four standard questions offering smaller-sooner vs. larger-later
real-stakes monetary payoffs. We measure self-control using three qualitative questions, and two
measures of time-inconsistency based on the real-stakes discounting questions. Stakes took the
form of a lottery: there were 13 discounting and risk questions, and the surveyor randomly choose
one question per respondent to pay out.




                                               15
     The financial education curriculum might also affect risk tolerance (Column
9), in the sense that the curriculum draws attention to various types of risks and
the value of preparing for bad shocks. Indeed, we find that both education arms
decreased risk tolerance, as measured by eight standard questions, by about 0.06
standard deviations.11 There is suggestive evidence that this effect works through
a change in expectations rather than in preferences per se. First, as shown below
(Table 5), there is some evidence that education treatments increase wealth (or at
least income), which would tend to increase risk tolerance under constant relative
risk aversion; i.e., the positive treatment effect on income pushes against the
negative treatment effect on risk tolerance. Second, point estimates on the
treatment effect on the perceived likelihood of a future emergency are positive
and relatively large (Table 2 Column 10). But these estimates are noisy because
the shock perception index is comprised of only two questions. Appendix Tables
10 and 11 present treatment effect estimates for each component of the risk
tolerance and shock perception indices.
     Trust in other people and financial institutions might increase as well (Column
11), if the educational content on institutional workings and regulation leads
people to take a more optimistic view of market interactions. But we do not find
any effect on an index of 14 standard questions, and the point estimates are all
quite small: around 0.01 standard deviations. Appendix Table 12 presents
treatment effect estimates for each component of the trust index.12


11
   We measure risk tolerance using 7 real-stakes choices (three between two lotteries, one between
a risky and an ambiguous lottery, three between a certain option and a lottery), and one lifetime
income gamble hypothetical question. Please see the Data Appendix for question scripts.
Interestingly, we only see increases in risk aversion for choices where the less-risky option is a
certain one, suggesting the financial education increases direct risk aversion (DRA) in particular.
See Callen et al (forthcoming) for field evidence on the prevalence of DRA in Afghanistan.
12
   The results on component variables in Appendix Table 12 suggest that there are offsetting
effects where the education treatments increase trust in financial institutions (Columns 2 and 3)
but decrease trust in other people (note the preponderance of negative point estimates on these
variables).




                                                16
   There are two reasons why financial education might decrease altruism. First,
the financial education curriculum includes a module on developing social
strategies for protecting assets from various external claimants. Second, a key
theme of the curriculum is that “anyone can save”, which might engender less
sympathy for those who do not. Table 2 Column 12 provides some evidence that
education does in fact decrease altruism, as measured by an index comprised of
responses to one qualitative question and three real-stakes choices in standard
social   preference   elicitations:   by    0.06   standard   deviations   in   the
education+account arm (p-value= 0.083), and by 0.04 standard deviations in the
education-only arm (p-value = 0.233). In contrast, the account-only arm only
reduces altruism by an estimated 0.01 standard deviations (p-value =0.705).
Appendix Table 13 presents treatment effect estimates for each component of the
altruism index.
   Column 13 shows no effects on financial independence, as measured by an
index of one question being financially supported by others, and five questions on
financial decision making power/autonomy. Appendix Table 14 presents
treatment effect estimates for each component of the financial independence
index.


b. On Savings in the Group Account (administrative data, comparing the two
arms offered accounts)
   Next we compare savings in the group account across the two study arms
offered access to the account: account-only vs. account+education. This exercise
enables us to estimate whether there is an additive effect of financial education,
using data that is free from any self-reporting biases. The downside of course is
that the administrative bank data lack information on the other two study arms
(the education-only, and control, groups) and on saving in other vehicles (e.g., in
other financial institutions, or fixed assets). The next sub-section describes our




                                           17
use of survey data to estimate effects using the full sample, and broader measures
of savings.
     Table 3 shows three important patterns in the administrative bank data. First,
most club members do not use the account; we estimate a usage rate of 14% by
dividing the number of depositors in Panel A by the number of club members in
Panel B. Second, individuals that do use the account save nontrivial amounts; e.g.,
about 15,000 UGX in the account-only group (Panel A Column 2). It is important
to keep in mind that we measure a stock rather than a flow here, and FINCA
savings rather than overall savings, so the effect on total savings could be larger
(or smaller). Third, intention-to-treat estimates suggest that financial education
has an additive effect on saving in the group account. Panel A Columns 2-6 use
individual-level data, on depositors only, and finds that individuals in the
account+education group save 4,000-7,000 UGX more than individuals in the
account-only group, across a variety of definitions of savings balance.13 The
effect is statistically significant for four of the five measures of savings, in which
cases the implied percentage increase ranges from 58 to 70 percent. Column 1
also shows an effect on the extensive margin (i.e., on the number of members per
club who make any deposit), meaning that presence in our depositor-only sample
is affected by education. So Panel B repeats Panel A’s analysis after adding
zeroes for non-depositors.14 All five point estimates are positive, three are
statistically significant with at least 95% confidence, and their implied percentage
increases range from 75-200%.


c. On Financial Assets and Liabilities (Survey data)

13
   The data shows only a snapshot, taken as of July 2011, to match the endline survey timing as
closely as possible. Column 2 estimates the treatment effect on level balances, and Columns 3-6
use various top-coding and trimming rules to check for the influence of outliers.
14
   We infer zeros using a measure of the total number of group members from the Club Survey.
E.g., if we have a club where we observe 8 depositors in the FINCA data, and 20 members in the
club survey, we infer that there are 12 non-depositors, with zero balances, in the FINCA data.




                                              18
     Next we use endline survey data to examine treatment effects on the stock of
total savings, using all four study arms.
     The first six columns of Table 4 present estimated treatment effects on various
measures of total money currently held across all financial savings instruments at
the time of the follow-up survey. The survey prompts for 12 such instruments
(e.g., “pocket”, “an individual account at a formal bank”, “other”, etc.) We use
this data to construct six different measures of total financial savings: any savings
(control group mean = 0.84), total number of instruments with positive savings
(control mean = 1.3; this is correlated 0.34 with UGX value of total savings and
might proxy for diversification as well), UGX value of total savings (control
mean = 247,094 = $99 USD), total savings top-coded at the 95th or 99th percentile
(control means= 162,941 and 221,940 UGX), and total savings dropping the top
percentile (control mean = 185,740 UGX).
     Qualitatively, we find some evidence that the treatments increased savings
relative to the control group. Across the six different measures of savings, all 18
treatment effect point estimates are positive (Table 4 Columns 1-6), and 10 are
statistically significant with at least 90% confidence. Quantitatively, the point
estimates from the survey data imply modest effects (1% to 5%) on the extensive
margin (Column 1), and large effects on the intensive margin of money saved: the
estimated increases in total savings (Columns 3-6) are 7% to 52% of the control
group’s savings.15
     Although the results are statistically stronger for financial education than for
the account-- 9 of the 10 statistically significant effects are on the two arms that
include financial education, and only one of the account-only treatment effects is

15
  To scale by income and thereby infer the effect on individual savings rates, take, e.g., Table 4
Column 4 and compare those treatment effects (roughly 40,000 UGX increase) to the control
group’s income over the last 90 days in Table 5 Column 2 (180,000 UGX), tripling this income to
account for the average time elapsed between treatment and follow-up of 9 months (i.e., assume
that savings accumulated over 9 months): 40,000/(180,000x3)= a savings rate increase of roughly
7%.




                                               19
statistically significant (p-value= 0.074)-- the table also shows that we cannot
reject, statistically speaking, equality between the account-only arm and the
education arms. We should also keep in mind that subjects were exposed to the
account for less time than to education, due to both the design (which sought to
have accounts offered at the conclusion of the 3-month curriculum) and
implementation issues (account marketing delays in one of the four regions). This
timing issue may weaken our power to identify effects of the account treatment if
treatment effects on saving take time to materialize; e.g., if, as hypothesized, they
are the result of several months of incremental changes in behavior. Our setup
may tilt toward finding larger effects in the education arms, which makes the lack
of strong evidence for larger effects all the more striking.
   All told, in contrast to the administrative bank data, the endline data shows
little evidence of strong complementarity between financial education and
account access. Unlike the administrative bank data, we find little evidence of
greater saving in the account+education arm than in the account-only arm: the
lowest p-value on the six differences is 0.12, on the extensive margin of money
saved (Column 1). Nor do we find strong evidence of greater saving in the
account+education arm than in the education-only arm: actually four of the six
point estimates are larger for the education-only treatment. Rather, the results
support one of two interpretations: (1) education and the account are substitutes
for increasing saving; this interpretation focus on the lack of statistically
significant differences between the single-treatment arms and the joint-treatment
arm; (2) only education is effective at increasing saving; this interpretation
focuses on the greater number of statistically significant results in the education-
only arm vs. account-only arm (5 vs. 1).
   Appendix Table 15 show results on savings behavior-- deposits, withdrawals,
and having a goal— that are consistent with the effects on the stock of financial
assets in Table 4 Columns 1-6. Appendix Table 15 shows some evidence of




                                         20
increases in regular deposits and having a savings goal (Columns 1 and 3), and no
significant effects on making regular withdrawals (with point estimates around
zero in Column 2).
     The survey has limited data on non-financial assets (e.g,. businesses,
livestock), although below we make some inferences below about whether and
how the treatments affected investment in non-financial assets through questions
on income (Table 5) and expenditures (Table 7).
     Table 4 Columns 7-12 present treatment effect estimates on borrowing that
parallel those for saving. The motivation for estimating treatment effects on
borrowing is twofold: 1) the education curriculum directly discourages borrowing
(while presenting saving as a more cost-effective alternative); 2) we are interested
in testing whether any increased saving is financed by borrowing (as opposed to
by reducing expenses and/or increasing income).16 We find no evidence of
statistically significant treatment effects on borrowing but emphasize that our
confidence intervals are wide: these are noisy nulls.
     The results thus far suggest that the treatments increase net worth, and the
next columns offer a bit of additional support for this inference, examining
treatment effects on individuals’ evaluations of their current and prospective
wealth relative to the rest of their community (individuals rank themselves using a
10-rung ladder). Columns 13 and 14 show that five of the six point estimates are
positive, with statistically significant effects on the account+education treatment
group. The point estimates imply that any effects are modestly-sized: about half a
“rung” or less on the 10-rung ladder (i.e., a shift of < 5 percentile points in the
wealth distribution). The effects on prospective wealth are significantly larger


16
   Another possible mechanism is that the treatments help youth claim household assets as their
own; i.e., it might be that the treatments merely affect the division of household resources in
addition to (or instead of) affect the amount or composition of resources. But the lack of treatment
effects on financial independence, including intra-household decision power (Appendix Table 14),
casts doubt on the importance of a division/claiming mechanism.




                                                21
from account+education than from the other treatments, suggesting that financial
education and account access might be complements in the long-run even if they
are not in the shorter-run.


d. Income and Work
     The large effects on saving motivate estimating treatment effects on income.
There are two distinct channels that could produce treatment effects on income as
well as on savings. The first channel runs from income to saving: respondents
might fund their increased saving by increasing work effort. After all, if they are
not increasing borrowing (as suggested by the results in Table 4 Columns 7-12) or
increasing their claims on household resources (recall that Table 2 Column 13
finds no effect on financial independence), the only alternative means of
increasing saving are earning more (Table 5) or spending less (Table 7). The
second channel runs from saving to income: initial increases in saving (over a
shorter horizon than our follow-up survey) might fund high-return investments
that generate income by the time we conduct our follow-up survey.
     Table 5 Columns 1-4 suggest that each of the treatments causes a substantial
increase in individually17-earned income (10% to 15% over the control mean of
total earnings over the last 90 days).18 As with the effects on savings, we find no
evidence of differential effects across treatment arms, or that financial education
and the savings account are complements. Columns 5-16 examine disaggregated


17
   We find no effects on club-generating income activities. 48% of clubs report that they have
done some type of activity to generate income for individual club members.
18
   We measured income by asking “We would like to know about what work you did to earn
money since 90 DAYS AGO. Have you done any activities to earn any money? This can include
small activities or even being given something as a thank-you for work you did” and then, “Please
take a moment to think about what work you did to earn money in that time. Please tell me the
activities that you got money from in these months”, and then asking for various details on each
activity, include the amount earned in the past 90 days.




                                               22
income, from the three most prevalent occupation categories: farming & livestock
rearing, informal employment (e.g., bricklaying, boda/taxi driving), and business
ownership. Most of the point estimates are positive, but we do not find
statistically robust evidence of increases in any particular category. Column 17
suggests that those in the account+education treatment arm were more likely to be
lenders (5 percentage points on a base of 71, p-value=0.074), although Column 18
suggests that even the upper bound of lending’s effect on total earnings is likely
small. In all, Table 5 shows evidence that each of the treatments increases total
earnings, but does not yield strong clues about whether this increase runs from
income to saving, or vice versa; e.g., we do not see particularly strong evidence of
increases in business earnings that would suggest that initial savings are used to
finance productive investments.
   Table 6 looks for clues on the mechanism linking savings and income by
examining additional measure of work effort. Columns 1 and 2 present estimates
of treatment effects on the quantity of work effort. These show no significant
effects, although all six point estimates are positive. Columns 3-6 show no
significant effects on occupational choice: the likelihood of working in
farming/livestock, informal employment, formal employment, or business
ownership. Column 7 shows no significant effects on the likelihood of school
attendance.
   In all, the results on income and work effort yield two main findings: the
treatments increase earned income, and our results on income and effort in
different types of activities are too imprecise to yield strong clues about the
mechanism linking increases in saving with increases in income. Our results are
consistent with either or both channels: respondents working more to fund
savings, or respondents using initial savings to fund income-generating
investments (see also Table 7 Column 9, discussed below).




                                        23
e. Expenditures
   Table 7 examines impacts on recent expenditures (with Appendix Table 16
providing some robustness checks re: outliers). Over the roughly nine-month
follow-up horizon there are potentially offsetting effects on spending. In the first-
order, the treatments might reduce spending in order to free up money for saving.
Higher-frequency and shorter-run follow-ups may be needed to detect such an
effect, especially given that the treatments increase income (Table 5), creating the
potential for spending increases via an income effect. Indeed, we find no evidence
of significant effects on the large expenditures that are measured with six-month
look-backs (Columns 7-9)—school fees, health, and business investment—
although these “nulls” have large confidence intervals. Columns 1-6 focus on very
recent expenditure, and hence present a cleaner test of the income effect. The only
significant effects suggest an increase in the consumption of meat, which is
thought to be a very income-elastic good.
   In all, we find little of evidence of treatment effects on expenditure, although
it is important to keep in mind that our nulls are imprecisely estimated. It may
also be the case that our estimated null results obscure offsetting substitution and
income effects.


f. Reporting Bias?
   Are the estimates of large treatment effects on saving artifacts of reporting
bias (e.g., experimenter demand effects)? After all, each of the three treatment
arms was encouraged to save—through the financial education curriculum and/or
marketing of the savings account—so it is reasonable to wonder whether
individuals assigned to treatment might simply report more savings due to image
concerns. In our view two factors push against the reporting bias interpretation.
First, we find a treatment effect in administrative data that is unaffected by
reporting bias concerns (Section II-B and Table 3). Second, we find treatment




                                         24
effects on income as well as on saving, and the treatments did not emphasize
income generation.


III. Conclusion
   Microfinance increasingly focuses on encouraging savings, especially among
youth. We develop some evidence on whether and why two common approaches
to encouraging saving—expanding basic account access and financial
education—are (in)effective, using a 2x2 field experiment among 240 Ugandan
youth clubs.
   We find significant treatment effects on financial knowledge and other inputs
to decision making for those in the two financial education treatment groups
relative to the control group, but not for those who only received simplified access
to subsidized group savings accounts. We also find a significant increase in
savings for the education groups; the point estimate for the account-only group is
positive but not significantly different from either the control group or those in the
other treatment arms. All three treatment groups report significantly higher earned
income than the control group, at roughly equal levels.
   Our results come with several caveats. We lack data on some key
mechanisms; e.g., on how much of the savings increase is in formal versus
informal vehicles, and on whether savings leads to higher income via motivation
and/or productive investments. We also lack data to measure whether the
treatment effects persist over longer horizons. This is clearly critical to the
motivation, and policy focus, on youth financial education and access.
   The question of whether expanding account access and financial education are
complements or substitutes is a critical one given the relatively high cost of
financial education as typically delivered (i.e., in a labor intense way). One could
reasonably infer from our results that increased knowledge is not a necessary
condition for increasing saving or income, and hence that account access and




                                         25
financial education are substitutes. This interpretation focuses on the findings of:
1) knowledge increases in the education groups but not in the account-only
groups; 2) similar effects on saving in the account-only and education treatments;
3) similar increases in earned income in the account-only and education
treatments. Under this interpretation one might elect to pursue only the lower-cost
of the two interventions, and/or to invest in developing and evaluating lower-cost
delivery approaches (e.g., through mobile platforms). On the other hand, one
might reasonably ask whether our data are rich enough, or results precise enough,
to detect higher savings in the education+account group versus the account-only
group (as suggested by the bank administrative data and some of the point
estimates in the survey data), and/or all of the downstream effects of increased
knowledge (e.g., on unmeasured or longer-term outcomes). This highlights the
value of further work to pin down the mechanisms underlying pro-savings and
other anti-poverty interventions.




                                        26
                                  References


Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast:
        Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2): 673–97.
———. 2010. “Female Empowerment: Further Evidence from a Commitment
        Savings Product in the Philippines.” World Development 38 (3): 333–44.
Banerjee, Abhijit. 2013. “Microcredit Under the Microscope: What Have We
        Learnt in the Last Two Decades, What Do We Need to Know?” Annual
        Review of Economics 5: 487–519.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2007. “The Economic Lives of the Poor.”
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (1).
Bruhn, Miriam, Luciana de Souza Leão, Arianna Legovini, Rogelio Marchetti,
        and Bilal Zia. 2013. “Can High School Financial Education Improve
        Economic Preferences and Outcomes? Evidence from Brazil.” World
        Bank Working Paper.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2013.
        “Commitments to Save: A Field Experiment in Rural Malawi.”
Burgess, Robin, and Rohini Pande. 2005. “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence
        from the Indian Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review
        95 (3): 780–95.
Callen, Michael, Isaqzadeh, Mohammed, Long, James, and Sprenger, Charles.
        forthcoming. “Violence and Risk Preferences: Artefactual and
        Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan.” American Economic Review
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia. 2011. “Prices or Knowledge?
        What Drives Demand for Financial Services in Emerging Markets?”
        Journal of Finance 66 (6): 1933–67.
Collins, Daryl, Jonathan Morduch, Stuart Rutherford, and Orlanda Ruthven. 2009.
        Portfolios of the Poor: How the World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day. Princeton
        University Press.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Leora Klapper. 2012. “Measuring Financial Inclusion:
        The Global Findex Database.” World Bank Working Paper.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013a. “Savings Constraints and
        Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
        Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1): 163–92.
        doi:10.1257/app.5.1.163.
———. 2013b. “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health Savings
        Experiments.” The American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138–71.




                                      27
Fernandes, Daniel, John G. Lynch, and Richard G. Netemeyer. 2013. “Financial
        Literacy, Financial Education and Downstream Financial Behaviors.”
        Management Science forthcoming (October).
Hastings, Justine S., Brigitte C. Madrian, and William L. Skimmyhorn. 2013.
        “Financial Literacy, Financial Education, and Economic Outcomes.”
        Annual Review of Economics 5 (1): 347–73. doi:10.1146/annurev-
        economics-082312-125807.
Karlan, Dean, Aishwarya Ratan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “Savings by and for
        the Poor: A Research Review and Agenda.” Review of Income and
        Wealth, October.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental
        Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1): 83–120.
Miller, Margaret, Julia Reichelstein, Christian Salas, and Bilal Zia. 2013. “Can
        You Help Someone Become Financially Capable? A Meta-Analysis of the
        Literature.”
Prina, Silvia. 2013. “Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a
        Field Experiment.” Working Paper, May.
Rutherford, Stuart. 2000. The Poor and Their Money. New Delhi: Oxford
        University Press.
Schaner, Simone. 2013. “The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long-Run
        Impacts of Temporary Savings Subsidies for the Poor.”
Schreiner, Mark. 2011. “Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI) A Simple Poverty
        Scorecard for Uganda”. Grameen Foundation.
Xu, Lisa, and Bilal Zia. 2012. “Financial Literacy Around the World: An
        Overview of the Evidence with Practical Suggestions for the Way
        Forward”. 6107. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper. World
        Bank.




                                       28
                                      Table 1: Baseline Club Characteristics by Study Arm
                                           (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)               (5)                             (6)
                                                                                      p-value from f-test              p-value from f-test
                                        Account Education Account +                  from regressing row              from regressing row
                                                                           Control
                                          Only        Only    Education              var on indicators for            variable on indicator
                                                                                        each treatment                  for any treatment
Count of Baseline Survey                  11.80       11.53      11.55      11.95            0.263                            0.111
Respondents                              (0.184)     (0.192)    (0.172)    (0.147)
Proportion of Female Club Members         0.425       0.409      0.423      0.443            0.737                            0.332
                                        (0.0237)    (0.0194)   (0.0204) (0.0224)
                                          0.121       0.126      0.174      0.132            0.214                            0.712
Has Any Formal Account
                                        (0.0188)    (0.0179)   (0.0230) (0.0190)
Financial Knowledge Score (# of           5.664       5.406      5.713      5.670            0.532                            0.687
questions answered correctly of 13)      (0.158)     (0.158)    (0.165)    (0.173)
Trust in Financial System on scale of     8.731       8.681      8.699      8.723            0.985                            0.868
3 (least) to 12 (most)                   (0.106)    (0.0847)    (0.111)    (0.103)
                                          24.66       24.56      24.65      24.27            0.922                            0.498
Age
                                         (0.453)     (0.469)    (0.445)    (0.438)
                                          0.366       0.394      0.377      0.391            0.895                            0.717
Currently in school
                                        (0.0304)    (0.0297)   (0.0292) (0.0278)
                                          10.24       10.12      10.50      10.30            0.741                            0.959
Education: Highest Grade Completed
                                         (0.255)     (0.226)    (0.261)    (0.241)
Income: total last 90 days ('000          146.7       146.0      168.8      141.3             0.47                            0.417
UGX)                                     (11.82)     (14.24)    (13.33)    (13.88)
                                         0.0228      -0.0728   0.00596     -0.0352           0.739                            0.789
Wealth Index
                                        (0.0742)    (0.0533)   (0.0726) (0.0624)
Cost to Reach District Capital by
                                          4.364       4.918      4.193      4.422            0.704                            0.894
Public Transport ('000 UGX)              (0.354)     (0.579)    (0.396)    (0.457)
                                             0.817        0.695        0.767        0.833             0.277                   0.237
Whether Club Has Money
                                           (0.0504)     (0.0605)     (0.0551)     (0.0485)
                                            0.0667       0.0500       0.0833       0.0667             0.913                   1.000
Whether Club Has Bank Account
                                           (0.0325)     (0.0284)     (0.0360)     (0.0325)
Stratification Variables:
Average Savings of All Members by             82.69        103.7        84.99       91.40              0.478                   0.758
Club ('000 UGX)                              (9.166)      (12.31)      (9.538)     (5.258)
Region: North                                 0.250        0.283        0.283       0.271              0.973                   0.934
                                            (0.0564)     (0.0587)     (0.0587) (0.0287)
Region: East                                  0.300        0.283        0.267       0.279              0.974                   0.804
                                            (0.0597)     (0.0587)     (0.0576) (0.0290)
Region: West                                  0.183        0.167        0.183       0.183              0.974                   0.701
                                            (0.0504)     (0.0485)     (0.0504) (0.0250)
Region: Central                               0.267        0.267        0.267       0.267              1.000                   1.000
                                            (0.0576)     (0.0576)     (0.0576) (0.0286)
Number of Clubs                                60            60          60           60                240                     240
Notes: Means, with standard errors in parentheses, unless otherwise noted. All variables are club-level averages of individual
respondents to the baseline survey, except for the transport, club money, and club bank account variables, which are measured using
the club survey. The binary indicator for whether a club has money or not has one missing value in the "Account Only" treatment.
Each cell in Column 5 provides the p-value from an F-test on the joint signifiance of the three treatment variables, from an OLS
regression of the row variable on the treatment. Each cell in Column 6 presents the p-values from an F-test on the significance of any
treatment, from an OLS regression of the row variable on the treatment.
Variable Definitions: Formal account includes group and/or individual accounts; Financial Knowledge: 13 questions on definitions of
basic financial terrms (e.g., budgeting, interest, collateral) and the regulation of financial institutions; Trust in financial system: three
questions re: theft/expropriation risk at banks; Age and income exclude the top 1% of individual-level observations; Wealth Index:
standardized at the individual-level and based on responses to 4 questions re: meat-eating, number of meals, homeownership, and
toilet facilities; Cost to reach district capital: Average of up to 5 individual responses from the Club Survey; Whether Club Has
Money: From Club Survey question asking whether club has collective money; Whether Club Has Bank Account: From Club Survey
question asking whether club has a formal bank account.
                                                                    29
                                  Table 2: Treatment Effects on Inputs to Decision Making
                          Regressions of Standardized Indices on Treatment Variables and Controls
                                                  (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)               (5)
                                              Financial                                                              Financial
                                                               Financial                            Financial
                                     LHS:    Knowledge                            Numeracy                         Matters at Club
                                                               Awareness                            Literacy
                                             Questions                                                               Meetings
Account Only                                    -0.009            -0.022            -0.008            -0.020           0.051
                                               (0.028)           (0.024)           (0.029)           (0.022)          (0.042)
Education Only                                0.085***            0.018             0.009            0.039*            -0.009
                                               (0.028)           (0.024)           (0.030)           (0.022)          (0.040)
Account + Education                           0.084***            0.036            0.048*           0.056***           0.015
                                               (0.028)           (0.024)           (0.027)           (0.021)          (0.037)
Controls for Baseline Values                      No                No               Yes                No              Yes
N baseline miss val                                0                 0                 0                 0                0
Observations                                     2680              2680              2680              2680             2680
Control Mean                                    0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000            0.000
Std. Dev                                        0.423             0.370             0.607             0.337            0.675
F-test (p-value): Acct = Acct + Ed            12.28 (0.00)       4.90 (0.03)       3.26 (0.07)    11.10 (0.00)        1.04 (0.31)
F-test (p-value): Ed = Acct + Ed               0.00 (0.97)       0.48 (0.49)       1.53 (0.22)     0.55 (0.46)        0.49 (0.49)
F-test (p-value): Acct = Ed                   12.33 (0.00)       2.41 (0.12)       0.24 (0.62)     6.22 (0.01)        2.30 (0.13)
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                      0.00               0.00             0.00             0.00              0.00
Notes: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. OLS intent-to-treat estimates, with standard errors in
parenthesis, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Sample contains 2680 respondents present for both the baseline
and followup surveys. Each column reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column
heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the
dependent outcome variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables
for randomization (not shown in table): average savings per club member at time of baseline, and region. Each dependent variable
is a index of several related questions ("component outcomes", indexed to form an "outcome family"). Each index is standardized
so the control group has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. A missing value for a component outcome is replaced
with the control group mean. We briefly summarize index components on the next page and provide details in the below-referenced
Appendix Tables and the Data Appendix.




                                                                30
                                 Table 2 (cont): Treatment Effects on Inputs to Decision Making
                             Regressions of Standardized Indices on Treatment Variables and Controls
      (6)              (7)               (8)            (9)               (10)           (11)             (12)              (13)
                                                                                                                        Financial
   Financial                                                        Likelihood of
                  Discounting       Self Control   Risk Tolerance                        Trust          Altruism      Independence
   Planning                                                          Bad Shock
                                                                                                                           Index
      0.022            0.017            0.011          0.001             0.079            0.011          -0.014           -0.022
    (0.033)          (0.028)           (0.025)        (0.033)           (0.052)         (0.022)         (0.036)          (0.036)
      0.048           -0.012            0.009        -0.068**            0.050           -0.007          -0.039            0.019
    (0.032)          (0.029)           (0.023)        (0.033)           (0.057)         (0.022)         (0.033)          (0.033)
     -0.026           -0.014            0.034         -0.061*            0.075            0.010         -0.057*            0.029
    (0.032)          (0.030)           (0.023)        (0.033)           (0.051)         (0.022)         (0.033)          (0.035)
       No               Yes              No             No                No               No              No                No
        0                0                0              0                 0                0               0                 0
      2680             2680             2680           2680              2680             2680            2680             2680
      0.000            0.000            0.000          0.000             0.000            0.000           0.000            0.000
      0.533            0.517            0.464          0.554             0.900            0.364           0.531            0.548
  1.91 (0.17)      1.17 (0.28)       0.82 (0.37)    3.30 (0.07)        0.01 (0.93)    0.00 (0.98)      1.49 (0.22)     1.80 (0.18)
  4.69 (0.03)      0.00 (0.95)       1.10 (0.29)    0.05 (0.83)        0.24 (0.62)    0.64 (0.43)      0.30 (0.58)     0.08 (0.77)
  0.52 (0.47)      1.12 (0.29)       0.01 (0.93)    3.96 (0.05)        0.32 (0.57)    0.66 (0.42)      0.51 (0.48)     1.35 (0.25)
     0.00             0.00               0.00          0.00               0.00           0.00             0.00            0.00
Index Components:
(1) Financial Knowledge: 17 questions on whether various financial institutions in Uganda are regulated and the definitions of
simple financial terms like budgeting, interest, and collateral (see Appendix Table 3).
(2) Financial Awareness: 11 questions about market prices and currency characteristics (see Appendix Table 4).
(3) Numeracy: 3 questions re: simple addition, percentage, and the concept of compound growth (see Appendix Table 5).
(4) Financial Literacy: Composite of columns 1-3.
(5) Financial Matters at Club Meetings: 3 questions about the extent to which money related matters are discussed in respondent's
youth group (see Appendix Table 6).
(6) Financial Planning: 4 questions about whether a respondent keeps track of their monetary expenses or makes plans for using
money they receive (see Appendix Table 7).
(7) Time Discounting: 4 real-stakes choices between money now and money in the future (see Appendix Table 8).
(8) Self Control: 3 qualitative questions re: procrastination and spending money too quickly or without thinking, and two measures
of time-inconsistency based on the real-stakes discounting questions (see Appendix Table 9).
(9) Risk Tolerance: based on 7 real-stakes choices (three between two lotteries, one between a risky and an ambiguous lottery,
three between a certain option and a lottery), and one lifetime income gamble hypothetical question (see Appendix Table 10).
(10) Shock Perceptions: 2 questions about whether the respondent thinks they are likely to be effected by a negative shock in the
next 3 or 6 months (see Appendix Table 11).
(11) Trust: 14 standard hypothetical questions about trust in financial institutions and in other people (see Appendix Table 12).
(12) Altruism: one qualitative question and three real-stakes choices in standard social preference elicitations (see Appendix Table
13)
(13) Financial Independence: one question being financially supported by others, and five questions on financial decision making
power/autonomy (see Appendix Table 14).



                                                                  31
                                       Table 3: Treatment Effects on Savings in the Group Account: Administrative Data
                                                      Sample Frame: Account Treatment Groups Only
                                             (1)                   (2)                 (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)
                                         Number of
                                                                Recorded                         Balance: 95%      Balance: 99%      Balance: 95%      Balance: 99%
                                       Members Who                              Balance ('000
                                 LHS:                          Making any                        Winsor ('000      Winsor ('000       Trim ('000        Trim ('000
                                       Made Deposits                               UGX)
                                                                 Deposit                            UGX)               UGX)             UGX)              UGX)
                                          per Club
Panel A: Administrative Data with Depositors Only
Account + Education                        2.610*                                  -0.395           4.577**            6.775*           3.481**           5.292**
(omitted = Account Only)                   (1.418)                                (11.289)          (2.003)            (3.978)          (1.675)           (2.479)
Mean of Account Only Treatment                  3.767                              15.291            7.625              9.695            5.986             8.741
Observations                                     120                                544               544                544              518               539

Panel B: Administrative Data with Zeros Imputed
Account + Education                                                0.073             1.213            0.645**          1.238**            0.107           1.054**
(omitted = Account Only)                                          (0.047)           (1.018)            (0.289)         (0.534)           (0.125)          (0.447)
Mean of Account Only Treatment                                     0.103             1.606              0.441           0.736             0.260            0.489
Observations                                                       3775               3775              3775             3775             3587              3738
Notes: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. OLS intent-to-treat estimates, with standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the unit of
randomization (the youth club). Sample for Panel A contains only those respondents from the Account Only and Account + Education treatments who were listed in the
ledger as depositing money into the group's account. Sample for Panel B includes the individuals from Panel A plus added zero value observations for the number of
members reported in each relevant club. Each column reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the
treatment variable listed in the row headings (account only is omitted), the stratification variables for randomization (not shown in table): average savings per club
member at time of baseline, and region. Balances are measured in a single snapshot taken in July 2011 to match the timing of the endline survey as closely as possible.
Except for Column 1, observations are at the individual level. The exchange rate between Ugandan Shillings and USD during summer 2011 was approximately 2500 to
1.




                                                                                  32
                 Table 4: Treatment Effects on Financial Assets and Liabilities ('000 UGX): Self-Report from Survey
                                            (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                        Total number
                                        Any Money                                            Total Savings: Total Savings:    Total Savings:
                               LHS:                       of Savings        Total Savings
                                          Saved                                             topcode top 5% topcode top 1%      drop top 1%
                                                         Instruments
Account Only                               0.008           0.098*              52.780           24.329          48.754            22.788
                                          (0.023)          (0.055)            (55.161)         (16.788)        (37.858)          (26.348)
Education Only                             0.022          0.147**            127.949**        48.663***       101.844**          56.611*
                                          (0.020)          (0.059)            (61.957)         (17.873)        (41.572)          (30.023)
Account + Education                       0.042**         0.148***             17.834         39.592**          47.354           52.271*
                                          (0.019)          (0.057)            (46.047)         (17.254)        (34.637)          (27.937)
Controls for Baseline Values                Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
N baseline miss val                          0                0                 4.000            4.000           4.000             0.000
Observations                               2680             2680                2678             2678            2678              2647
Control Mean                               0.839            1.276             247.094          162.941         221.940           185.740
Std. Dev                                   0.368            0.876             867.992          296.602         606.003           438.797
F-test (p-value): Acct = Acct + Ed      2.47 (0.12)      0.89 (0.35)         0.63 (0.43)      0.87 (0.35)     0.00 (0.97)       1.54 (0.22)
F-test (p-value): Ed = Acct + Ed        1.31 (0.25)      0.00 (0.98)         4.64 (0.03)      0.27 (0.60)     2.27 (0.13)       0.03 (0.87)
F-test (p-value): Acct = Ed             0.34 (0.56)      0.81 (0.37)         1.55 (0.21)      2.09 (0.15)     1.83 (0.18)       1.74 (0.19)
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero               0.143            0.142               0.145            0.145           0.145             0.146
Notes: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. OLS intent-to-treat estimates, with standard errors in parenthesis,
clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Sample contains 2680 respondents present for both the baseline and followup
surveys. Each column reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment
variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent outcome variable if available
(with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization (not shown in table): average
savings per club member at time of baseline, and region. The exchange rate between Ugandan Shillings and USD during summer 2011 was
approximately 2500 to 1.




                                                                       33
                   Table 4 (cont): Treatment Effects on Financial Assets and Liabilities: Self-Report from Survey
      (7)           (8)           (9)            (10)            (11)           (12)                             (13)               (14)
               # of Times                                                                                      Wealth             Wealth
Borrowed Any                Total Amount    Total Amount   Total Amount
               Borrowed                                                  Total Borrowed:                     Compared to        Compared to
Money (past 6               Borrowed (past   Borrowed:      Borrowed:
              Money (past 6                                               drop top 1%                        Community:         Community:
   months)                    6 months)    topcode top 5% topcode top 1%
                months)                                                                                        Current             Future
    -0.043         0.002        21.763          -1.783         -5.832         -3.711                            0.139              0.088
   (0.027)       (0.053)       (29.271)        (4.544)       (10.160)        (7.832)                           (0.124)            (0.134)
    -0.042        -0.041         6.971          -1.025          4.552         -6.065                            0.127              -0.006
   (0.026)       (0.052)       (12.935)        (4.092)       (10.351)        (7.284)                           (0.126)            (0.136)
    -0.034        -0.020        22.883          2.346           2.523         -4.156                           0.276**           0.342***
   (0.030)       (0.055)       (18.349)        (4.585)        (9.888)        (7.077)                           (0.120)            (0.129)
     Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                              Yes                Yes
    3.000          0.000         0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000                               0                  0
     2680          2680          2678            2678           2678           2648                             2680                2680
    0.522          0.758        63.387         37.377          62.604         49.751                            3.854              7.307
    0.500          0.905       203.572         77.762         197.020        143.167                            2.002              2.113
  0.08 (0.78)     0.17 (0.68)      0.00 (0.97)        0.75 (0.39)        0.67 (0.42)       0.00 (0.95)        1.16 (0.28)        3.67 (0.06)
  0.07 (0.79)     0.14 (0.71)      0.56 (0.45)        0.61 (0.44)        0.04 (0.84)       0.07 (0.78)        1.32 (0.25)        6.80 (0.01)
  0.00 (0.97)     0.71 (0.40)      0.23 (0.63)        0.03 (0.86)        1.00 (0.32)       0.10 (0.76)        0.01 (0.92)        0.46 (0.50)
     0.507           0.504            0.506              0.506              0.506             0.511
Total savings is a snapshot of total financial assets held across all different types of instruments (the survey prompted for 12 different
types, including "pocket").
Total amount borrowed is measured as a flow over the previous six months and elicited by prompting for loans from different types of
lenders, and their originated loan amounts.

LHS variables in Cols (13) and (14) are elicited using 10-rung ladders, with higher rungs indicating higher wealth.




                                                                      34
                                                          Table 5: Treatment Effects on Income ('000 UGX)
                                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)

                                                       Total Earnings: Total Earnings: Total Earnings:              Farm Earnings: Farm Earnings: Farm Earnings:
                                      Total Earnings
                               LHS:                     Winsor Top      Winsor Top        Top 1%       Farm Earnings Winsor Top     Winsor Top       Top 1%
                                       Last 90 Days
                                                             5%              1%           Dropped                        5%             1%           Dropped

Account Only                              30.693         23.385*         31.404**        36.985**          22.510           7.266          14.244*           5.636
                                         (33.472)        (12.749)        (15.911)         (16.507)        (14.221)         (5.501)         (8.092)          (6.257)
Education Only                            23.725         24.254*         29.608*         45.012***         10.435           4.875          11.264            4.117
                                         (30.702)        (13.112)        (16.389)         (16.230)         (7.905)         (4.817)         (7.326)          (5.671)
Account + Education                       34.143         27.188**        37.862**        53.293***          5.586           4.232          10.156            6.498
                                         (35.197)        (12.784)        (16.716)         (17.998)         (7.983)         (5.165)         (7.513)          (6.206)
Controls for Baseline Values                Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             No              No               Yes
N baseline miss val                        0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
Observations                               2679            2679            2679             2652            2680            2680            2680             2652
Control Mean                             232.824         180.191         199.902          184.098          43.364          35.717          42.745           38.251
F-test (p-value): Acct = Acct + Ed      0.01 (0.92)      0.10 (0.75)    0.15 (0.70)      0.85 (0.36)     1.29 (0.26)      0.24 (0.63)     0.19 (0.66)     0.01 (0.91)
F-test (p-value): Ed = Acct + Ed        0.12 (0.73)      0.06 (0.81)    0.22 (0.64)      0.22 (0.64)     0.22 (0.64)      0.01 (0.91)     0.02 (0.90)     0.12 (0.73)
F-test (p-value): Acct = Ed             0.06 (0.80)      0.01 (0.94)    0.01 (0.91)      0.25 (0.62)     0.61 (0.43)      0.16 (0.69)     0.10 (0.75)     0.05 (0.83)
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero               0.119            0.119          0.119            0.121           0.544            0.544           0.544           0.549
Notes: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. OLS intent-to-treat estimates, with standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the unit of
randomization (the youth club). Sample contains 2680 respondents present for both the baseline and followup surveys. Each column reports results for a single OLS
regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the
baseline value of the dependent outcome variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization
(not shown in table): average savings per club member at time of baseline, and region. The exchange rate between Ugandan Shillings and USD during summer 2011 was
approximately 2500 to 1.
The survey elicits earnings by asking about working for money, then asking for a list of earning activities, and then asking for details on each activity, including the
amount earned in the past 90 days. See the Data Appendix for details.




                                                                                  35
                                                 Table 5 (cont): Treatment Effects on Income
   (9)           (10)          (11)           (12)           (13)                 (14)         (15)          (16)          (17)          (18)
                                                                              Business      Business
               Informal      Informal                                                                      Business
                                            Informal       Busines           Ownership     Ownership                      Lent Any       Interest
 Informal      Earnings:     Earnings:                                                                    Ownership
                                          Earnings: Top   Ownership           Earnings:     Earnings:                    Money Out Received from
 Earnings     Winsor Top    Winsor Top                                                                   Earnings: Top
                                          1% Dropped       Earnings          Winsor Top    Winsor Top                  (last 6 months) a Borrower
                  5%            1%                                                                       1% Dropped
                                                                                   5%           1%
  -10.368        7.488         4.629          7.846          8.628               4.333        8.752         8.439         -0.004         1.032
 (19.237)       (6.707)      (10.649)        (8.438)       (16.426)            (5.021)       (7.872)       (6.369)       (0.024)       (1.233)
    0.479      15.695**       15.846        18.138**        -1.414              -1.213        0.191         2.458         -0.008        -0.516
 (18.050)       (7.314)      (11.666)        (8.657)       (16.726)            (4.742)       (7.686)       (6.025)       (0.024)       (0.870)
    0.270      12.308*        13.715         14.159         -0.359               3.816        8.355         6.886        0.045*          2.917
 (18.066)       (7.022)      (11.750)        (8.732)       (14.880)            (4.993)       (8.059)       (6.279)       (0.025)       (3.024)
     Yes          No            No             Yes            Yes                  No           No           Yes            Yes           No
    0.000        0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000               0.000        0.000         0.000          5.000         0.000
    2680         2680          2680           2652           2680                2680         2680          2649           2680          2680
   81.120       46.367        60.631         49.892         51.522             28.749        38.336        29.242          0.709         2.069
0.71 (0.40)   0.57 (0.45)   0.86 (0.35)    0.63 (0.43)    0.52 (0.47)        0.01 (0.92)   0.00 (0.96)    0.06 (0.81)   3.32 (0.07)   0.39 (0.54)
0.00 (0.99)   0.24 (0.63)   0.04 (0.85)    0.23 (0.63)    0.01 (0.93)        1.19 (0.28)   1.12 (0.29)    0.49 (0.49)   4.13 (0.04)   1.25 (0.26)
0.73 (0.39)   1.54 (0.22)   1.36 (0.24)    1.77 (0.18)    0.47 (0.49)        1.44 (0.23)   1.31 (0.25)    0.88 (0.35)   0.02 (0.88)   1.83 (0.18)
   0.566         0.566         0.566          0.572          0.774              0.774         0.774          0.783         0.284         0.890




                                                                        36
                                                             Table 6: Treatment Effects on Activities
                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                                Activities:                         Activities:
                                          Total Number of Days Worked if                          Activies:                                             Currently
                                                                                Farming or                           Formal            Business
                                     LHS: Days Worked in    Only Did 1                            Informal                                              Attending
                                                                                Livestock                           (salaried)        Ownership
                                              past 90        Activity                            Employment                                              School
                                                                                 Rearing                           Employment
Account Only                                    1.371            0.415            0.011              -0.001           -0.004             0.027            -0.000
                                               (1.974)          (2.096)          (0.031)            (0.019)          (0.013)            (0.024)          (0.023)
Education Only                                  1.565            0.564            -0.039             0.022            0.018              0.003            -0.018
                                               (1.999)          (2.109)          (0.031)            (0.019)          (0.015)            (0.024)          (0.023)
Account + Education                             2.319            0.181            0.005              0.018            -0.001             0.019            0.014
                                               (1.941)          (2.156)          (0.034)            (0.018)          (0.014)            (0.025)          (0.023)
Controls for Baseline Values                     Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes
N baseline miss val                               0                0                 0                  0                0                 0                 0
Observations                                    2680             1526              2680               2680             2680              2680              2675
Control Mean                                   41.058           30.080            0.462              0.875            0.115              0.218            0.355
F-test (p-value): Acct = Acct + Ed           0.24 (0.63)       0.01 (0.91)      0.03 (0.87)       0.99 (0.32)       0.06 (0.81)       0.10 (0.76)       0.42 (0.52)
F-test (p-value): Ed = Acct + Ed             0.15 (0.70)       0.03 (0.86)      1.63 (0.20)       0.04 (0.84)       1.56 (0.21)       0.38 (0.54)       2.24 (0.14)
F-test (p-value): Acct = Ed                  0.01 (0.92)       0.01 (0.94)      2.38 (0.12)       1.25 (0.26)       2.38 (0.12)       0.93 (0.34)       0.70 (0.40)
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                    0.119             0.207            0.534             0.114             0.880             0.770             0.652
Notes: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. OLS intent-to-treat estimates, with standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the unit of
randomization (the youth club). Sample contains 2680 respondents present for both the baseline and followup surveys. Each column reports results for a single OLS
regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the
baseline value of the dependent outcome variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for
randomization (not shown in table): average savings per club member at time of baseline, and region.

Outcomes:
(1) We sum the number of days worked for each activity, and topcode at 90 because some respondents worked partial days on several activities.
(3)-(6) take the value of 1 if respondent reports income from that activity during the past 90 days, and 0 otherwise.
(4): Informal activies include Build/Construction, Quarrying, Salon, Boda/Taxi driving, Work in other HH, Work in own HH, Small Scale Vocation,
Non-Salary (Wage) Church, Other Wage employ, Other, Brewing Alcohol, Fetching Water, Collecting Firewood, Computer Related, Fishing,
Music, Nursing, Drama, Sports, Sewing, Rent

                                                                                 37
                                                        Table 7: Treatment Effects on Expenditures ('000 UGX)
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)            (6) (7)          (8)                         (9)
                                                                                                                      Own Money                                Own Money
                                                                                                                                   Own Money
                                                    Money Spent               # of Meals w/              # of People   Spent on                                 Spent on
                                     Money Spent                   1=Owns                   Airtime Used                            Spent on
                                LHS:                 on Snacks                 Meat last 7               you Support    Health                                  Business
                                     in Last 7 days              mobile phone                last 7 days                           School Fees
                                                    Last 7 days                    days                  Financially Related Exps.                             Investment
                                                                                                                                   last 6 mths
                                                                                                                      last 6 mths                              last 6 mths
Account Only                              -0.717        -0.309       -0.031       0.172         0.067        0.210      43.380       12.814                       -8.111
                                         (5.259)       (0.882)      (0.025)      (0.131)       (0.270)      (0.164)    (50.474)     (16.273)                    (54.153)
Education Only                            0.086         -0.561       0.011       0.193*         0.091        0.268      -0.986       11.773                      -13.782
                                         (5.398)       (0.786)      (0.026)      (0.114)       (0.246)      (0.179)    (13.460)     (14.739)                    (51.090)
Account + Education                       -0.249        -0.012       0.001       0.231*         0.226        0.089      -9.766       10.106                      -24.914
                                         (4.886)       (0.899)      (0.026)      (0.123)       (0.279)      (0.167)    (13.483)     (14.119)                    (49.444)
Controls for Baseline Values               Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes                         Yes
N baseline miss val                       0.000       179.000        0.000        0.000         3.000        5.000       2.000        0.000                       0.000
Observations                               2678          2627         2679         2679         2679         2680        2679         2679                         2673
Control Mean                             31.768         3.517        0.662        1.942         2.090        2.333      62.482       24.322                      141.295
F-test (p-value): Acct = Acct + Ed     0.02 (0.90)   0.27 (0.60)  2.11 (0.15)  0.20 (0.65)   0.36 (0.55)  0.48 (0.49) 1.15 (0.28)  0.03 (0.87)                  0.26 (0.61)
F-test (p-value): Ed = Acct + Ed       0.01 (0.93)   1.21 (0.27)  0.17 (0.68)  0.11 (0.74)   0.33 (0.56)  0.90 (0.34) 1.25 (0.26)  0.01 (0.92)                  0.14 (0.71)
F-test (p-value): Acct = Ed            0.03 (0.85)   0.34 (0.56)  3.49 (0.06)  0.03 (0.86)   0.01 (0.91)  0.10 (0.76) 0.81 (0.37)  0.00 (0.95)                  0.02 (0.88)
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero              0.020         0.288        0.341        0.236         0.240        0.380       0.072        0.974                        0.518
Notes: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. OLS intent-to-treat estimates, with standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the unit of
randomization (the youth club). Sample contains 2680 respondents present for both the baseline and followup surveys. Each column reports results for a single OLS
regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline
value of the dependent outcome variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization (not shown
in table): average savings per club member at time of baseline, and region. The exchange rate between Ugandan Shillings and USD during summer 2011 was approximately
2500 to 1.
Outcomes:
(1) "How much money did you spend in the last 7 days on everything?" [PROBE - ENCOURAGE RESPONDENT TO BE ACCURATE, BUT ALLOW ESTIMATION]
(4) "Meat" includes chicken.
(5) We estimate airtime value by eliciting minutes used, and multiplying that by the market price.
(6) "How many people do you give financial support to regularly? This could include children or adults, and people who live with you or people outside of your home."
(9) "How much money total did you spend on investments in business in order to try to make profits in the past 6 months? It is okay to estimate."
                                                                                     38
