NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BEHAVIORALIST AS NUTRITIONIST:
LEVERAGING BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS TO IMPROVE CHILD FOOD CHOICE AND CONSUMPTION
John A. List
Anya Savikhin Samek
Working Paper 20132
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20132

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We thank the Kenneth and Anne Griffin Foundation for generous funding of this study. We thank
the Greater Chicago Food Depository for assistance with implementation, including sourcing, preparing
and delivery of food. We thank Phuong Ta, Joseph Seidel, Tristin Ganter, Tina Huang and Amanda
Chuan for excellent research assistance. We thank Joseph Price, Sally Sadoff and David Herberich
for helpful comments. We thank seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania, the University
of California-San Diego and the University of Wisconsin-Madison for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John A. List and Anya Savikhin Samek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Behavioralist as Nutritionist: Leveraging Behavioral Economics To Improve Child Food
Choice and Consumption
John A. List and Anya Savikhin Samek
NBER Working Paper No. 20132
May 2014
JEL No. C93,I15
ABSTRACT
Childhood obesity has reached epidemic proportions in the U.S., with now almost a third of children
ages 2-19 deemed overweight or obese. In this study, we leverage recent findings from behavioral
economics to explore new approaches to tackling one aspect of childhood obesity: food choice and
consumption. Using a field experiment where we include more than 1,500 children, we report several
key insights. First, we find that individual incentives can have large influences: in the control, only
17% of children prefer the healthy snack, whereas the introduction of small incentives increases take-up
of the healthy snack to roughly 75%, more than a four-fold increase. There is some evidence that the
effects continue after the treatment period, consistent with a model of habit formation. Second, we
find little evidence that the framing of incentives (loss versus gain) matters. While incentives work,
we find that educational messaging alone has little influence on food choice. Yet, we do observe an
important interaction effect between messaging and incentives: together they provide an important
influence on food choice. For policymakers, our findings show the power of using incentives to combat
childhood obesity. For academics, our approach opens up an interesting combination of theory and
experiment that can lead to a better understanding of theories that explain healthy decisions and what
incentives can influence them.

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
Anya Savikhin Samek
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1300 Linden Drive
Madison, WI 53706
anyasamek@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Obesity is a major public health concern, leading to many chronic conditions such as high
blood pressure, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and certain cancers (Pi-Sunyer, 1993). A major
contributor to obesity is the decision by individuals to consume high quantities of low-nutrient,
high-calorie foods and beverages habitually. While many interventions to improve nutrition have
been geared towards adults, there is a growing need to address nutritional decision-making
among children and adolescents. This is because 17% of the nation’s youth have body mass
indices (BMIs) at or above the recommended 95th percentile (National Institutes of Health, 1998;
Ogden et al., 2002, 2010).

Lack of proper nourishment, such as not meeting the RDA

requirements for fruits and vegetables, affects health and hampers growth among children and
can contribute to lack of concentration and energy, resulting in poor performance in school
(Whitaker et al., 2006; Jyoti et al., 2005; Weinreb et al., 2002). Importantly, children from lowincome families are at higher risk (Cole et al., 2008; Neumark-Sztainer et al., 1996).1
Children’s health and weight are closely linked to dietary behavior. American children
consume less than 20% of the recommended amount of whole grains and just 10% of the
recommended amount of dark green and orange vegetables and legumes (Just et al., 2007). The
tendency to consume an unhealthy diet is learned at an early age and persists throughout
adulthood, as individuals are more likely to eat familiar foods (Smith and Tasnadi, 2007). These
habits are often learned in the home, which may create a cycle of unhealthy behaviors (De
Bourdeaudhuij, 1997; Campbell et al., 2007; Dowda et al., 2001).
Academics have begun to take important steps in understanding the causes and
consequences of obesity. For example, interventions for adults by the U.S. Department of
1

Lower-income students have less food security and are more likely to be overweight or obese, so targeting this
socioeconomic group is of vital import (Casey et al., 2001; Ogden et al., 2006).

2

Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services have included providing
advice about healthy choices and requiring labeling of foods (Welsh et al., 1993). Likewise,
interventions that include nutritional education for children have shown some progress in terms
of increases in fruit and vegetable consumption (Reynolds et al., 2000; Perry et al., 1998; Nicklas
et al., 1998).2 Interestingly, even though behavioral economics has touched nearly every field in
economics, one area where behavioral economics has made fewer inroads is in food choice. Yet,
food choice is an important area where the insights gained from behavioral economics might
produce the highest social benefits.
In this study, we conduct a large-scale field experiment to explore how behavioral
economics can be leveraged to affect child food choice. Our experiment revolves around one
major behavioral tenet: some people have reference-dependent preferences, wherein carriers of
utility are changes relative to a neutral reference point rather than absolute levels. In certain
cases, such people will exhibit behavior consistent with a notion of loss aversion, an insight
gained from Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory. The field experiment
methodology is ideal in this setting because it allows us to infer the causal effects of treatment
(see, for example, other field experiments in health economics; Okeke et al., 2009).
We conducted our field experiment in after school programs in the Chicago area, called
‘Kids Cafes’, which provide children from low-income families a USDA-sponsored free meal
and activities. In the field experiment, children were given a choice between a dried fruit cup
(healthier choice) and a cookie (less healthy choice). Children were allowed to select only one
item. We randomly assigned Kids Cafe sites to either receive a gain-frame incentive (in which
the child received a small prize if and only if he/she selected and fully consumed a fruit cup), a
2

These studies included featuring nutrition education as a primary component, and employed the National Cancer
Institute’s (NCI) “5 a Day for Better Health” initiative. Our study, on the other hand, uses a short educational
message.

3

loss-frame incentive (in which the child received a small prize but then it was taken away if
he/she did not select and consume a fruit cup), a 3-minute educational message delivered by the
experimenter about the benefit of fruits versus cookies, or a loss-frame incentive combined with
the educational message. In total, 1,614 individual children and adolescents across 24 sites
participated in the experiment, which lasted several weeks. We also observe children after
conclusion of the treatment period to explore whether the incentives or educational messages had
an effect after we removed the treatment.
We find several interesting insights. First, in the absence of incentives, about 17% of
students choose the healthy snack. Yet, once an incentive is introduced, students are drawn to
the healthy choice at a rate of nearly 80%. This more than four-fold increase is achieved with
small incentives. Importantly, we find little evidence that a loss frame works better than a gain
frame. Indeed, if anything we find some evidence that after treatment children in the gain
treatment choose the healthier option than those in the loss treatment.
Second, the educational message has little influence on food choice: even after providing
information about the healthy choice, children are not persuaded to make the switch from cookie
to fruit.

This is surprising, since our educational message was crafted using the USDA

MyPyramid for Kids3 as a guide. Yet, what does work quite effectively is the combination of the
educational messaging and loss-based incentives. In this case, not only do many children choose
the healthy snack, but they ultimately consume the snack. Whereas in the education message
treatment only 60% of the children who choose the fruit ultimately consume it, over 93% of
children who received both the education message and incentive who choose the fruit consume
it. Importantly, this effect spills-over to the post treatment period: upon returning a week after

3

Information about MyPyramid is available here: http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/MyPyramidDevelopment.htm. Note
that MyPlate replaced MyPyramid as the official USDA guide in June 2011, after our data collection had concluded.

4

the experiment is completed, we find that children in the control group continue to choose the
unhealthy snack at a low rate—around 12%. Yet, for those in the treatment that combines
incentives and educational messaging, nearly twice as many children choose the healthy choice.
These results suggest that there could be an important place for educational messages,
and that they have their greatest impact when combined with a small individual incentive.
Finally, the findings have important implications for not only immediate choice, but show that
longer-term impacts can be achieved with the correct mix of pecuniary and non-pecuniary
incentives.

Contrary to wide-spread concern that incentives may crowd out the intrinsic

motivation to choose healthy foods, we do not find that incentives have a detrimental effect on
food choice—rather, we find the opposite.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows.
underlying theoretical framework that motivates our design.

Section 2 summarizes the
Section 3 describes the

experimental design and implementation. Section 4 summarizes the main results. Section 5
concludes.

2. Background
Our experiment involves an exploration of both non-pecuniary and pecuniary incentives.
While the effect of information and standard pecuniary incentives on behaviors have been
modeled for decades, the theory underlying why there might be behavioral differences between a
standard (gain) incentive and “loss” incentive is less mainstream. Pioneered by Tversky and
Kahneman’s riskless framework (1991), the idea that losses and gains can yield different
behaviors in our setting has its roots in prospect theory. Prospect theory conjectures that a value
function exists that is (i) measured over deviations from a reference point assessed over some
5

narrowly bracketed timeframe, (ii) convex for losses and concave for gains, and (iii) initially
steeper for losses than for gains (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991). For our purposes, consider a
representative agent who derives benefits and costs as follows:
V(c, cr) = u(c) + R(c, cr)
Where u is utility over consumption and r is the value function of prospect theory. Let u(.) be
increasing and concave in c. We define utility derived in relation to a reference point, R(.):

  
Where r is increasing and concave and s is increasing and convex. Estimates of the ratio of r and
s (when linearity is assumed) have found

(see Tversky and Kahneman, 1991).

In the spirit of this finding, if children are loss-averse, then the negative utility they receive from
a loss of x is greater in magnitude than the positive utility they receive from a gain of x for any
positive x. This simple formulation provides the basis of our most novel intervention.
It is important to recognize that even though such a behavioral insight has not been taken
to food choice and consumption, it has been tried in other areas. For instance, studies in the area
of worker productivity (Hossain and List, 2012), teacher performance (Fryer et al., 2012), and
student performance in the classroom (Levitt et al., 2012) have all attempted to use loss framing
to induce greater effort in field experiments.
In addition, many other potentially impactful interventions have been explored in this
important area. For instance, messaging has been an important point of interest. Simple verbal
prompts have been successfully used to encourage children to choose healthier meals. When
cafeteria workers asked children whether they would like a fruit, the number of children
consuming fruit increased significantly (Schwartz, 2007; Perry, 2004).

6

Likewise, standard incentives have been explored.

One particularly interesting

concurrent study is due to Just and Price (2011), who explore the impact of small prizes or 25cent rewards on children’s choices in the school cafeteria, and find that an incentive increases the
fraction of children choosing a healthy fruit or vegetable side item by 80%. Wasting of food is
also reduced by 43%. The observed effects were greater at schools with a larger fraction of lowincome children.
Incentives have also proved to be effective in changing health prevention related behavior
in adults. A series of related novel studies that explore the effect of incentives on health-related
behaviors have also been aimed at adults. Incentives have been shown to be effective for weight
loss (Cawley and Price, 2011, 2013; Volpp et al., 2008), smoking cessation (Volpp et al., 2009),
and compliance with healthy preventive behaviors (Malotte et al., 2008).
Recent concerns have been raised about the long-term impact of extrinsic incentives Gneezy at al. (2011) suggest that in some contexts, incentives may crowd out intrinsic
motivation, and literature in psychology is concerned with potential negative ‘rebound effects’
(Lepper et al., 1973). More work is needed to understand the long-term impact of incentives, but
there is some preliminary evidence that the long-term impact could be positive in the health
domain. For example, Charness and Gneezy (2009) found that adults given incentives to attend a
gym continued attending the gym even after incentives were removed.
Our framework takes the literature in a new direction by using behavioral economics to
guide our treatment set. In doing so, we simultaneously explore the effect of messaging and the
effect of our treatment after the intervention concludes. This permits us a glimpse of whether
habit formation might play a role in food choice. Our study includes both urban and suburban
neighborhoods, with a particular focus on how the incentives impact children and adolescents

7

ages 6-18. Importantly, our students come from households with below average earnings.

3. Experimental Setup & Design
3.1 Experimental Procedures
After eating the meal, children approached the experiment table and were given the
choice of a dried fruit cup or a cookie. Each cookie was individually presented on a napkin on a
tray full of cookies, and the dried fruit was similarly presented in small plastic cups. Both options
were available at all times. Children could either choose one fruit or one cookie, were instructed
not to share the fruit or cookie and were asked to eat it in the cafeteria. The experimenter read a
standard message about the choice and then read a message about the incentive or education,
depending on treatment (see Appendix). We recorded the choice that was made, and research
assistants also observed whether or not the food item was consumed.
The experiment was conducted at 24 different after school programs called ‘Kids Cafes’
in the Chicago area, with 1,614 children participating at some point during the study. The
majority of the sites were in the program between February and March of 2011, and the
remaining sites were in the program in the second phase between April and May of 2011. Kids
Cafes are located in community centers, schools and churches in low-income areas of Chicago,
where the majority of children are eligible for the Free or Reduced Lunch Program. At each Kids
Cafe, children eat a meal and may also participate in homework help sessions, art projects, or
other activities, depending on the site. Attendance at most Kids Cafes is not required and
children participate either daily, several times a week, or sporadically. In addition, Kids Cafes
vary in size: the smallest program has 17 regular participants, while the largest program has 287
participants. In the analysis, we use between-subject variation as our major indicator of
8

differences, and within-subject variation for some subjects to investigate change in choices over
time. Over 30 different experimenters assisted in the implementation of the treatments, with 3-8
experimenters in each team. Experimenters were trained by the authors and also evaluated during
the study in order to ensure that the implementation was comparable across sites.
Each site was visited 2 times per week for either 2.5 weeks or 4.5 weeks, depending on
the randomly determined length of study at each site. We varied treatment length to explore habit
formation, but note that habit formation data is available for only a subset of children, because all
children did not participate in the program every day.
Table 1 provides a sample timeline of implementation. On the day before the experiment,
experimenters arrived to acquaint themselves with the center staff, present a schedule for visits to
the center, explain the distribution of the desserts, and request assent forms from the children and
reverse consent forms from the parents. The forms stated that children would be offered choices
of desserts throughout the study, that their choices would be recorded, and that they may have
the opportunity to receive prizes or educational messaging as part of the study. 4 Children who
had a completed assent on file, and no form declining consent from the parent, participated in the
experiment. Most students assented either on the day of assent or the following day when the
dessert was offered, while most parents did not decline to consent, so that only 12, or less than
1%, of Kids Cafe participating children are not in the data.5

[ TABLE 1: TIMELINE OF IMPLEMENTATION. ABOUT HERE]

4

In this spirit, our field experiment should be considered a framed field experiment in the parlance of Harrison and
List (2004).
5
Note that children who assented but whose parents declined to consent still received a fruit or a cookie during the
experiment but did not enter into the data collection process. Children who did not assent but whose parents
consented, or children who did not have assent or consent on file, did not participate in any part of the experiment.

9

The first day of the experiment involved a baseline treatment in which all children
received the choice of fruit or cookie and results were recorded. The next 1 or 5 days (depending
on length of assigned treatment) consisted of treatment days, in which children made the choice
of fruit or cookie and also either continued in the baseline treatment or received an incentive or
educational message, as described in Section 3.3. The last 2-3 days consisted of additional
baseline treatments.
Table 2 provides a list of the fruit and cookie options that were available throughout the
study. In general, we alternated between three different cookies and two different dried fruit
options. The choice of cookie and fruit for delivery was dependent on availability and was
provided by the Greater Chicago Food Depository.
[TABLE 2: FRUITS AND COOKIES SERVED. ABOUT HERE]

3.2 Experimental Design
The goal of the experiment was to discover whether gain-framed incentives, loss-framed
incentives, an educational message, or both message and incentive would prompt children to
choose and consume the healthier food item over a less healthy snack. Short and long study
sessions were conducted in order to explore the possibility of habit formation. Table 3
summarizes the treatments, including the total number of unique children who participated
throughout the study, while Table 4 provides a snapshot of the number of children who
participated in Periods 1 and 2. Although we have on average 323 children participating per
treatment, we only have on average 186 and 160 children in each treatment in periods 1 and 2,
respectively. This difference in numbers is due to the high turnover of children at sites on a dayto-day basis.

10

[TABLE 3: SUMMARY OF TREATMENTS. ABOUT HERE]
[TABLE 4: OBSERVATIONS PER DAY. ABOUT HERE]

We conducted one baseline treatment (No Intervention – denoted BASELINE) in which
children continued to receive a choice of cookie or fruit during treatment days.

The key

treatment that we explore following the theory outlined in Section 2 is whether a “gain” or a
“loss” framed incentive is more effective. In “Gain” Incentive Only (denoted GAIN), the child
only chooses a prize if he/she selects and consumes the fruit. In “Loss” Incentive Only (denoted
LOSS), the child first chooses a prize, which is then placed in a clear plastic box and taped shut.
The child can keep the box as he/she goes up to the line to select a fruit or a cookie. If the child
selects a cookie, the child has to forfeit his/her prize, but if he/she chooses the fruit, he/she kept
the prize. Experimenters then take the prize out of the box and give it to the child if they observe
the child eating the fruit cup, or take the prize away if the child chooses not to eat the fruit cup.
In Education (denoted EDU), the experimenter reads a short educational message about the
benefits of fruit and displays the USDA’s MyPyramid for Kids board prior to asking the child to
select a fruit or a cookie. The message does not involve the experimenter explicitly prompting
the child to choose the fruit over the cookie. In Education + “Loss” Incentive (denoted
EDU+LOSS), the experimenter both reads an educational message and conducts the same
procedure for incentive as in LOSS.
The prizes available in the incentive treatments (GAIN, LOSS, EDU+LOSS) are
displayed in Figure 1. Children could select between a number of different items, each worth 50
cents or less, including different colored fruit key chains, pens, wristbands, small rubber ducks,
11

and trophies. All of these items also varied in colors to make sure that children in the “long”
groups continued to value the incentive throughout the experiment (for example, there were 5
different colors of wristbands, so children could ‘collect’ all 5). The educational message was
based on the USDA’s Food Pyramid guidelines for children.6 All treatments were accompanied
by a bulletin board that showcased the different prizes or showcased the food pyramid (or both,
as in EDU+LOSS)
[ FIGURE 1: PHOTO OF GIFT DISPLAY. ABOUT HERE]

4. Results
4.1 Summary
Figures 2a and 2b provide a snapshot of our results for both the long and short treatment
types, respectively. Significant increases in fruit selection occurred on days when an incentive
was offered, raising the proportion of children choosing fruit from 17% to around 80%. In
addition, despite the fact that not all children observed in later periods participated in all days of
treatment, there is evidence that a greater proportion of children consumed fruit following the
end of the incentives in the long treatment type group.

[ FIGURES 2a,b: FRUIT OVER STUDY DAYS. ABOUT HERE]

4.2 Baseline and Treatment Comparison on Selection
Our main comparison is selection of fruit versus cookie between the first day (without
treatment) and the second day (with treatment), pooling both short and long treatments. As
summarized in Figures 2a and 2b, 21% of children selected fruit in period 1, and 16% selected
6

The USDA Food Pyramid can be found at www.mypyramid.gov.

12

fruit in period 2 of BASELINE. There are no statistically significant differences in proportion of
fruit chosen in period 1 across most treatments, but significantly fewer children selected fruit in
EDU+LOSS as compared to the other treatments (Chi squared p-value < 0.10). Randomization is
at the site level, and sites differ by location and activities provided, but our data suggest little
differential selection by treatment. Moreover, the direction of differences for EDU+LOSS
relative to the others might provide us with a lower bound of the potential positive effects of this
treatment in subsequent analysis.
We conducted Chi square tests to compare the proportion of children selecting fruit in
period 2 in each treatment. In period 2, the proportion of children selecting fruit in BASELINE
was 16%. Our GAIN treatment increased the proportion of children selecting fruit to 78%, while
LOSS increased the proportion of children selecting fruit to 76% (p-values < 0.01 for
BASELINE vs. LOSS and BASELINE vs. GAIN). Our EDU treatment did not prove effective,
as the proportion of children selecting fruit in period 2 dropped to 11% (p-value > 0.10 for
BASELINE vs. EDU). Importantly, EDU+LOSS increased the number of children selecting
fruit to 86%, which is significantly higher than BASELINE, EDU, or incentive alone (p-values
<0.01 when comparing BASELINE to EDU+LOSS or to EDU; p-value<0.05 when comparing
EDU+LOSS to LOSS or GAIN).
The comparisons above are conducted using the child’s choice as a unit of observation.
However, we find similar results when using the average choice at the site as a unit of
observation and conducting Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney tests. The proportion of children selecting
fruit in GAIN, LOSS or EDU+LOSS is significantly different from BASELINE (p-value < 0.05
for GAIN and p-values < 0.10 for LOSS and EDU+LOSS). The proportion of children selecting

13

fruit in EDU+LOSS was significantly higher than EDU (p-value <0.05). No significant effects
between EDU+LOSS and LOSS were observed.
We also conducted pair wise comparison tests (sign-rank) for children who were in the
program for both periods. Table 5 displays the change in proportion, between period 1 and
period 2, of children choosing fruit across treatments. There are no statistically significant
changes from period 1 to 2 in BASELINE or EDU (p-values = 0.37 and 0.18, respectively). By
comparison, there is a statistically significant improvement in fruit choice for students in GAIN,
LOSS, and EDU+LOSS (p-values <0.01). These data lead to a first two results:
Result 1: Use of token incentives can induce children to select healthier foods.
Result 2: Education alone does not have a significant effect on food choice, but there is
an important interaction effect between education and loss framed incentives.
[TABLE 5: CHANGE IN PROPORTION. ABOUT HERE]
We also compare the relative effectiveness of our different treatments to test our
theoretical model. Different from theoretical predictions, LOSS did not result in significantly
different proportions of children selecting fruit than GAIN (Chi squared –p-value>0.10).
Together, these two insights lead to our next result:
Result 3: The gain and loss treatment are equally effective in moving children to choose
the healthy option.

4.3 Effects Post-Intervention on Selection
We follow the participants post-intervention to determine whether choices are different
when incentives are removed. Table 6 summarizes the proportion of children choosing fruit
following the treatment for each length (long and short) and treatment type, including all

14

children, even if they participated in only one day of the study. We find significant differences
between the proportion choosing fruit in EDU+LOSS post-treatment (26%) relative to
BASELINE (13%) in the long treatment sessions (Wilcoxon rank-sum p-value < 0.01). This is
the only significant difference we find, as the differences in Post-treatment for LOSS (20%)
relative to BASELINE is not significant at conventional levels (p < .10).7 In the short session
treatments,
In the short session treatments, we find improvements from BASELINE to EDU+LOSS (p-value
< 0.10) but not for any other treatment.8
[TABLE 6: CHOOSING FRUIT FOLLOWING TREATMENT. ABOUT HERE]
These data lead to our next result:
Result 4: Combining education and loss incentives positively affected choice postexperimental treatment, whereas providing education or incentives alone did not have a
significant long-term effect.

4.4 Consumption
Programs providing nutritionally balanced meals have been implemented on a wide scale
(e.g., the USDA’s Free and Reduced Lunch Program, Kids Cafes). While these programs have
been implemented, a direct link from choice of food to consumption cannot be taken for granted.
For example, Just et al. (2013) find that in the lunchroom at school, over 44% of items taken by
students are wasted.9 Our study provides evidence of the link between selection and
consumption, which is another interesting variable for our theory and for policymakers. If
7

We also see a decrease for Education Only treatment with p-value < 0.10.
Wilcoxon ranksum test p-value has a sign in the opposite direction than expected with p-value < 0.10 for Baseline
vs. Education+Loss, p-value 0.00 for Baseline vs. Education, and no significant differences between Baseline and
Loss Incentive alone. There are also no significant differences between Loss Incentive and Education+Loss (p-value
= 0.11) or between Education and Education plus Loss.
9
In Just et al.’s (2011) work, they find waste going down to only 26% when incentives are introduced.
8

15

incentives linked to consumption help to reduce costly food waste, this provides another,
financial motivation for schools and other programs serving food to implement them.
Our experimental administrators were able to observe on average 73% of all consumption
by walking around the room while the dessert was being served, at the level of detail of “ate
BASELINE”, “ate 1/4", “ate 1/2", “ate 3/4" and “ate all.”10 Table 7 describes the amount of data
available for the subsequent analysis, including all days of treatment and baseline observations.
[TABLE 7: OBSERVED DATA. ABOUT HERE]

Figures 3a and 3b provide histograms of consumption amounts for Period 2, while Table
8 provides proportion of consumption data by treatment. Consumption is generally clustered at
the full serving, for both cookies and fruit, with 70%-90% of students consuming the full
amount. The exception is the fruit consumption in BASELINE and EDU – in which almost 20%
of students ate 1/4 or less of their fruit. While consumption is generally high in incentivized
treatments, conditional on choosing fruit, LOSS leads to higher consumption than GAIN, with
96% consumption in LOSS but 90% consumption in GAIN (p-value = 0.10 for overall
comparison, and p-value = 0.06 for those who selected only fruit). Consumption in EDU+LOSS
is similar to that of LOSS alone. It is interesting to see that loss and gain incentives have an
effect at the level of consumption but not selection.
Assuming that children who chose cookies consumed 0 fruit, we calculate average
amount of fruit consumed in Period 2 to be 0.12 servings in BASELINE, 0.06 servings in
EDUCATION, 0.66 servings in GAIN, 0.74 servings in LOSS, and 0.82 servings in
EDU+LOSS. All incentivized treatments have significantly higher consumption of fruit as
compared to EDU and BASELINE (Wilcoxon ranksum p-values < 0.01). We observe significant
10

This is out of 4,773 observations (across all days, sites and participants).

16

differences in amount of fruit consumed between GAIN and EDU+LOSS (Wilcoxon ranksum pvalue = 0.02) but not between GAIN and LOSS or EDU+LOSS and LOSS. Thus, we can
conclude that not just selection, but also consumption of fruit is increased through our token
incentives. This brings us to our last result:
Result 5: Use of token incentives can induce children to consume healthy foods.
[FIGURES 3a.b: CONSUMPTION DETAIL. ABOUT HERE]
[TABLE 8: PROPORTION OF FRUIT/COOKIES CONSUMED. ABOUT HERE]

We define the “rate of waste” as the average proportion of whole servings of items that
were not consumed in each treatment. Rate of waste for our desserts, on average, is only 9% - a
small waste rate in comparison to ~40% waste rates in school lunchrooms. Table 8 provides
waste data by treatment for both types of desserts. Notice that all of our treatments reduce the
rate of waste significantly – while treatment waste rates are around 5%-10%, rate of waste in
baseline is 23% (all pairwise Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney ranksum test p-values < 0.05 for
BASELINE vs. treatments).
[TABLE 9: OVERALL WASTE RATE ABOUT HERE]

5. Conclusion
We conducted a framed field experiment to investigate the relative impact of short,
educational messages and token incentives, which have been shown to encourage positive
behaviors in related settings, on child’s choice to select and consume a dried fruit cup (healthier
option) or cookie (less healthy option). The field experiment was conducted across 24 different
after school programs that regularly serve meals to children ages 7-18 from low-income
households. We randomized children to receive either gain framed incentives, loss framed
incentives, short educational messages, or a certain combination.
17

We find some results that suggest behavioral interventions can affect food consumption
choices. First, at baseline, only 17% of children preferred the fruit. Our incentives, framed both
as gains and losses, significantly increased fruit choice, with nearly 80% of subjects choosing the
healthy snack in the incentive treatments. The educational message was not significantly
different from baseline, except in combination with a loss framed incentive. Importantly, one
week following the intervention, children in the Education+Loss treatment continued to choose
more fruit as compared to children in the other treatments.
Our data suggest that incentives are more effective than a short educational message
alone in encouraging children to select a healthier snack instead of a cookie, but that the
educational message is quite effective when paired with an incentive. Importantly, pairing the
educational message with an incentive results in greater long-term retention of habits that are less
likely to lead to obesity. Combining educational messaging with incentives also affects eating
choices in the long term. These findings have implications for the literature on the benefits of
more in-depth nutritional education targeted towards children, which suggests that gearing
informational interventions towards children may be quite successful (Epstein et al., 1990;
Reynolds et al., 2000; Perry et al., 1998; Nicklas et al., 1998). The positive effects that we
observed suggest that there is promise in pairing incentives with educational interventions of this
type.
Policymakers and organizations interested in improving child food choice behavior may
be concerned with the added cost of incentives. Incidentally, we find that incentives or incentives
combined with education increase the levels of consumption, reducing waste relative to
education alone, and potentially saving the organization money.

18

While immediate incentives are a highly cost effective intervention in the short term,
especially paired with information, it remains an open question whether we could sustain the
impact of these types of incentives if they were applied more broadly. This is important future
research. More generally, we believe this study demonstrates that behavioral economics can
lend powerful insights into our understanding of the health production function and the design of
healthy choice interventions. In addition, using field experiments to explore the rich hypotheses
that behavioral economics provides should become the rule rather than the exception.

6. References
Campbell, K. J., Crawford, D. A., Salmon, J., Carver, A., Garnett, S. P., & Baur, L. A. (2007).
Associations between the home food environment and obesity-promoting Eating
Behaviors in Adolescence. Obesity, 15(3), 719-730.
Casey, P. H., Szeto, K., Lensing, S., Bogle, M., & Weber, J. (2001). Children in foodinsufficient, low-income families: prevalence, health, and nutrition status. Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 155(4), 508-514.
Cawley, J., & Price, J. A. (2011). Outcomes in a program that offers financial rewards for weight
loss. in Economic Aspects of Obesity, eds. Michael Grossman and Nanci H. Mocan. P. 91-126.
___________________ (2013). A case study of a workplace wellness program that offers
financial incentives for weight loss. Journal of Health Economics, 32(5), pp. 794-803.
Charness, G., & Gneezy, U. (2009). Incentives to exercise. Econometrica, 77(3), 909-931.
Cole, N. & Fox, M. K. (2008). Diet quality of American young children by WIC participation
status: data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2004.
Report No. WIC-08-NH. Alexandria, VA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis, Nutrition, and Evaluation.
De Bourdeaudhuij, I. (1997). Family food rules and healthy eating in adolescents. Journal of
Health Psychology, 2(1), 45-56.
Dowda, M., Ainsworth, B. E., Addy, C. L., Saunders, R., & Riner, W. (2001). Environmental
influences, physical activity, and weight status in 8-to 16-year-olds. Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 155(6), 711-717.

19

Epstein, L. H., McCurley, J., Wing, R. R., & Valoski, A. (1990). Five-year follow-up of familybased behavioral treatments for childhood obesity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 58(5), 661-664.
Fryer, Roland, Levitt, Steven, List, John A., and Sadoff, Sally. (2012) “Enhancing the Efficacy
of Teacher Incentives through Loss Aversion: A Field Experiment”, NBER Working Paper No.
18237.
Gneezy, U., Meier, S., Rey-Biel, P. (2011), When and Why incentives (don’t) work to modify
behavior. Economic Perspectives 25(4), 191-210.
Harrison, G. W., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4),
1009-1055.
Hossain, Tanjim and John A. List, (2012) “The Behavioralist Visits the Factory: Increasing
Productivity Using Simple Framing Manipulations,” Management Science, (2012),
forthcoming.
Just, D., & Price, J. (2011). Using incentives to encourage healthy eating in children. Cornell
working paper.
Just, D., Lisa, M., & Brian, W. (2007). Could behavioral economics help improve diet quality for
nutrition assistance program participants? Economic Research Report No. 43, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Jyoti, D., Frongillo, E., & Jones, S. (2005). Food insecurity affects school children’s academic
performance, weight gain, and social skills. Journal of Nutrition. 135, 2831-2839.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47(2), 263-292.
Lepper, M. P., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children's intrinsic interest with
extrinsic reward: A test of the "overjustification" hypothesis. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 28(1), 129-137.
Levitt, Steven D., List, John A., Neckermann, Susanne, Sadoff, Sally, (2012) “The Behavioralist
Goes to School: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Improve Educational
Performance,” NBER w18165.
Malotte, C., Rhodes, K. F., & Mais, K. E. (1998). Tuberculosis screening and compliance with
return for skin test reading among active drug users. American Journal of Public Health,
88(5), 792-796.
National Institutes of Health. (1998). Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation, and
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: The evidence report. Bethesda, MD:
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

20

Neumark-Sztainer, D., Story, M., Resnick, M. D., & Blum, R. W. (1996). Correlates of
inadequate fruit and vegetable consumption among adolescents. Preventive Medicine
25(5):497–505.
Nicklas, T. A., Johnson, C. C., Myers, L., Farris, R. P., & Cunningham, A. (1998). Outcomes of
a high school program to increase fruit and vegetable consumption: Gimme 5 – A Fresh
nutrition concept for students. Journal of School Health, 68(6), 248-253.
Ogden C. L., Carroll M. D., Curtin L. R., McDowell M. A., Tabak C. J., & Flegal K.M. (2006).
Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the United States, 1999-2004. The Journal of the
American Medical Association, 295(13),1549-1555.
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Curtin, L. R., Lamb, M. M., & Flegal, K. M. (2010). Prevalence of
high body mass index in US children and adolescents, 2007-2008. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 303(3), 242-249.
Ogden, C. L., Flegal, K. M., Carroll, M. D., & Johnson, C. L. (2002) Prevalence and trends in
overweight among US children and adolescents, 1999-2000. The Journal of the American
Medical Association, 288(14),1728-1732.
Okeke, E., Adepti, C., Ajenifuja, K. (2012). What is the Price of Prevention? New Evidence
from a Field Experiment. Journal of Health Economics, Vol 32(1), pp. 207-218.
Perry, C. L., Bishop, D. B., Taylor, G. L., Davis, M., Story, M., Gray, C., … Harnack, L. (2004).
A randomized school trial of environmental strategies to encourage fruit and vegetable
consumption among children. Health Education and Behavior, 31(1), 65-76.
Perry, C. L., Bishop, D. B., Taylor, G., Murray, D. M., Mays, R. W., Dudovitz, B. S., Smyth, M.,
& Story, M. (1998). Changing fruit and vegetable consumption among children: the 5-aDay Power Plus program in St. Paul, Minnesota. American Journal of Public Health,
88(4), 603-609.
Pi-Sunyer F. X. (1993). Medical hazards of obesity. Annals of Internal Medicine;119(7),655660.
Reynolds, K. D., Franklin, F. A., Binkley, D., Raczynski, J. M., Harrington, K. F., Kirk, K. A., &
Person, S. (2000). Increasing the fruit and vegetable consumption of fourth-graders:
Results from the High 5 Project. Preventive Medicine, 30(4), 309-319.
Schwartz, M. B. (2007). The influence of a verbal prompt on school lunch fruit consumption: a
pilot study. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 4(6).
Smith, T., & Tasnadi, A. (2007). A theory of natural addiction. Games and Economic Behavior,
59, 316–344.

21

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference-dependent
model. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 1039-1061.
Volpp, K. G., John, L., K., Troxel, A. B., Norton, L., Fassbender, J., Loewenstein, G.(2008).
Financial incentive-based approaches for weight loss: A randomized trial. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 300(22), 2631-2637.
Volpp, K. G., Troxel, A. B., Pauly, M. V., Glick, H. A., Puig, A., Asch, D. A., …AudrainMcGovern, J. (2009). A randomized, controlled trial of financial incentives for smoking
cessation. New England Journal of Medicine, 360(7), 699-709.
Weinreb, L., Wehler, C., Perloff, J., Scott, R., Hosmer, D., Sagor, L., & Gundersen, C. (2002).
Hunger: Its impact on children’s health and mental health. Pediatrics 110, e41.
Welsh, D., Davis, C., & Shaw, A. (1993) USDA’s Food Guide: Background and development.
Miscellaneous Publication No. 1514. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Human Nutrition
Information Service.
Whitaker, R., Phillips, S., & Orzol, S. (2006). Food insecurity and the risks of depression and
anxiety in mothers and behavior problems in their preschool-aged children. Pediatrics,
118 (3), e859–e868.

22

TABLES AND FIGURES
Table 1: Timeline of Implementation – Phase I Example
Sample Date
Day #
Long Treatments
Short Treatments
(X sites)
(X sites)
th
Mon., Feb. 7
0
Assent/Introduction Day
Wed., Feb. 9th
1
Baseline
th
Mon., Feb. 14
2
Treatment (1)
th
Wed., Feb. 16
3
Treatment (2)
Baseline
Wed, Feb. 23rd
4
Treatment (3)
Baseline*
Fri., Feb. 25th
5
Treatment (4)
Baseline
Mon., Feb 28th
6
Treatment (5)
Survey Collection
Wed., March 2nd
7
Baseline
th
Mon., March 7
8
Baseline*
Wed., March 9th
9
Baseline
March 11-18
10
Survey Collection
Note: *Observations not available for Day 4 in Short and Day 8 in Long for most sites, because sites were served a
celery + peanut butter option instead of the usual dried fruit cup in observance of National Nutrition month. Phase
II implementation is same, but on different dates in Spring 2011.

Table 2: Fruits and Cookies Served
Fruits
Cookies
Dried Banana with Acai
Snickerdoodle Cookie
Dried Mango
Lemon Cookie
Brown Sugar Shortbread Cookie
Chocolate Chip Cookie (1 site on one day only)
Note: Fruit and cookie choices alternated between the options listed above, depending on the day.

Table 3: Summary of Treatments: Children Participating Throughout Study
Short Study
Long Study Session
Total
Session
No Intervention – (NONE)
2 sites, N=192– 80/36*
4 sites,
2 Sites P1 only, N=76 ** N=304
“Gain” Incentive Only –
5 sites, N=419–
Not conducted
5 sites,
(GAIN)
32/34/38/232/83
N=428
“Loss” Incentive Only –
5 sites, N=212–
1 site, N=108
6 sites,
(LOSS)
33/35/19/62/63
N=390
Education Only –message
3 sites, N=137–
2 sites, N=333– 287/46
5 sites,
only (EDU)
45/68/24
N=482
Education + “Loss”
1 site, N=45
3 sites, N=168– 63/24/81 4 sites,
Incentive –Incentive +
N=225
message (EDU+LOSS)
Note: This table describes the number of sites and individual students per site who participated in the experiment.
Randomization to treatment was conducted at the site level. Short and Long study sessions differ only in the number
of total treated observations prior to the post-observation period.
*One of the two sites does not have any observations for Period 1, of a delivery mishap.
**2 additional sites were only visited in P1.

23

Table 4: Number of Observations per Day – Periods 1 & 2 Only
Period 1
Period 2
Both Days
No Intervention (NONE)
157
83
65*
“Gain” Incentive Only (GAIN)
221
210
100
“Loss” Incentive Only (LOSS)
191
183
117
Education Only (EDU)
216
184
105
Education + “Loss” Incentive
145
140
111
(EDU+LOSS)
Note: Since we track ID of student, we are able to determine which students attended on both pre-treatment Day and
the treatment day. *In Baseline, for Period 1 we have observations from 5 sites and for Period 2 we have
observations from only 2 of the sites.

Table 5: Change in Proportion of Children Choosing Fruit, Periods 1 to 2
Proportion Proportion
Change in
Number of
in Period 1 in Period 2 Proportion from Observations
Period 1 to 2
No Intervention (NONE)
0.210
0.160
-0.05
62
“Gain” Incentive Only (GAIN)
0.208
0.839
0.63
89
“Loss” Incentive Only (LOSS)
0.195
0.774
0.58
115
Education Only (EDU)
0.180
0.107
-0.07
97
Education + “Loss” Incentive
0.099
0.856
0.76
111
(EDU+LOSS)
Note: This table reports the proportion change from periods 1 to 2, using only students who participated in and
have data on both days 1 and 2 of the experiment, where Period 1 is a baseline day and Period 2 is a treatment day.

Table 6: Proportion of Children Choosing Fruit Post Treatment

Long
Short

NONE
0.12 (0.33)
N=189

EDU
0.068 (0.25)
N=190
0.026 (0.16)
N=156

GAIN
N/A
0.17 (0.38)
N=417

LOSS
0.19 (0.39)
N=143
0.11 (0.31)
N=326

EDU+LOSS
0.26 (0.44)
N=204
0.04 (0.19)
N=52

Note: This table reports the average proportion of children choosing fruit following treatment, including both of the
post-treatment days of observation, and including all children even if they did not attend all treatment days. Number
in parentheses represents the standard deviation.

Table 7: Observed Consumption
Observed w/ detailed amounts
Observed w/o detailed amount
Number of Observations

NONE
74.29%
24.5%
3,007

EDU
72.7%
26.2%
626

GAIN
30%
67.6%
210

LOSS
78.7%
20.5%
380

EDU+LOSS
77.2%
22.4%
545

Note: This table describes the proportion of people for whom we observed detailed consumption data. The
differences in number of observations per treatment are due to the fact that some treatments were conducted only
during the “Short” session (Gain Incentive) while the remaining treatments were conducted in both “Short” and
“Long” versions. Moreover, the team sent to one of the “Gain” sites during the treatment day did not correctly
record amount information.

24

Table 8: Proportion of Fruit and Cookies Consumed
Fruit
N
Cookies
Baseline
81.3%
8
76.2%
“Gain” Incentive Only
89.5%
50
95%
“Loss” Incentive Only
95.7%
98
92.9%
Education Only
65%
11
93.1%
Education + “Loss” Incentive
95.4%
65
80%

N
43
10
28
98
10

Note: This table uses data on proportion consumed, for all students that consumption was recorded, for period 2
only. Consumption is conditional on first selecting fruit or cookie.

Table 9: Overall Waste Rates
Rate of Waste
Baseline
23.0%
“Gain” Incentive Only
9.6%
“Loss” Incentive Only
4.9%
Education Only
9.9%
Education + “Loss” Incentive
6.7%

N
51
60
126
109
75

Note: This table uses data on proportion wasted overall, defined as 1-consume amount, for all students that
consumption was recorded, for period 2 only.

FIGURES
Figure 1: Photo of Gift Display

25

Figure 2a: Proportion of Children Selecting Fruit over Study Days - Long

Propor%on	  Choosing	  Fruit	  

1	  
0.9	  
0.8	  
0.7	  
0.6	  
0.5	  

Educa2on	  

0.4	  

Educa2on+Loss	  

0.3	  

Loss	  Incen2ve	  

0.2	  

Baseline	  

0.1	  
0	  

Period	  and	  Day	  Type	  

Figure 2b: Proportion of Children Selecting Fruit over Study Days – Short
1	  
Propor%on	  Choosing	  Fruit	  

0.9	  
0.8	  
0.7	  

Educa2on	  

0.6	  
0.5	  

Educa2on+Loss	  

0.4	  

Loss	  Incen2ve	  

0.3	  

Gain	  Incen2ve	  

0.2	  

Baseline	  

0.1	  
0	  
1-­‐Baseline	   2-­‐Treated	   3-­‐Baseline	   4-­‐Baseline	   5-­‐Baseline	  
Period	  and	  Day	  Type	  

Note: Figures 2a and 2b present the number of children selecting fruit versus cookies, divided by the total number of
children who made a selection. Data is missing for some treatments in Long – Day 8 and Short – Day 4 because on
that day a fruit/cookie selection was not served at those sites due to a logistical error.

26

Figure 3a: Proportion Consumed when Cookie was Selected, Period 2

Figure 3b: Proportion Consumed when Fruit was Selected, Period 2

Note: Figures 3a and 3b represent the proportion of dessert consumed, conditional on selecting fruit or cookie.
Consumption was recorded at the level of 1/4s. Data is available for 73% of the sample (the sub-set that was
observed by the research assistants).

27

Appendix (For Online Publication Only) – Scripts for the Interventions
USING INCENTIVES TO IMPROVE CHILD FOOD CHOICE
Scripts
Assent
Over the next few weeks, the University of Chicago team will do a study about food choices at
the Kid’s Cafe. Everyone will get some extra desserts. Everyone can also get rewards later for
participating in the study. Please go ahead and write your name (or make a mark) on this sheet if
you want to participate.
Control – Choice (also Observation days for all treatments)
Today at Kids Cafe you will get an additional dessert. You will get the choice of either a dried
fruit cup, or a cookie (hold up display board). You can only choose one dessert. Please come up
to the front to choose a dessert.

!"##"$%#&%'()*!

'$!

.''/+"!

($+"(&,$-+%!

You shouldn’t share your dessert with anyone – these are the rules. If you try to take anyone
else’s dessert, we will write up a report and you will not get to choose desserts the next time – so
please follow the rules!
Non-Financial Incentive - Gain
Today at Kids Cafe you will get an additional dessert. You will get the choice of either a dried
fruit cup, or a cookie (hold up). You can only choose one dessert.
If you choose this dried fruit cup, and eat all of it today, you will also get to pick a gift
immediately after you finish eating the dried fruit cup. You can choose ONE from any of these
gifts: a wristband, a pen, a trophy, a rubber ducky, or a fruit keychain (hold up the prizes).

28

If you chose the dried fruit cup, after you finish eating it, one of us will come over to your table
and you will get a sticker on your nametag. Go up to the front, show us your sticker and you will
get to choose a prize. If you choose the cookie, you will not get a gift. If you choose a dried fruit
cup but you do not eat it all, you will not get a gift.
You shouldn’t share your dessert with anyone – these are the rules. If you try to take anyone
else’s dessert or prize, we will write up a report and you will not get to choose rewards the next
time – so please follow the rules!
Please come up to the front to choose a dessert.

!"#$%&'()*!
(345*%%
"#$$!%&$&'()!

,./$%
"&'#*+,)!

'+!
6+3"&%5.*4-)"/$!

.)&$&+'/0%1+"$&2)/(%%
!"##$%&#&'()$

&+',-*!

Non-Financial Incentive - Loss
Today at Kids Cafe you will get an additional dessert. You will get the choice of either a dried
fruit cup, or a cookie (hold up). You can only choose one dessert.
But first before you choose a dessert, you should come up to the front and pick a gift. You can
choose ONE from any of these gifts: a wristband, a pen, a trophy, a rubber ducky, or a fruit
keychain (hold up the prizes display board). We’ll put the gift into a closed box for you with
your name on it, and you get to take it back to your table.
Then you will go to get a dessert. If you choose a cookie, we’ll take the box back from you when
you get your cookie. If you choose the dried fruit cup, after you finish eating it, one of us will
come over to your table and put a sticker on your nametag. If you got a sticker, you can come up
to the front, we will open up your box for you and you will keep the gift you picked up. If you
don’t finish eating all of the dried fruit cup, when you come up to the front you will have to give
the box back to us and you will not keep the gift you picked.
You shouldn’t share your dessert with anyone – these are the rules. If you try to take anyone
else’s dessert or prize, we will write up a report and you will not get to choose rewards the next
time – so please follow the rules!

29

!"#$%&'()*!
(345*%%
"#$$!%&$&'()!

,./$%
"&'#*+,)!

'+!
6+3"&%5.*4-)"/$!

.)&$&+'/0%1+"$&2)/(%%
!"##$%&#&'()$

&+',-*!

Please come up to the front to choose a gift, and then to choose the dessert.

What kinds of choices are healthy? This is a Food Pyramid (show poster). It reminds us to
make healthy food choices. Do you notice that some of the color stripes are wider than others?
The different sizes remind you to choose foods from the food groups with the widest stripes. You
don’t need to change all your choices overnight, but eating just one new, good thing everyday
will make a big difference!
Let’s look at the food groups. The orange is the grains group – that includes healthy choices
like whole wheat bread and rice. Next is the vegetable group – that includes lots of veggies like
carrots, corn, tomatoes, and more (point). Next is the fruit group – that includes fresh, dried and
canned fruits of all kinds (point). Next is the milk group (point). Next is the meat and beans
group (point).
The fruits group (point to it again) has a pretty wide stripe – that means fruits are a smart choice
for eating strong! Fruits are very important for helping you stay healthy and they give you lots of
energy. Most people don’t get enough fruits everyday – so eating some fruit can go a long way.
What about cookies? Cookies aren’t on the pyramid because they aren’t part of eating strong.
They don’t give us very many nutrients and don’t help us be strong and healthy, like fruits and
veggies do. Small amounts of foods like cake and cookies are fine to eat, but you should only
eat them sometimes, like at parties.
Remember, today you will get the choice of either a dried fruit cup, or a cookie (hold up). You
can only choose one dessert.
You shouldn’t share your dessert with anyone – these are the rules. If you try to take anyone
else’s dessert, we will write up a report and you will not get to choose desserts the next time – so
please follow the rules!

30

Please come up to the front to choose a dessert.

31

