                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               PERMANENT HOMELESSNESS IN AMERICA?




                       Richard B. Freeman


                           Brian Hall




                     Working Paper No. 2013




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2013
                                                  September 1986




                        Permanent Homelessness in America?




                                     ABSTRACT



      This paper seeks to determine the approximate number of homeless persons
 in the U.S., the rate of change in the number, and whether or not the problem
 is likely to be permanent or transitory. It makes particular use of a new 1985
survey of over 500 homeless people in New York City.     It finds:
       (1) that the much maligned 1984 Department of Housing and Urban Affairs
      study was roughly correct in its estimate of 250,000 - 350,000 homeless
      persons for 1983;
      (2) the number of homeless has grown since 1983, despite economic recovery,
      with the number of homeless famflies growing especially rapdij;
      (3) homelessness is a relatively long-term state for tomeless individuals,
      who average 6-8 years of home lessness;
      (4) much of the homeless problem can be attributed to increases in the
      number of the poor in the 1980s and declines or rough constancy in the
      number of low-reri't rental units;
      (5) relatively few homeless individuals receive welfare or general
      assistance money; a large proportion have spent time in jail.
      Overall, the study suggests that economic recovery wll not sove the
problem of homelessness, and that in the absence of changes in the housing
market or in the econorr-c position of the very poor, the U.S. will continue to
be plagued w-th a problem of homelessness for the forseeable future.




R-chard B. Freeman                               Brian Hall
London School of Economics                       NBER
Houghton Street, Aldwych                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
London WC2A 2AE                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
ENGLAND
                      Permanent Homelessness in America?


     Men and women sleeping on park benches, on heating vents, in privately-run

and public shelters. Large numbers of persons seemingly incapable of earning

enough to pay for the very basics of shelter and food. Families filling welfare

hotels that cost hundreds of dollars per week of public moneys, A temporary

blemish on the American scene due to the severe 1982-83 recession? Or a per-

manent scar if social and economic developments do not change dramatically?

     When the reports of homelessness first exploded in the media in the early

1980's the problem seemed at most to be a temporary phenomenon, likely to

diminish rapidly as the economy improved.1 The idea that a sizeable permanent

homeless underclass was beginning to develop in the U.S. seemed hardly

credible -- a nightmare from the Great Depression; a propaganda debating point

by Gorbachev at the Summit -- not the reality of modern day America. While no

one denied the sudden burst in homelessness, which generated the first

Congressional Hearings on the subject since Depression days, even the most basic

facts about the problem -- the numbers of persons, lengths of time spent home-

less, the characteristics of the homeless—-were shrouded in controversy, often

of a partisan nature.2 In 1980 advocates for the homeless claimed that

"approximately one percent of the population, or 2.2 million people, lacked

shelter," a figure that was widely accepted in the media and is still often

cited as approximately correct, although even larger figures are occasionally

mentioned.3 By contrast, the report of the Department of Housing and Urban

Affairs, released on April 23, 1984, estimated numbers 10 to 1596 as large.4

   What is the approximate size of the homeless population in the U.S. today?

Did homelessness decrease with economic recovery, as expected, or is

homelessness becoming an endemic part of the American scene? To answer some of

these questions, we developed a set of questions specifically designed to
                                           2


 illuminate the nature of homelessness in the U.S. and in the summer of 1985 one

of us (Brian) interviewed 516 homeless persons in New York City: 210 shelter

dwellers; 101 heads of homeless families in welfare hotels; and 205 people

living in the street. The interview procedures are described in Appendix A.

When we began the survey many persons close to the homeless problem warned us

that we would have little success in interviewing this hard-to-reach population.

This did not turn out to be the case. Eighty-one percent of the homeless

persons approached agreed to give interviews: most were eager to tell about

their lives; and while we do not have a Census-Bureau-type random sample, we

have one of the largest data set that includes street as well as shelter

residents, Our findings ——   together   with those of numerous studies for various

cities in the country --   go a long way toward answering some of the key

questions regarding the nature of homelessness in the U.S. today.

    Put broadly, our research demonstrates that the perception of homelessness

as a temporary blemish on the American scene is seriously in error. Despite the

substantial recovery from the 1982-83 recession, the number of homeless persons

is increasing. For many homeless persons, spells of homelessness tend to be

quite long, on the order of 6—8 years for individuals. And, while social

programs move homeless families into housing relatively quickly, patterns of

change in incomes, family structure, land prices and housing costs will produce

a continuous stream of newly homeless families large enough to keep welfare

totels and family shelters filled for the forseeable future.

    In the absence of major economic and social changes or a new housing policy

for the extremely disadvantaged, the U.S. is likely to be plagued by a iong-tern

problem of homelessness, of a sizeable magnitude.
                                        3

                                     I-low   Many?


    As noted, the issue of how many homeless persons there are in the U.S. has

been at the center of bitter dispute for some time.    At one extreme is the 2.2

million   persons figure suggested by homeless activists; at the other extreme is

the 250-350,000 person estimate by HUD in its 1984 report. When the House

Subcommittee on Housing and Community Development held hearings on the HUD

Report in May 1984, numerous witnesses, often involved in helping the homeless,

castigated the study as seriously understating the problem. Many saw the report

as an effort (conscious or unconscious) to reduce the magnitude of the problem

by an Administration considered unfriendly to the plight of   the poor. Given the
complexity of counting the number of homeless on the streets (as opposed to

those in shelters) and the subjectivity of some estimating procedures (of the

four methods used by H.U.O., two involved obtaining "expert" opinions or

newspaper reports, rather than "hard counts"), it seemed as if one could not

choose between the two widely disparate estimates, and some observers have

simply decided that reality must lie somewhere in the middle of the range.

     Our survey data provide new information that can be used to evaluate the

conflicting claims about the size of the homeless population. In particular, we

asked homeless persons the amount of time they spent in shelters and the amount

of time they spent in the street since becoming homeless. Assuming that future

behavior mirrors past behavior, the proportion of homeless time persons spent in

shelters in the past can be used to estimate the probability they will be in a

shelter in the future. Given separate estimates of time spent in shelters for

persons who are currently in shelters and for persons who are currently in the

street, we can, in turn, estimate the proportion of the entire homeless popula-

tion in shelters.
                                        4


Formally, let P(St)= proportion of homeless -in shelters at time t

                conditional probability that a homeless person is in a shelter

    in t, given that they were in a shelter in t1

    PISt/St..i]=conditional probability that a homeless person is in a shelter in

    t, given that they were in the street in t—1

Then, by conditional probability:

       (1) P(St)=P(St/St_i) P(St_i) +       P(St/St..1)   [1—P(St_l))

       where P(Sti)= 1-P(St...i)

In equilibrium, P(St) =   P(st_1), yielding     an equation for the proportion in

shelters in t as a function o-f the relevant conditional probabilities:

                     P(St/St_i)/[(1-P(St/St...i)   +
       (2) P(St) =                                     P(St/St..i)]
     In our survey, individuals in shelters spent 5596 of their homeless time in

shelters whereas individuals in the street spent 2096 of their time in shelters,

yielding an estimate of P(St/St_i) of .55 and an estimate of                 of .20.

This in turn yields an estimated ratio of persons in shelters to the total home-

less population of about .31. That is, based on the time homeless persons

report they spend in shelters and in the street, there are 3.23 (=1/.31) home-

less persons for every homeless person in a shelter, or put differently, 2.23

persons living in the streets for every person in a shelter.

    Is our figure, based on the population of homeless people in New York in the

summer of 1985, reasonably applicable to the overall country? We have per-

formed two checks to see if it is. First, we compared it with street to

population ratios from sources based on street counts: our figure was hiher

than the others, possibly because, as is widely recognized, even the best street

count will miss some street dwellers.5 If our estimate is "too high" we will be

coming up with an overstatement of the total homeless population. Second, to

see if there is a regional bias to our ratio (possibly because street dwellers
                                       B


 are more common -in the Southern or Western states for reasons of weather or

because they have built fewer shelters than in the East), we have compared the

 regional distribution of federal surplus food distributed under the Temporary

Emergency Food Distribution Program to the regional distribution of homeless

persons estimated by HUD. If we found proportionally more persons in the South

and West obtaining food support than in shelters we would be suspicious that our

ratio understates the street to shelter homeless population in those areas of

the country. In fact, we find no such regional disparity; the South does get a

greater share of food moneys than is its share of homelessness, but the West has

a lower share of food moneys, suggesting no overall regional problem with our

data 6

    Finally, to turn our estimate of the ratio of the number of homeless persons

to the number in shelters into an estimate of the total homeless population, we

need one other number--the number of persons sheltered. On the basis of HUD's

1983 survey of shelters we estimate that there were about 76,500 homeless

individuals in shelters in that year, which multiplied by 3.23 yields an

estimated total number of homeless persons of 246,500. In addition, HUD

reported about 14,500 members of families were sheltered in 1983 This number,

however, appears to exclude most homeless families receiving vouchers to live

in welfare hotels or motels rather than in shelters.7 For New York, as many

as 10,500 persons in homeless families lived in welfare hotels in 1983.     In

other cities, the exclusion seems to have a much smaller impact; on the basis

of discussion with officials in various cities, we estimate that outside New

York perhaps one—third of homeless families were in welfare hotels, and there-

fore unlikely to have been counted by HUD. Adjusting for the omission of

10,500 families in New York and of homeless families in hotels elsewhere we

increase HUD's number of homeless family members to 32,000. Assuming, as

seems reasonable, that all members of families were either in shelters or
                                        6


    Table 1: Estimated Number and Growth of liomelessness in the U.S., 1983-85
                            (average night estimates)




 1) Number of homeless persons
   a) in shelters                       76,500              92,000-98,000
   b) in street                        170.500             205,000-219,000


2) Number of persons in                 32,000             46,000
        homeless families


3) Total number of homeless
  Our estimate                         279,000            343,000-363,000
  MUD estimate                     250-350.000
  Popular advocate claim             2,200.000


 line 1: For 1983, our 76.500 consists of MUD's 54,500 (equal to 69,000 x7g
         reported as individual homeless persons) plus others not included as
         homeless in MUD'S study: 1) Those homeless in detoxification centers,
         approximately 7,000 nationwide. This number was arrived at by taking
         the total numer of homeless in detox. centers in New York and Boston
         and comparing it to the number of individuals in shelters. This fate
         (detox/total individual) is then applied to the 54,500 to yield the
         7000. For New York city, the total shelter population for individuals
         In 1983 was 6346 homeless, 5846 in city shelters (source: Human
         Resources Administration) and 500 In other private shelters (source:
         varous phone calls with local churches and knowledgeable sources). For
         Boston, there were approximately 939 sheltered (source: Emergency
         Shelter Commission). The homeless detoxification population was 518. in
         Boston (same source) and about £00 In New York City (source: various
         phone calls with local sources and detox. centers). This represents a
         detox./individual population of 918/7285. Applying this rate to the
         MUD figure yields about 7,000 ho.eless In detox. centers, nationwide.
         2) Those homeless In runaway youth shelters and shelters for battered
         wo.en using MUD's homeless/bed rate of 77t (69,000/91,000), we esti-
         mate that roughly 9000 homeless are in runaway youth shelters (MUD
         reports 12,000 beds) and 6000 battered or abused women In shelters
         (8,000 beds) (MUD Report, pg.34). The total shelter population for
         individuals, therefore, is about 76,500.

 line 2: For 1983, our estimate of 32,000 represents the 14,500 reported by MUD
         (.21 x 69,000) plus the 10,500 In New York City, very likely to have
         been omitted by MUD and a very rough estimate of 7,000 others likely
         missed by MUD because they were in long term facilities. See footnote
         I for a detailed account.

1985:    Figures for Individuals based on estimated 1983—85 growth rates,
         from New York and Boston shelters. For Individuals, the growth rate in
         Boston was 20,2% between 1983-1985. The number moved from 1457 to 1752
         (Source: Emergency Shelter Corrission,) In New York, the number grew
         from 6740 to 8642 (source: Human Resources A&'lnlstration).
1985:    FIgures for families based on estimated 1983—85 growth rates obtained as
         weighted average from New York and Boston shelters. In New York City It
         grew from 10.520 to 14970 (Source: Human Resources Mmlnistration
         Crisis Intervention Center.) In    Boston, the number of individuals
         Increased from 120 to 420 (source:     Emergency Shelter Conrisslon) or
         by 87% per annum. Here we took a weighted average to obtain 4 44 6%
         growth between 1983 and 1985.
                                       7



welfare hotels, we came up with a final estimate for 1983 of about 279,000.

This, we note, falls at the lower end of the range suggested by HUD (250,000

to 350,000) in its controversial report. While our figures are to be viewed

as rough orders of magnitude only, it is important to recognize that they are

strongly inconsistent with the claim that 196 of Americans are homeless. For

the number of homeless to be on the order of 2.2 million persons, the Street

to shelter population ratio would have to exceed our estimate by about ten-

fold, which even given the crude nature of our procedures seems highly

implausible. In short, we find that the much-maligned HUD study was roughly

correct in its estimate of the number of homeless persons in 1963.

    The pattern of response to the homeless problem --   in   which activists raise

an alarm with high, undocumented claims about the numbers involved, to which the

government responds with a commissioned report that seemingly diminishes the

severity of the problem--appears to be an unfortunate part of American public

debate.   It has also occurred in the area of the number of illegal immigrants

and the extent of hunger in the country, among other issues. In the case at

hand, it has had the unfortunate effect of making what should be seen as

shockingly large numbers --   over a quarter of a million Americans homeless in
1983 -- seem moderate by contrast.

    What about changes in the homeless population over time? After all, 1983

was a peak post World War II recession year. Since then, has the number of

homeless persons declined with economic recovery?

    According to estimates of the shelter populations from Ne York and Boston

used to gauge the rate of increase in shelter populations nationwide in our

table, the answer is no. Between 1983 and 1985 the numbers of persons living in

shelters in New York increased by 2896, while in Boston the number increased by

     While in the absence of a new HUD survey, these figures should be taken
                                         8



solely   as "orders of magnitude," their direction is consistent with reports from

other cities, as indicated by the January 1986    study by the Conference of Mayors
which concluded that in 22 of 25 cities the homeless population increased while

only in three cities had it remained constant.8     Even more strikingly, the

number of homeless families seems to have increased especially rapidly since

1983. In Boston, where some 120 homeless family members were reported in 1983,

there were about 420 in 1985. Elsewhere in the state, family homelessness also

grew sharply, so that a major theme of the Massachusetts 1985 Report on

Homelessness was that "family homelessness is on the increase."9 in Ne York,

the 10,500 persons reported in homeless families in 1983 grew by about 4,000

through 1985. Our discussion with shelter providers in other cities confirm

this increase elsewhere.10

    Finally, we have examined data on the number of households obtaining food

from food shelters on the hypothesis that if hOmelessness is increasing, one

would also expect the number seeking food from pantries, kitchens, etc. would

also be increasing. Indeed, that is precisely what the data show.11

    Given our estimate of the street—to—shelter ratio, and the apparent 1983-85

growth in the number of homeless individuals and in shelters, e estimate that

the homeless population was on the order of 343,000-363,000 by 1985, 23 to 3O9

larger than in 1983.

    The weakest part of the estimated growth is the assumed constancy of

the street-to-shelter population ratio. It is possible that, given increased

shelter capacity, homeless people are spending more time in shelters, which

would lead our figures to overstate the growth of the homeless population. On

the other hand, however, our data show that the homeless tend to spend more time

in the street as their spells of homelessness increase, suggesting that the

ratio of street to shelter population could rise over time. To see whether

these biases seriously mar our picture of increasing homelessness we have exa-
                                       9

mined the number of persons in particular shelters in New York during "peak"

times. In New York City, the "peak" number of individuals sheltered during

winter 1985-6 was 47 greater than the "peak" number sheltered in winter

1983-4, whereas the "average" number sheltered per night increased by just 2896.

This pattern is inconsistent with the notion that the street-to—shelter ratio

declined on average. In addition, several cities have reported turning people

away from shelters, further indicating that the observed growth of the shelter

population is not simply a result of a movement of a fixed homeless population

into shelters.


                                 Who Are They?

     What kind of persons end up homeless in America? Does the population of

homeless individuals consist largely of "skid-row" types? The mentally ill? Or

does the homeless population include a large number of persons who could reaso-

nably be expected to function in the society?

     By including street persons as well as shelter residents in our survey we

are able to provide a more representative picture of the homeless than is

afforded by standard government reports that are limited to persons in

shelters.12 As can be seen in Table 2, our data and those of other recent stu-

dies give a markedly different picture of homeless individuals than the typical

stereotype of a skid—row alcoholic. We find that:

    -The homeless consist largely of men over 30 and below 60 years of age, with

an underrepresentation of both the very old and the very young. There are few

homeless persons among the aged presumably because of high mortality rates for

homeless persons. There are few young homeless persons because most young per-

sons still live in their parental home. The average age of the homeless is

approximately 40.

    -With respect to ethnicity, blacks are overrepresented among the homeless,
                                                   10

  Table 2: Proportion of Homeless               1ndlvidl  and Relevant Total Population with
                                    Specified     Characteriitics

                                                        Relevant Comparison
                                          Oeless            f22.i!tior1               !.!flo
                                          (1)                   (2)                   (1/2)
    20—29                                 .22                .26
    30—59                                 .68                .51               1.33
       604                                .10                .23                .43
  Ethnicity
 New York:
   Black                                  .48                .25               1.92
   Hispanic                               .16                .20
 Boston:
   Black                                  .32                .22              1.45
   Hispanic                               .05                .06               .83
 Educat Ion
   * not graduated High SChOOl .53
                                                             .27
                                                                              1.9
 Fully Baekround
   Without at least one parent .46                           .15              3.1
   With neither real parent    .15                           .03              5.0
 Social Pathology
   percent that ever      spent   time
     in   Jail                           .39
  mentally ill                           33%                                   25
Substance Abuse
  alcohol abuse                          .29                .13               2.23
  hard drug abuse                        .14                .01           14
Income
  so.. current      income
     (any source)                        .18                .ie
  receiving      sither
    public assistance or SSI             .12                .22               .55
    or goverr.ent transfer
    payments


Source:
        Age, dat. for ho.eJ.ss are fro. our study.
Comparison data are from U.S. Statistical Abstract            1986. for U.S. total
Ethnicity.    WY data from ourstudy: Boston data from Emergency Shelter
          Coselssien, 1986. Comparison data from U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1980
          cesus of Population,
Education, homeless data from our study; comparison data from
          Statistical Abstract 1985.
Fully data for homeless our survey; The comparison groups for fully backround
       Is for 1968, sInce that Is approximately when the homeless mould have
          been being brought t in their parental hose, from Statistical
          Abstract4ji6g.
Social pathology, percent spending time In jail, our survey;
                                                             mentally
        111, stylistic figure based on diverse studies. Co.parlson, as
        described In text.
Alcohol and drug abuse, homeless from WY State Department of Soc il
        Services, Homelessness In New York State (October 1984), WY City Human
        Resources Adainistration, Homeless in New York City Shelters. Com-
        parison data for alcoholism from Statistical Abstract of the United
        States, 1985, table 192, where 13* of the population is reported to
          consume at least 50 alcoholic drinks per month. Hard drugs (excluding
          marihuana) sere currently used by less than .5* of the population with
          the exceptions of cocaine (1.2%) and stimulants (.5*), U.S. National
          Institute on Drug Abuse, NICA Statistical Series.
Income,   from New York City Human Resources Ada Inistrat ion.
          comparison, men 25-54, from
          tion
                                                U.S. Bureau of the Census. Lja-
                 Reports. Consumer Income Series P—SO.
                                       11



while 1ispanics are underrepresented. As our data show lengths of spells of

homelessness to be the same for blacks and whites, the higher rate of home-

lessness represents a greater risk of becoming homeless for blacks.

    -The homeless are far less educated than the population as a whole, with

over half having failed to graduate from high school compared to a little over a

quarter of the comparison group.

    —The homeless are more prone to substance abuse and mental illness than the

population as a whole. A figure that emerges from a wide variety of studies is

that approximately one in three homeless persons suffers from mental illness.

In terms of the comparison group a rough estimate is that less than 296   of   the

U.S. population is mentally ill, which implies that the mentally ill are about

25 times more likely to become homeless than someone else.

    -The homeless are much more likely to have been raised in a one-parent

family than the population as a whole, and are especially likely to have been

brought up with neither real parent.

     -The homeless individual is unlikely to receive much if any "welfare" bene-

fits such as disability insurance, unemployment insurance, etc.

    One of the most striking characteristics of the homeless population, which

has been neglected in much popular discussion, is the frequency of criminal

activity. In our survey, 3996 admitted to having spent time in jail, with an

average time in jail of two years. Other studies show somewhat larger percen-

tages spending time in jail, and report sizeable numbers (13-2696) having com-

mitted felonies or major crimes.

    The obvious question that arises from these figures is whether crime is not

only a "result of" homelessness, but is also a "cause" of homelessness. To

answer this we asked the homeless about the timing of their periods in jail.

Sixty-one percent of time spent in jail occurred prior to becoming homeless,
                                   12



suggesting that (unsuccessful) crime leads to homelessness. Indicative of the

presence of crime among the homeless, many of those we interviewed expressed

concern that their meager goods might be stolen and that they might be mugged by

other homeless persons, "It's dangerous on the streets" was how one homeless

woman expressed the situation.

    Finally, an important issue on which our survey provides new insight is

whether or not the homeless in the Street differ markedly from the homeless in

shelters. In terms of age and ethnicity, there are notable differences.

Persons living in the street in our survey were nearly a decade older and were

much more likely to be white than those living in shelters. More importantly,

we find that the street population tends to be generally "worse off." Homeless

persons in the street are more prone to substance abuse, spend more time -in

jail, and appear to be less employable. Whereas 2996 of shelter residents in our

survey reported themselves unable to work, 4496 of the street residents said they

were unable to work. Consistent with this, spells of unemployment were longer

for the street people.

    It is not surprising to find street people to be functionally less cor—

petent than persons in shelters, as conditions on the streets are much worse

than conditions in the shelters. The more rational homeless person will con-

sequently choose a shelter.   In terms of policy this implies that any social

policy operating through shelters may miss the most vulnerable and helpless of

the homeless.


                              The Homeless Family


     As shown in Table 1, the group among whom homelessness has increased the

most since the HUD report are families. Whereas in the 1984 report of HUD the

problems of homeless families were given little separate attention, by 1936 the
                                     13


 situation had changed to such an extent that the problems of the homeless
                                                                              family
 have come to the fore of much policy discussion.

      The homeless families differ significantly from homeless individuals.

 They Consist largely of female-headed families. They tend to be predominantly

 black, with the black overrepresentation of families far exceeding black

overrepresentation among homeless individuals. Even in a city like Boston where

the majority of homeless individuals are white, the majority of homeless fami-

lies are black. Moreover, in contrast to homeless individuals who receive

little social welfare benefits, the bulk of homeless families obtain regular

AFDC payments and food stamps.

     By age, the heads of homeless families tend to be young, with half less

than twenty-five years old. They also tend to have less education than

otherwise comparable persons and are more likely to have come from female-headed

homes themselves. Finally, just as the deterioration of the two-parent family is

a major cause of poverty and welfare recipiency, the breakup of the family seems

to be a major contributor to family honielessness. Forty percent of homeless

families report that they lost their residence because of family conflict, often

from a situation In which they doubled up with friends or relatives.

    The characteristics that differentiate homeless persons and families from

others could, we note, just as easily be a summary of characteristics differen-

tiating those with any social problem from the average. While a certain propor-

tion of the homeless have mental or other behavioral problems that distinguish

them from the rest of the poor in America, it is important to recognize that

homelessness is endemic among the same groups of people for whom urban poverty,

unemployment, living-on—welfare, and crime is also endemic. In this sense

homelessness is not a "bizarre" problem to be studied by itself but rather is

part-and-parcel of the overall social problem of low incomes, income inequality,
                                       14


 and social pathology in the U.S. that has gained attention from activists and

analysts of all political philosophies.


                             Permanent or Transitory?


    A key issue in understanding hornelessness, and developing policies to

alleviate the problem, is whether it is a transitory or long-term phenomenon,

If it is transitory, the homeless are likely to resume normal life in short

order, making temporary shelters an appropriate social remedy for their probler.

If, by contrast, it is largely a long—term problem for a sizeable number of

persons, a very different set of policies may be needed to deal with the

problem.

    In its evaluation of lengths of homelessness, HUD concluded that "for most

people who become homeless, their condition is recent and likely to be

temporary".13 Our analysis indicates that for individual homeless persons

HUD's conclusion is, for reasons given below, incorrect. Far from being tem-

porary, homelessness appears to be a long-term state for large numbers.

Moreover, as with unemployment and welfare recipiency, the vast bulk of time

spent homeless is contributed by persons who are homeless for long periods.

While family homelessness is of much shorter duration, due in part to public

policies to move families out of welfare hotels and shelters, even here

lengths of spells are considerably longer than is recognized.

    There are four reasons why hornelessness is erroneously thought to be a

short-run phenomenon. First, most shelters report the amount of time persons

spend in that shelter rather than total time spent homeless, suggesting that

periods of homelessness are short and episodic. Time spent in particular

shelters or places may, in fact, be short, but much of the movement of the

homeless is between the street, shelters, detoxication centers, hospitals, and
                                      15


 jail rather than from homelessness to normal residences. Second, surveys that

report durations of homelessness give the amount of time persons have been

homeless up to the survey date, not the amount of time until they leave home-

lessness. Assuming, as statisticians often do, that one catches persons mid-

way in their spell, one must double the reported times to estimate the likely

completed duration of homelessness for those in any survey. Third, most

information on the homeless comes from shelter residents, who by our analysis,

tend to be much better off and much less likely to be long-term homeless than

persons living in the streets. Finally, because the homeless population is a

growing one, tabulations of durations at a point in time will give a

misleading picture of lengths of spells by shodng a disproportionately high

number of short beginning spells.

    On the other side of the coin, however, is the fact that any survey at a

moment in time tends to overrepresent persons with long spells. This is

because the likelihood of catching persons homeless differs by the lengths of

time they are homeless. For instance, given one homeless person with a spell

of one year and one homeless person with a spell of one day, the chance of

'catching' the former in a survey is 365 times greater than the chance of

catching the latter. While this is not a problem if one -is interested in spells

of homelessness weighted by their importance (i.e. by length) it does bias esti-

mates of the distribution of all spells.

    Our effort to deal with these problems takes two forms. First, in contrast

to studies done by public welfare agencies, we asked the homeless people not hov

long they have been in their current state but rather,"how long ago was the

first day that you ever were homeless?" We then asked them the proportion of

time since that date spent en the Street, in shelters, and in normal residence.

As 96 of reported time since the first date was spent in the homeless state, we
                                        16


 believe our- figures give a more accurate picture of the length of homelessness.

 Second, we calculate a diverse set of statistics to reflect the differing con-

 cepts of spell lengths.

     Table 3 presents the results of our analysis. Line 1 gives the average

 duration of incomplete spells for persons in our sample, with street persons

weighted more heavily to reflect their greater number in the population. The

4.1 years reflects past. reported homelessness and is thus the "hardest" number

of those in the table.14 Line 2 adjusts the distribution of incomplete spells

to take account of the large number of new beginning spells due to recent growth

of homelessness. It represents our estimate of what the duration of homeless

would be if the homeless population had been constant over the period and may

thus be viewed as providing a more meaningful indicator of durations of home-

lessness for a given population.   it is nearly 50% larger than the estimated

duration which does not take account of this problem. Doubling the figures in

line 2 yields an estimate of the "length-weighted" mean years of homelessness

for our sample, that is, the "average" years homeless weighted so that longer

spells count more heavily than shorter spells; this is also the expected mean

years of homelessness for the homeless persons in our sample, adjusted for the

beginning spells. Finally, we adjusted our data on the distribution of the

homeless by length of time they were homeless to take account of the approximate

growth rate of the population to estimate a "steady-state" distribution and

approximate "escape" rates from homelessness to normal shelter dwellings. On

the basis of these calculations, we estimate that the "typical"   jj of
homelessness (including spells of persons not in our survey because they are

especially short) is 3.5 years. This number is far below the other estimates

because our data suggest that there are many very short homeless spells:

roughly one third of individuals who enter homelessness appear to exit within
                                           17

       Table 3: Alternative Measures of the Years Homeless Among Individuals

                                                       Years Homeless
 1.   Incomplete Duration for
      Persons in Our Sample                            4.1

 2. Incomplete Duration for
      Persons, Corrected f or
      Growth of Homeless Population                    6.1

3. Estimated Completed Duration
    For Persons in Our Sample
      (also, the average length of
      homelessness weighted by its
      contributions to total time of
      homelessness)                                   12.2

4. Estimated Mean Length of All
    Spefls of Homelessness Including
    Very Short Spells                                  3.5


Source:

line 1:    based on our survey, with an average incomplete duration for Street
           people of 4.7 years and an average incomplete duration for sheltered
           people of 2.9 years.

line 2:    correction obtained by adjusting the frequency distribution in our
           survey to take account of growth from 1979 to 1985 when homelessnes
           spurted and of average population growth for earlier period. For the
           1979-85 rate of growth, we took a weighted average of the annual
           growth rates for New York and Boston, as reported in table 1. Our
           specific adjustment was to multiply the frequency 1-2 years by
           1.115, 2—3 years by (1.115)2, etc. Starting at 1-8 years we apply
           the average population growth rate of 1.014. Therefore the 8-9 years
           percentage would be multiplied by (1.115)6 (1.014)2. The corrected
           frequency was multiplied by the midpoint of the duration (i.e. .5,
           1.5, 2.5, etc.), the numbers summed, and divided by the sum of the
           percentages. The numbers were calculated separately for street and
           shelter populations with the results of 7.2 (street) and 3.7
           (shelter), then averaged to yield the figure in the text.

line 3:    multiplied by 2 on the hypothesisthat "corrected" for growth we are
           catching people midway in their homelessness spell.


line 4:    estimated by calculating transition probabilities from the adjusted
           frequency distribution of spells and then simply taking the mean dura-
           tion. The calculation was performed separately for persons in
           shelters and those on the street, and then weighted. We experimented
           with various ways of smoothing the frequency distributions to obtain
           transition probabilites and obtained figures like those in the table,
           so that the particular method, while crude, does not critically deter-
           mine the results.   ,
                                         18



 half a year.

     By contrast, for families, comparable calculations yield estimates of home-

 lessness closer to the HUD description: incomplete spells of homelessness

averaging about 1 year. The 'long-term' nature of the problem here is not one

of relatively permanent homelessness of individuals, but rather of the continued

influx of new families into the homeless state.

                        Why Homelessness in America Today?


     What could possibly underlie the sudden growth of homelessness in America?

The most commonly cited cause, deinstitutionalization of mental patients, cannot

explain the 1980s growth of homelessness for the simple reason that

deinstitutionalization occurred for the most part in the 1960s. Indeed,

deinstitutionalization began in the late 1950s to early 1960s with the inception

of tranquilizing drugs, and was given particular impetus by the Community Mental

Health Center Act of 1963. From 1955 to 1982 the average number of persons in

psychiatric hospitals on a given night fell from 558,922 to 125,200.15 While

some persons are, of course, let out of mental hospitals today, they do not

constitute a large proportion of homeless. A New York study found that just 796

of the homeless came directly from mental hospitals.16 Our survey found just 196

in that circumstance.

      While deinstitutionalization cannot, therefore, be cited as a significant

direct cause of homelessness, it did create a population of "non-

institutionalized" persons whose psychological and economic position made them

particularly prone to fall into homelessness, given adverse circumstances. To

evaluate the contribution of non—institutionalization to the current homeless

problem, we have estimated the number of persons who might have been institu-

tionalized in the 1980s had we institutionalized persons with mental problems at

1955 rates. Our estimate shows that about 657,000 less patients were institu-
                                         19



 tionalized in 1982 than would have been at 1955 rates of institutionalization.

Assuming that about one third of the homeless are mentally ill, we find that

 roughly 14% of those who would have been institutionalized have ended up

homeless.17 That failure to institutionalize has contributed to homelessness

should not, however, be taken to imply that deinstitutionalization itself has

failed. By our estimates, 86% of persons who might have been institutionalized

are not homeless, and at least by that minimal criterion, are successfully

integrated into society. Perhaps if Community Health Centers had been developed

in the numbers envisaged in the 1963 Act, (2000 were planned, whereas there were

only 717 built by 1980), the negative effects of the movement on homelessness

would have been largely avoided.

    If noninstitutiorialization is not the primary cause of the rise in home-

lessness in the U.S., what is?     Our analysis highlights two sets of factors:

the growing incidence of social characteristics that may be causally related to

homelessness, and changes in the housing market that make it increasingly dif-

ficult for the poor to rent space.


                        ChanginQ Social Characteristics


    By comparing the frequency of personal and social characteristics between

the homeless and comparison populations, as in Table 2, we can make inferences

about the impact of characteristics on the likelihood an individual will be

homeless. Moreover, to the extent that a particular characteristic that raises

the probability of homelessness has increased over time, we can infer that it

has contributed to the rising problem.

    The two main characteristics which, by this line of reasoning, have

increased homelessness are the growing number of female-headed homes, both

because the vast majority of homeless families are female-headed and because
                                           20




 homeless individuals tend to come from such backgrounds, and increased substance

abuse. Our calculations suggest that these factors have outweighed the main

factor working in the opposite direction ——     rising   education   so that on net

the changing characteristics of the population have made the homeless problem

worse.

    Since social characteristics change gradually, however, it is clear that

such changes could not by themselves have caused the sudden increase in home-

lessness in the 1980s, They are best thought of as creating a "risk" population

rather than increasing homelessness per Se.

    The one factor that did, of course, worsen in the early 1980s and undoub-

tedly contribute significantly to the burst of homelessness is, of course, the

recession—related increase in the number of persons with exceptionally low inco-

mes. In 1979 118 of men 18 and over in the Current Population Survey had

incomes below $3000 or were without incomes. In 1983 16.2 had incomes that

were below $4000 (aproximately $3000 in 1979 prices, given inflation) or were

without incomes. As persons with low income are especially likely to end up

homeless, this increase certainly contributed to the 1979-83 growth of home-

lessness. The recession cannot however, be the prime factor at work, for if it

were, homelessness would have fallen rather than risen from 1983 to 1985. It

is, in our view, the concordance of increased poverty and income inequality with

housing market developments deleterious to the poor that best explains why the

at-risk population suffered homelessness in the period.

                              Housing Market Developments


    An obvious place to look for causes of homelessness is in the market for

housing ——   in   particular, at potential short-run or long-run imbalances between

the availability of low—rent units and the income of those at the bottom of the

income distribution. Did rents rise and the stock of low-rent housing decline
                                          21



 relative to the number of persons and families in poverty in the early 1960s?

     The available evidence suggests that it did. Consider first the pattern of

 rent increases during the 1979-83 period. According to the Federal Government's

 housing survey, median rents in the U.S increased from $217 to $315 from 1979 to
 1983 —- a 45 increase over 4 years, or 69 with an adjustment for inflation.18

 By comparison, from 1970 to 1979 median rents did riot increase at all in real

 terms. In part, higher median rents represent increased rents for units of    a

given quality; in part, they represent changes in the distribution of the stock

of rental units toward higher quality units. Both changes create great problems

for the poor to obtain housing when the number of the poor increases, as it did

in the period.

    To get a better fix on the potential imbalance in the housing market bet-

ween low-income persons and the supply of low-rent units, we compare in Table 4

the changing numbers of persons and families below the poverty line with the

supply of rental units below $200 per month (in 1979 dollars). The figures

show clearly that at the same time the number of persons and families below

poverty inreased, the number of low—rent housing units in central cities fell

sharply, while the number of low—rent units -in the country as a whole held

roughly stable. By contrast, in the previous decade, the number in poverty fell

at about the same rate as did the number of low-rent units (defined in constant

dollars).

    Underlying the decline in low rent units are several important social deve-

lopments, mostly in central cities: the movement of higher-income and middle-

class people back to some cities, "gentrification" (which is important in

Boston and some other booming Northeastern cities); the growth of condominiums

(encouraged by mortgage intrest deduction on the tax code and, in several

cities, by rent control); and increasing land prices, which makes it less pro-
                                       22


 Table 4: Numbers of Poor Families and Low Rent Units in the Housjn Market,
                                     197 9—83




Families (in mil1ioJ                    1979      1983

Families below poverty                   5.3       7.7      45
Persons in families below poverty       20,0      28,0      40
Unattached adults below poverty          5.7       6,9      21

Rental Units (in millions)

number of rental units< $200
    (constant U.S. dollars)
          U.S. Total                   10.7       10.7       .1%

          Central City                  5.3        5.0

Single room rental units                    .98     .97    -0.9




Source:   Tabulated from U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S. Statistical Abstract,
          1986; Annual Housing Survey, Current Housing Reports, Part A, 1979,
          1983.
                                          23


 fitable to develop low-income housing. While one could imagine a housing

market where developers would respond to these changes and to the increased

number of poor persons by producing lower-quality low-rent units, building

codes and other regulations put a minimum cost beneath construction of low-

rent dwellings. In New York, the city has offered a bonus of some $6,000 to

landlords for renting to homeless families for two years, but found that rela-

tively few landlords have taken advantage of the bonus. One reason is that

the cost of bringing apartments up to City building—code standards may exceed

that amount. In 1986 the city raised the bonus to $9,700 to see if that would

encourage landlords to accomodate the homeless. If it requires nearly $10,000

extra to make it worthwhile for landlords of existing buildings to house home-

less families, it is no wonder that builders do not find it profitable to

construct low—rent units in sufficient numbers to alleviate the imbalance.

    The nature of the housing problem faced by currently homeless people does,

of course, differ among different types of persons. For the most dysfunctional

of the homeless, the problem is not so much one of housing costs as inability to

earn even a modicum of pay. Aside from small sums obtained by panhandling, most

homeless persons in the street have essentially no income;   many have not worked

for years and are, on the face of it, incapable of working without extended

help; in addition, they claim few of the welfare benefits that might enable them

to rent space in single room only places, were such rooms available. Those who

are mentally ill, chronic substance abusers and generally in poor physical and

mental health are in many cases functionally incapable of demanding and com-

peting for housing -in the free market.

     For the bulk of the homeless, who have greater potential for finding

housing themselves, and for homeless families who receive welfare payments, the

declining availability of low-rent units and increases in rent relative to
                                        24


 incomes appears to be a major cause of their problem.     In Boston, where the

housing market is particularly tight, the newspapers report the existence of

shelter residents who are employed but cannot find nor afford housing, at least

in the short run.

     While we are loathe to generalize from a single area, the pattern of

rapidly rising land values, rents, and housing market problems for the poor

in Massachussetts raises the possibility that future economic progress,

including full employment of the type enjoyed in Massachussetts, may exacerbate

rather than alleviate the housing problems of the poor. One can easily devise     a

scenario in which economic growth raises demand for land, inducing landlords to

develop higher-quality properties, pricing out of the market those whose incomes

do not rise with the rate of growth.

    In addition to the broad supply and demand patterns in the housing market,

however, other factors are likely to make it difficult for the private market to

resolve the homelessness problem. For one, once a person is homeless, landlords

are likely to view him or her as a higher risk tenant than other persons. The

probability that someone who has been homeless will pay rent regularly may

reasonably be viewed as lower than for others, Moreover, while only a minority

of the homeless may suffer from serious behavioral problems that may lead them

to damage units or engage in behavior that would upset other tenants, the beha-

vior of even a small number can raise the "expected" costs of renting to any

member of the group.


                       Efforts to Deal with Homelessness


    Homelessness is an issue that arouses considerable public concern, with the

result that a wide variety of programs have developed in both the public and

private sectors to help the homeless, often of a rather innovative nature.
                                       25



     The first and foremost need has been, of course, to develop shelters so that

 the homeless have an alternative to the street. The federal government's

 Emergency Food and Shelter Program (EFSP), initiated by Congress in 1983, dis-

bursed 210 million dollars in three phases to deal with the problem. Part of

the money went to the states and part was distributed through a National Board

made up largely of charitable organizations. Assessing the operation of the

Program, the Urban Institute concluded that "the EFSP met a great need for

emergency food and shelter services" with the private charitable part disbursing

funds to the needy more quickly than the states.19   At the state and local

level, many areas have developed extensive shelter systems where none had pre-

viously existed, In Massachusetts, for example, the number of publicly funded

shelters increased from 2 in 1982 to 29 in 1986. Private organizations have

also made significant efforts to raise money to aid the homeless, ranging from

local church and community efforts to shelter persons to the massive "Hands

Across America" fund—raising effort on May 25, 1986. Our observation is that

the smaller privately-run shelters tend to be better accomodations for the

homeless than the larger impersonal publicly-run shelters.

     While provision of beds for the homeless is a necessary step in dealing

with the problem, it is not adequate. As our analysis indicates, the bulk of

homelessness is contributed by a relatively long-term homeless population,

which, by definition, is unlikely to return quickly to normal living conditions.

Additional services are needed to help these people attain self-sufficiency, as

some shelters have begun to provide. In addition, for the most dysfunctional

and helpless of the homeless, who live in the streets, outreach programs are

necessary.

    Even with effective programs, however, one should not expect a sudden, sharp

decline in homelessness. While, on the one hand, evidence that the number of
                                       26


homeless persons is smaller than the 196 bandied in the press makes the problem

seem more manageable, our finding that homelessness is a long-term state with

causes going far beyond the economic recession suggests that a quick solution is

unlikely in the near future. Indeed, if ongoing changes in the distribution of

income, in various social problems and pathologies, and in the housing market

continue into the future, the ?at_riskv population is likely to grow rather

than to decline. And one unhappy lesson we have learned from past efforts to

resolve social problems is that while problems can arise quickly, cures often

take longer to find and implement.
                                          27


                                       Footnotes


1.   Media articles on the homeless increased at an extraordinary rate in the

     early 1980s. In 1980 there were 13 articles listed in the indexes of The

     New York Times, Los Angeles Times, and Washington Post; in 1985, there were

     428 articles listed in the three indexes.


2. The 1984 Hearings on the Homeless and on the HUD Report on Homelessness show

     the extent of controversy over the issue. See Subcomm-ittee on Housing and

     Community Development of the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban

     Affairs, House of Representatives, 98th Congress Second Session; Homeless in

     America II— (January 25, 1984) and HUD Report on Homelessness (May 24,

     1984).


3. The source of the 1 or 2.2 million persons number is the Community for

     Creative Non-Violence. See, for example, Hombs, Mary Ellen and Mitch

     Snyder, Homelessness in America, a Forced March to Community for Creative

     Non-Violence, 1982.


4. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development A Report to the Secretary

     on the Homeless and Emergency Shelters, Washington, D.C., Office of Policy

     Development and Research, 1984.


5. The HUD figures show an average street to shelter ratio of 1,78:1 (pg. 17 of

     their report). Because their ratio came from actual Street counts, where

     "counters" are bound to miss at least some street dwellers, one should

     expect the actual ratio to be slightly higher, as our 2.23 is. A more

     recent Nashville study found a street/shelter ratio of less than 1, also

     suggesting that our 2.23 isn't missing a large number of those in the West

     who never use the shelters. R. Bruce Wiegand "Counting the Homeless"
                                             28




    American Demographics, December 1985, Vol. 7, No. 12, PP. 34-37.

    While it is possible that our survey also missed an especially hard to get

    population, which potentially spends even less time in shelters than the

    "street" people we surveyed, our street to shelter ratio would not increase

    greatly unless these persons were exceptionally numerous and spent virtually

    no time in shelters, thereby greatly altering our estimate of P(St/St_i).

    For example, if persons missed in our street count were as numerous as those

    in our survey, and they spent half as much time in shelters as those in the

    survey, P(St/St.1)    would be .15 instead of .20. This would yield a homeless

    population to shelter population of 4 rather than 3.23, raising the esti-

    mated size of the population by 2496.

6. The HUD distribution of homeless (p. 20) is: South, 2496;        North Central, 2296;
    North   East, 2496; West, 3196,

    The 1982-86 distribution of surplus foods under the Temporary Emergency Food

    Distribution Program iS:      South,   3096; North Central, 2296; North East, 2496;

   West, 2496.    (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Survey,

    Title   2 Commodities 6-4-86.)
   While the distribution of surplus foods shows a higher proportion of

    deral dollars in the South than does the distribution of the homeless, it

   shows a compensatory lower proportion of federal food spending in the West.


7. HUD's description of families not included in their 1983 study is suf-

   ficiently vague that we contacted the survey organization, who reported that

   families in "welfare hotels" may not have been included because these

   facilities are not regarded as part of the regular shelter system.            It

   seems, however, that in most cities in the US (except N.Y.); very few

   families were in long term facilities or hotels in 1983. The types of

   shelters for families also vary greatly from city to city. Some examples:
                                          29


         New York- opened their first homeless shelter in 1983. Therefore, at

         this time, virtually all families were in long term facilities that

        very likely were not counted by HUD. Because of this seeming omission,

        we have added all 10,500 individuals in homeless families to HUD's

        figure.

        Boston— In 1983, virtually no homeless families stayed in homeless

        hotels as the laws did not permit it. By 1986, 78 of the homeless

        families have been moved to long-term facilites or homeless motels.

        Philadelphia- The Department of Human Resources reports than in 1983.

        all homeless families were in shelters; therefore, they were likely to

        have been included by HUD.

        Houston— Most families, according to the United Way, stayed in shelters

        or missions and were likely to have been counted by HUD.

        Washington- The Department of Human Services claims that almost all o-F

        the families in 1983 stayed in long term facilites and were likely to

        have been missed by HUD. A small percentage in the private sector may

        have been counted.

     Note that omission of persons in welfare hotels is not a problem in   the
     more subjective "extrapolation" methods used by HUD.


8. Conference of Mayors, Report on the Homeless, p.15.


9. Massachusetts Report on Homelessness, 1985, Executive Office of Human

   Services, pg. 19.

10. Other cities doe not have the exact figures for family growth; however,

   sources we contacted in Washington, D.C., Chicago, and Los Angeles and

   Houston agree that the number of homeless families has grown more rapidly

   than the number of homeless individuals.
                                        30


11. Food Research and Action Center, Bitter Harvest II,


12. The statistics for our survey are based on a weighted average for persons in

    shelters and in the street. We have weighted the figures in order to get 2

    picture   of the typical homeless individual, The weights (.39, shelter:

    .61, Street) were chosen on the basis of our estimate of the distribution of

    the population between the two places.


13. RUD, Report on Homelessness, p. 29. We note that the HUD figures on home-

    lessness for New York show longer spells for New York and Boston than for

    other cities. Our disagreement with HUD is based not on the spells

    reported for cities but on the conceptual grounds that incomplete spells

    in a growing population are not the proper measure of lengths of time spent

    homeless.


14. To check on the plausibility of our estimates we have compared the incom-

    plete durations in our survey with those reported elsewhere and find no

    reason to believe ours are overstated. As durations reported elsewhere are

    limited to shelter populations, we limit comparisons to that subset of our

   sample. A calculated mean duration of sheltered residents in a recent

   Boston Survey show an incomplete spell of 2.1 years compared with 2.9 for

   the similar group in our survey. Source for Boston: a study of 785

   sheltered, Emergency Shelter Commission, 1985 (Sept. 17, table 1). In

   contrast, HUD's study reports shorter spells of homelessness for sheltered

   residents. We believe that two reasons account for this discrepancy.

   First, their study was conducted in 1983- a time closer to the period

   usually considered to be the beginning of the rise of homelessness, In

   using durations shortly after the "homeless increase," HUD is likely to

   catch a shorter term homeless population. Second, we calculated duration
                                        31



     beginning with the "first time that a person was homeless." For instance,

     if a person had been homeless for 5 years, then found a home for 2

    months,and then became homeless for another 4 months, we did not count only

     the recent spell of homelessness of 4 months but rather the entire 53 years.

    We believe that only counting the most recent spell seriously underestimates

    the duration of homelessness as people tend to bounce in and out of

    homelessness, and according to our survey, only spend 49    of   their total time

    since becoming homeless in a home of any sort.


15. Alter, Jonathan et.al, Newsweek, "Homeless in America," January 2, 1984,      p.

    25.



16. New York State, Homelessness in New York State, Report to    the   Governor,1984.


17. Assuming that the number of patients in institutions in 1955 was 558,922,

    this number would have increased with population growth (40 between 1955 &

    1982), this number would be at 782,491. However only 125,200 patients were

    institutionalized in 1982, leaving a "gap" of 657,291- the number that

    would have been institutionalized at 1955 rates.

    Assuming that approximately one—third of the 279,000 (or 93,000) homeless

    are mentally ill ( and would be in institutions), we find a failure rate of

    deinstitutionalization of 93,000/657,291 or 149.   This   number represents

    the number not institutionalized that ended up homeless.


18. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Housing Reports, Annual Housing Survey.


19. Urban Institute, "Evaluation of the Emergency Food and Shelter Program,"

   Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations, January 1985.
                                       32


                      Appendix A: The Survey Methodology


    While our survey was not a Census Bureau-style random design, an effort was

made to cover a variety of places and homeless people in different circumstan-

ces. We divided New York City in to five regions: terminal area (Penn Station,

Grand Central Station and Times Square); the lower west side; the lower east

side; the upper west and east side; and the Central Park area. In these areas,

we divided the interviews evenly into two categories 1) persons found in the

streets and parks, 2)persons found in soup kitchens, food lines and other places

of service. In the streets and parks, Brian approached anyone who had at least

one of the following tell—tale signs of homelessness: 1) poor atire, such as an

old ripped jacket, unmatching shoes, etc.,   2) ragged appearance such as scrappy

beard, obvious poor hygiene, etc., 3) anyone pushing a supermarket cart, 4)

anyone carrying a bag for belongings, 5) anyone collecting cans, 6) anyone with

mental illness. In order to conduct interviews in service places where the

homeless congregate, Brian visited the followng soup kitchens, food lines and

service places: St. Francis (Breadline)-West 31st Street; Holy Apostles (Soup

kitchen)-East 28th Street; Lambs Church of the Nazarene (Soup Kitchen)-West 4th

Street; Bowery Mission (services)-Bowery; Soul Saving Station(Food)-West 124th

Street; Broadway Presbyterian Church (Soup Kitchen)-West 114th Street;

Franciscan Missionaries-East 45th Street; Calvary St. George (Sandwich

line)-East 16th Street; Yorkville Soup Kitchen-91 Street and 1st Avenue; St.

John the Divine Episcopal (Soup Kitchen)—West 112th Street; Coalition for the

Homeless (Food line)—Grand Central Station. Soup kitchens or other places that

allowed only certain groups were not visited. Interviews were divided evenly

among areas and between street or soup kitchen,

    In order to interview those in the shelters, we divided the sheltered group

into 3 categories: 1) family shelters, 2) women's shelters and 3) men's
                                           33


 shelters. In the family shelters, Brian evenly conducted 104 interviews in four

of the main family shelters: 1)Alberta Hotel, 2)Martinique Hotel; 3)Carter

Hotel; 4)Holland Hotel. These hotels are used by the city government as

shelters in NYC. In the men's shelters, Brian conducted interviews evenly in

the following shelters: 1)Bronx Men's Shelter; 2)Harlem Men's Shelter; 3)Fort

Washington Armory; 4)Third Street. Third Street is the center where men are

transported to other shelters.     I-fe interviewed men here so that all of the

smaller shelters would be represented as well as the larger ones such as Fort

Armory (about 600 men.) In all, 155 were interviewed.

       Women were interviewed in two of the larger (100 plus) shelters in

Manhattan: 1) Shelter Care Center for Women, Annex 2) Lexington Avenue Armory.

In all, 52 women were interviewed. Men and women were interviewed in approx-ima-

tely this ratio because past studies in NYC showed that 3:1 was the approximate

male/female ratio in the shelter system. In all, 516 homeless were interviewed

-in the streets and shelters of the city with an 81 response rate.

Bias

       Because some homeless people are unwilling to be interviewed, a problem ar-i--

ses concerning the randomness in the study.     If certain individuals refuse to be

interviewed, the results will be biased. Compared to other studies that

attempted to interview the homeless, the response rate in our survey as very

high. A reason for this was that Brian spent many hours working in soup

kitchens and food lines so that he knew many of the homeless as friends and thej

were, therefore, very receptive to being interviewed. Many of the homeless

urged their friends to agree to be interviewed, and offered their services as

interpreters for Hispanic homeless. Occassionally, Brian invited a homeless

person to talk over lunch or' coffee. With those who were incoherent, rather

than formally interview, Brian let them tell him about themselves and filled in
                                    34



the information. Often, it would take several conversations with a homeless

person before he was able to record all of the information. Homeless persons of

this type generally stay in the same area and can be found again easily. In

order to record all of the information, interviews often lasted several hours.

During these interviews, Brian usually took notes in order to gain a better

understanding of the problem in general. As can be seen in the accompanying

instrument, the interview dealt with only the briefest and simplest questions.
                                          35


                                   Bibliography


 Alter, Jonathan, et al., "Homeless in America," Newsweek, January 1984.


 Burbridge, Lynn C., et aL, "An Evaluation of the Emergency Food and Shelter

      Program: National, Regional, and State Level Analysis," (November, 1984)

      and "Local Boards and Intermediaries" (January 1985), The Urban Institute.


Burt, Martha R. and Burbridge, Lynn C. "Evaluation of the Emergency Food and

     Shelter Program," The Urban Institute, January 1985.


Citizen's Committee for Children of New York, "7000 Homeless Children: The

     Crisis Continues," October 1984.


City of Boston Emergency Shelter Commission, "Emergency Shelter Commiss-ior:

     'The October Project' Seeing the Obvious," October 1983.


Committee on Government Operations, "The Federal Response to the Homeless

     Crisis," Third Report, April 18, 1985.


Crystal, Stephen, "Chronic and Situational Dependency: Long-Term Residents in a

     Shelter for Men," Human Resources Administration of the City of New Yo-k,

     May 1982.


Crystal, Stephen, and Goistein, Mervyn, "Correlates of Shelter Utilization: One

     Day Study," Human Resources Administration of the City of New York, August

     1984.



Crystal, Stephen, and Goldstein, !rvyn, "Homeless in New York City Shelters,"

     Human Resources Administration of the City of New York, May 1984.


Dietz, Stephen, Light, Helena, and Marker, David, "Survey of Shelters for the

     Homeless," U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office o'

     Policy Development and Research, April 1984.
                                       36



 Emergency Shelter Commission and United Community Planning Corporation,

      "Boston's Homeless: Taking the Next Step," April 1986.


Executive Office of Human Services, Massachusetts Report on Homelessness, p. 19.


Federal Task Force on the Homeless, Regional Meetings Briefing Book, March,

      1985.



Food Research and Action Center, Bitter Harvest II: A Status Report on the

      Need for Emergency Food Assistance in America, December 1985.


Planning Committee of the Emergency Shelter Commission, "Housing the Homeless:

     A Report on Boston's Homeless Adults and Families," December 1985.


Reiners, Elise, "Homelessness: The Explosion of Media Coverage on the Homeless,"

     May 1986.


Salant, Stephen W,, "Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,"

     Quarterly Journal of Economics.


Society for Promotion of Area Resource Centres (SPARC), "We, the Invisible: A

     Census of Pavement Dwellers," 1985.


Stone, Laurie, et al., "Heartbreak Hotels," The Village Voice, April 1, 1986.


Subcommittee on Housing and Community Development of the Committee on Bank-ing,

     Finance and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, 98th Congress Second

     Session, Homeless in America II, January 1984.

Sumariwalla, Russy 0. and Woodside, Cynthia, "An Internal Assessment of Impact

     of   United Way's Role and Participation in the Programs on the United

    Way System," United Way Institute, May 1985.
                                      37


Surber, Monica, et al., "An Evaluation of the Emergency Food and Shelter

     Program: Direct Service Providers," The Urban Institute, January 1985.


U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Housing Reports: Annual Housing Survey, Part

     A, 1979, 1983.


U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1985.


U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Helping the Homeless, a Resource

     Guide, Summer 1984.


Wickendon, Dorothy "Abandoned Americans," The New Republic, March 18, 1985.


Wiegand, R. Bruce "Counting the Homeless," American Demographics, December

     1985.
                                        38



                              The Survey Instrument

 Age:     Race: white black hispanic asian        male-female

 Single married divorced children:

 How long ago was the first day that you ever were homeless:

 Sinced that day how much time have you spent on the:
 streets:     shelters:     home:     other:
 percentage of total: st   sh   ho   other
percentage of last year: St sh ho other

Do you have any plans to get off of the streets in the next two weeks: yes no

Where are you going:    next year or SO: yes no

What factor(s) caused you to become homeless?
eviction   lost job rent up benefits cut building condemned other

How many years of schooling have you completed?
—  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                       —
Have you been employed since then: yes no

How many years did your longest job last?

Years worked since school:                   Percentage:

Time spent working in last 4 years:          Percentage:

Time spent working in last year:             Percentage:

Length of time since last employed:

Have you ever received any benefits:    yes no number of years:

Have you ever lived in public housing: yes no number of years:

Did you grow up with: both parents mother father foster home relatives
                     institution other

Was your family on welfare: yes no

Have you ever been in a: jail institution hospital(physical) Years:

are you able to work: yes no why not:

comments made:


interviewers perceptions:
