NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MATCHING CAPITAL AND LABOR
Jonathan B. Berk
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Binying Liu
Working Paper 20138
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20138
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We thank Anat Admati, Peter DeMarzo, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, Paul Pfleiderer, Anamaria Pieschacon
and Michael Roberts for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jonathan B. Berk, Jules H. van Binsbergen, and Binying Liu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Matching Capital and Labor
Jonathan B. Berk, Jules H. van Binsbergen, and Binying Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20138
May 2014, Revised October 2014
JEL No. D22,G11,G12,G2,G20,G3,G30,J01,J24,L22,L23,L25
ABSTRACT
We establish an important role for the firm by studying capital reallocation decisions of mutual fund
firms. At least 30% of the value mutual fund managers add can be attributed to the firm's role in efficiently
allocating capital amongst its mutual fund managers. We find no evidence of a similar effect when
a firm hires managers from another firm. We conclude that an important reason why firms exist is
the private information that derives from the firm's ability to better assess the skill of its own employees.
Jonathan B. Berk
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94306
and NBER
jonathan.b.berk@gmail.com
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
julesv@wharton.upenn.edu

Binying Liu
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
b-liu@kellogg.northwestern.edu

We demonstrate, empirically, that an important role of a firm in the mutual fund
sector is to efficiently match capital to skill. In a world with perfectly rational players,
no information asymmetries and no other frictions, the role of a mutual fund firm would
be irrelevant because investors themselves would efficiently allocate their own capital
amongst managers. In reality, what we find, is that mutual fund executives play a very
important role in capital allocation. Mutual fund firms appear to add substantial value by
intermediating between investors and managers and thereby efficiently matching capital
to skill.
A decision to increase a portfolio manager’s responsibility by assigning an additional
fund to that manager (that is, a decision to increase the manager’s assets under management, hereafter AUM), leads to an increase in the manager’s subsequent value added.
Similarly, we find that decisions to reduce managers’ responsibilities by taking away a
fund also lead to increases in subsequent value added. We find that at a minimum, the
decision to reallocate capital to a manager adds, on average, $715,000 per manager per
month, implying that the firm is responsible for at least 30% of the total value added of
the average manager.
We show that investors are unable to match the firm’s capital reallocation decision
themselves. We hypothesize that the reason why derives from the significant informational
advantage mutual fund executives have relative to investors. We provide supporting evidence in favor of this hypothesis: (1) external hires that involve a change in AUM do not
lead to a detectable change in future value added and (2) while past performance does
explain investor flows, it has very little explanatory power over firm capital reallocation
decisions. We also find that the capital reallocation decisions add more value for young
managers, supporting the hypothesis that the firm’s advantage derives from its access
to better information about managerial ability. These facts are consistent with the hypothesis, first theorized by Alchian and Demsetz (1972), that firm executives use factors
that are not easily observable to people outside the firm to make their capital allocation
decisions.
Many of the questions pertaining to the economics of organizations are difficult to
study because it is often hard to measure employee output directly. The advantage
of the mutual fund sector is that because the performance of a mutual fund is public
information, employee output is directly observable. That is, a mutual fund manager
has one task — to invest capital on behalf of investors. The return he generates, as well
as the amount of capital invested, is public information. So is the investor’s next best
1

alternative investment opportunity, an investment in passively managed index funds. By
comparing the manager’s performance against this alternative, we can directly calculate
an individual manager’s output, that is, the value she adds. We are then able to infer at
least part of the firm’s role in creating value by looking at how firm decisions affect the
manager’s value added.
The mutual fund sector is comprised of firms that own little physical capital. Consequently, it provides an ideal place to study the importance of theories of the firm.
Although in some sense the industry is actually very capital intensive (the business is,
after all, about investing financial capital), what distinguishes this industry from other
capital intensive industries is that the firm does not own its capital. Instead, the customers of mutual fund companies, that is, mutual fund investors, retain all ownership
rights to their capital and in most cases can call it back at any time. Thus, unlike a
typical firm, the value of a mutual fund firm does not include the value of the capital
it needs to operate. Thus ownership rights to capital cannot play an important role in
why mutual fund companies exist or are valuable. Yet the industry is dominated by large
firms. As of January 2011, the 5 largest mutual fund firms manage 46% of all assets while
making up only 1% of all firms in the industry. In this paper we identify an economically
important role for firms: they intermediate between investors and managers, efficiently
matching capital and labor. The main implication of our results is that while ownership
rights to capital undoubtably play an important role in firm value, other factors, such as
the informational role of the firm, potentially play just as important a role.

1

Background

The literature on the economics of organizations has raised several important questions
related to the role of firms. What makes a firm successful? Is it a characteristic of the
firm itself, or is it simply that a successful firm is a collection of particularly talented
employees? Why do people choose to work for firms rather than for themselves? Are
employees more productive when they work as part of a larger group? Clearly the firm
plays an important role in sharing risk, but does it have a role beyond that?
There is now a large theoretical literature designed to answer these questions (see Hart
and Moore (1990), Holmstrom and Tirole (1989), Hart (1995) and Rajan and Zingales
(1998)). A key aspect of modern theories of the firm is the concept of ownership. In a
world with incomplete contracting, incomplete information and bounded rationality, ex
2

post bargaining power is affected by ownership. Asset owners, because they retain the
rights of control, have inherently more bargaining power. An important insight of this
literature is that firms exist to ensure that ex ante ownership is concentrated to allow for
efficient ex post outcomes. Although these theories undoubtedly explain an important
component of why modern firms exist, they cannot explain a particular, and increasingly
important, type of firm — a firm that consists almost exclusively of human capital. These
firms have little physical capital other than perhaps some intangible capital such as the
firm’s brand name. Hence, a primary reason for the existence of these types of firms
cannot be the assignment of ex post bargaining rights through asset ownership.
Our paper is part of the expanding literature that seeks to isolate the role of the worker
(manager) from that of the firm. Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) find worker fixed
effects to be more important than firm fixed effects in driving heterogeneity in workers’
wages. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) study persistence in CEO characteristics (or styles)
and its connection to performance and pay. Graham, Li, and Qiu (2011) decompose
variation in CEO compensation and show that most of this difference is explained by
manager heterogeneity rather than firm heterogeneity. Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2013)
separate the value added in venture capital projects into a manager component and a firm
component and argue that human capital, rather than organizational capital, accounts
for most of the skill in the venture capital world. This research relies on the fact that
workers move between firms to identify the separate roles of workers and firms. However,
because switching firms is an endogeneous decision, the methodology is generally unable
to put a quantitative bound on the contribution of the firm independent of those working
for it. Instead of focusing on external moves as the identification strategy, we rely on the
firm’s internal decision to promote and demote its workers and thus we are able to derive
a lower bound on the firm’s contribution to productivity.
This study is part of the literature that studies how the intra-firm allocation of capital
and labor affects productivity and drives heterogeneity in the quality of firms. In a recent
paper, Tate and Yang (2014) show that diversified firms have higher labor productivity
and actively redeploy their human capital to business areas with better prospects. Giroud
and Mueller (2014) find that firms take resources away from less productive plants and
reallocate them to plants with better investment opportunities. Resource allocation (or
misallocation) across firms and across industries has also been identified as a major determinant of economic productivity at the macroeconomic level.1 Most mutual funds are
1

For example, see Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Alfaro, Charlton, and Kanczuk (2009) and Bartelsman,

3

owned and marketed as part of a fund family, so a number of studies have looked into
how the family structure affects the mutual fund industry.2

2

The Mutual Fund Industry

In the last 50 years there has been a secular trend away from direct investment in the stock
market. Individual investors used to make up more than 50% of the market, today they
are responsible for barely 20% of the total capital investment in U.S. markets. During
that time there has been a concomitant rise in indirect investment, principally in mutual
funds. Rather than invest directly in stocks, a mutual fund investor invests his money in
a fund that buys stocks on his behalf. Historically, mutual funds made up less than 5% of
the market, today they make up a third of total investment.3 The industry itself has also
changed. Initially made up of only actively managed funds, funds where the fund manager
claims to provide an expected return in excess of the expected return of a well-diversified
portfolio of equivalent risk, today 13% of the industry consists of index funds — funds
that simply provide diversification services.
For our purposes the rise of the index fund industry is fortuitous because these funds
allow us to measure something that usually proves elusive to economists — what would
have happened if the firm had not used its resources to generate value. Because index
funds provide the lowest cost way for any investor to own a well-diversified portfolio, the
value added of a mutual fund can be measured by comparing its performance against what
would have happened had the fund’s assets been invested in an index fund of similar risk.
The difference is the profits that accrue to the firm because of a skill in short supply, what
we will call value added.
The definition of value added that we use in this paper was introduced by Berk and
van Binsbergen (2013). It is calculated by first determining the fund’s realized gross alpha
– the difference between the return the fund generated from its investments before any
fees or expenses, and the return that would have transpired had the assets been invested
Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013).
2
Massa (2003) argues that having fund families reduces investors’ cost of switching between funds.
Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006) and Bhattacharya, Lee, and Pool (2013) find evidence that mutual fund
families transfer performance from one group of funds to another group of funds through coordinated
trades. Kempf and Ruenzi (2008) show that intra-firm competition has important effects on managers’
appetite for risk. Chen, Hong, Jiang, and Kubik (2013) find that funds outsourced to advisory firms
underperform funds managed in-house. Fang, Kempf, and Trapp (2014) show that a firm allocates its
skilled managers to funds targeting inefficient markets.
3
See French (2008).

4

in a set of index funds of comparable risk. The realized gross alpha is then multiplied by
the total amount of capital under management to provide the total value add of the fund.
We will follow Berk and van Binsbergen (2013) and use, as the alternative investment
opportunity set, the set of (orthogonized) index funds offered by The Vanguard Group
(see Table 1 for the specific funds used). There are good reasons to use these index funds.
First, Vanguard is the firm that pioneered index funds and so we can be reasonably sure
that the funds in our set represent a set of alternative investable opportunities that were
available at the time. Second, Vanguard is the largest, and is widely regarded as the
best, provider of diversification services. Finally, Berk and van Binsbergen (2013) show
that Vanguard funds have added value relative to other index funds, that is, Vanguard
provides these services at a lower cost than its average competitor.

Fund Name

Ticker

S&P 500 Index
VFINX
Extended Market Index
VEXMX
Small-Cap Index
NAESX
European Stock Index
VEURX
Pacific Stock Index
VPACX
Value Index
VVIAX
Balanced Index
VBINX
Emerging Markets Stock Index VEIEX
Mid-Cap Index
VIMSX
Small-Cap Growth Index
VISGX
Small-Cap Value Index
VISVX

Asset Class

Inception Date

Large-Cap Blend
Mid-Cap Blend
Small-Cap Blend
International
International
Large-Cap Value
Balanced
International
Mid-Cap Blend
Small-Cap Growth
Small-Cap Value

08/31/1976
12/21/1987
01/01/1990∗
06/18/1990
06/18/1990
11/02/1992
11/02/1992
05/04/1994
05/21/1998
05/21/1998
05/21/1998

Table 1: Benchmark Vanguard Index Funds: This table lists the set of Vanguard Index Funds
used to calculate the Vanguard benchmark. The listed ticker is for the Investor class shares which we
use until Vanguard introduced an Admiral class for the fund, and thereafter we use the return on the
Admiral class shares (Admiral class shares have lower fees but require a higher minimum investment.)
*NAESX was introduced earlier but was originally not an index fund. It was converted to an index fund
in late 1989, so the date in the table reflects the first date we included the fund in the benchmark set.

If Rtj is the excess return (the realized return minus the risk free rate) earned by
investors in the j’th Vanguard index fund at time t, then the benchmark return for fund
i is given by:
n(t)
X
B
Rit =
β ji Rtj ,
(1)
j=1

5

where n(t) is the total number of index funds offered by Vanguard at time t and β ji is
obtained from the appropriate linear projection, as described in Berk and van Binsbergen
(2013), of the i’th active mutual fund onto the set of orthogonalized Vanguard index funds.
By using Vanguard index funds as benchmarks, we can be certain that these portfolios
include transaction costs and reflect the dynamic evolution of active strategies.
The industry is characterized by a large number of firms that each market multiple
funds to investors. Funds are managed by individual managers. Managers can manage
multiple funds within a firm and funds can be managed by more than one manager.
Because of SEC reporting requirements we are able to observe detailed information on
each fund. For our purposes we know the fund’s performance (i.e., realized returns), fees
charged, total assets under management and importantly, the identity of its manager(s).
Customers provide the capital to mutual fund firms by investing in the firms’ funds.
That is, investors invest in funds, not firms. A firm cannot arbitrarily move capital from
one of its funds to another fund. However, what firms can, and do, do is decide which
manager gets to manage which fund. For that reason, the amount of capital a particular
manager has under her control is affected by two things: (1) investors’ decisions to put
capital in or take capital out of the funds the manager manages, and (2) the firm’s
decisions to either give the manager responsibility for managing an additional fund or
taking away that responsibility. By observing the second mechanism we will be able to
infer whether the firm adds value by assigning capital to labor.

3

Data

We use the dataset in Berk and van Binsbergen (2013). This dataset, which is comprised
of monthly observations of all mutual funds since 1977 is compiled from combining two
databases, the CRSP survivorship bias free mutual fund database and the Morningstar
Principia database.
We augment that data with the manager information provided by both data sources.
Although both CRSP and Principia have information on fund managers and firms, this
information is not consistently recorded in both databases. In many cases, individual
manager names are replaced with the words “Team Managed” and often manager names
are not consistently recorded.4 For this reason, we make use of a third data source:
4

In addition to examples of inconsistent spelling of a manager’s name, there are other inconsistencies
that we need to address. For example, sometimes the full name is spelled out, sometimes only the

6

Morningstar Direct. The Morningstar Direct database supposedly contains a clean and
complete list of managers and firms for each fund in Principia that is still in existence,
merged, or closed. However, there are examples of funds in Principia that are not in
Morningstar Direct, especially early in the sample. This suggests that the Morningstar
Direct database is not survivorship bias free. To make sure that we do not inadvertently
introduce a survivorship bias into our data, we only use Morningstar Direct to augment
our existing database. That is, we update the manager names on our existing database
with information from Morningstar Direct, but, importantly, still keep and use the data
in the original database that we could not update. For those funds for which we cannot
identify a match in Morningstar Direct, we employ an automated algorithm as well as
manual screening to clean up the manager information.5
We drop all observations without an identifier, as well as observations with missing
returns, AUMs, expense ratios or information on holding composition. We also remove
all bond and money market funds6 as well as index funds, by using the Principia special
criteria indicator and screening fund names. To adjust for the effect of inflation, we
restate all AUM observations in January 1, 2000 dollars. We aggregate different share
classes of the same fund into one fund, resulting in a database consisting of 5542 funds.
The final sample covers the period from January 1977 to March 2011.
Table 2 reports summary statistics of our resulting database of mutual funds. The
total number of firms, managers and funds has grown, although both managers and funds
have grown proportionately faster than firms, so the average number of managers and
funds per firm grew during our sample. The total number of funds grew by a factor of
56, while the average size of a fund only grew by a factor of 3, implying that most of the
growth in this industry is attributable to the creation of new funds rather than growth in
existing funds.

4

Definitions

Let Ritg be the gross excess return of fund i at time t, that is, the return in excess of the
risk free rate before management fees and expenses are taken out. The value added of
manager’s initials are used, and sometimes his/her middle name is included.
5
For a detailed description, see the Online Appendix to this paper.
6
Consistent with Berk and van Binsbergen (2013), a money market fund is defined to be a fund with,
on average, over 20% of its assets in cash. A bond fund is defined as a fund with, on average, over 50%
of its assets in either bonds or cash.

7

Total Number of

Average Number of
Managers per
Funds per

Average AUM per
(Y2000 $ Billion)

Year

Firms

Managers

Funds

Firm

Fund

Firm

Manager

Firm

Manager

Fund

1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011

39
49
69
116
161
290
356
445
501
486
510
523

76
108
174
332
552
1083
1789
2739
3436
3651
4388
4455

69
99
157
292
471
894
1395
2124
2672
2883
3621
3880

1.95
2.20
2.54
2.89
3.48
3.80
5.23
6.64
7.83
9.17
11.6
11.6

1.23
1.29
1.37
1.44
1.53
1.57
1.77
1.95
2.12
2.32
2.77
2.84

1.77
2.02
2.28
2.52
2.93
3.08
3.92
4.77
5.33
5.93
7.10
7.42

1.12
1.19
1.24
1.27
1.30
1.30
1.38
1.51
1.65
1.83
2.28
2.47

0.69
0.76
0.93
1.26
1.44
1.53
2.99
4.93
4.74
6.27
8.76
7.42

0.36
0.34
0.37
0.44
0.42
0.41
0.60
0.80
0.69
0.84
1.02
0.87

0.39
0.38
0.41
0.50
0.49
0.50
0.76
1.03
0.89
1.06
1.23
1.00

Table 2: Characteristics of Mutual Fund Firms and Managers: This table reports characteristics
of mutual fund firms and managers for selected years in our dataset. When a fund is comanaged by N
managers, we attribute N1 th of the fund’s AUM to each of its managers.

fund i is:
Vit ≡ qit−1 Ritg − RitB



(2)

where qit−1 is the amount of assets under management of fund i at t − 1. Vit is the value,
in dollars, the fund adds over and above what would have been earned if the capital was
invested in an appropriate passive benchmark.
It is worth spending some time here reviewing the intuition behind this measure of
value added. Note that expected gross return over the benchmark is the sum of the fund’s
net alpha, αit , and the fee charged, φit , so that
 g


B
= qit αit + φit .
Et [Vit+1 ] = qit Et Rit+1
− Rit+1
Notice that if the manager managing the fund has no skill, on average, the fund cannot
make more than the benchmark return before fees. Thus, after fees, the fund must
underperform the benchmark by at least the amount of the fee charged. That is, when
the manager has no skill, αit ≤ −φit , so the value added measure is zero or less. For
this measure to be positive, the fund’s manager must have some skill, that is, the fund
must outperform the benchmark before fees. To properly account for the scale of the
investment, it is important to multiply the gross excess return over the benchmark by the
8

fund’s AUM.
The value added by firm f at time t is the sum of all value created by its funds:
Vf t =

X

Vit

(3)

i∈Ωf t−1

where Ωf t is the set of all funds in firm f at time t. Funds are managed by at least one
manager in the firm and managers can manage multiple funds. So we define the value
added by manager m at time t as the sum of the value added of all the funds he manages.
When a fund is managed by multiple managers, we divide the fund’s value added equally
across its managers. Let nit be the number of managers managing fund i at time t. Then
manager m’s value added is,
X Vit
,
(4)
Vmt =
nit−1
i∈Ω
mt−1

where Ωmt is the set of all funds managed by m at time t. Using the same logic, the
manager’s AUM is:
X qit
qmt =
.
(5)
n
it
i∈Ω
mt

Using this AUM sharing rule, the manager’s gross return is defined as follows:
g
Rmt
=

1
qmt−1

X
i∈Ωmt−1

qit−1 g
R .
nit−1 it

(6)

We define net return (the return after fees are taken out) similarly. Ritn is the net return
of the i’th fund between time t − 1 and time t. Then the manager’s net return (his return
n
, is calculated by weighting the net return across the funds
minus the fees he charges), Rm,t
he manages:
X qit−1
1
n
Rn .
(7)
Rmt
=
qmt−1 i∈Ω
nit−1 it
mt−1

Similarly, the manager’s benchmark return is constructed from the benchmark returns of
the funds he manages:
X qit−1
1
B
Rmt
=
RitB .
(8)
qmt−1 i∈Ω
nit−1
mt−1

To differentiate superior past performance from poor past performance we need a
measure to select firms. We use the firm’s skill ratio, as defined in Berk and van Binsbergen

9

Figure 1: Capital and Human Resources Controlled by the Five Largest Firms: This figure
reports the fraction of assets controlled by and the fraction of managers working for the 5 largest firms
in January of each calendar year, for every year between 1977 and 2011. As a point of comparison we
also provide the 5 firms as a fraction of the total number of firms.

(2013):
SKRfτ
V̄fτ

≡

V̄fτ
σ V̄fτ

Vf t
t=t0 τ −t0

Pτ

(9)


V̄fτ



√Pτ

(Vf t −V̄ τ )2

t=t0
f
where
=
is average firm value added up to time τ , σ
=
τ −t0
is the standard error of firm value added up to time τ and t0 is the start date of the firm.
Note that the skill ratio is essentially the t-statistic of the mean value added up until time
τ.

5

The Importance of Firms

The mutual fund industry is dominated by a few large firms. As of January 2011, the
5 largest mutual fund firms, which make up less than 1% of the total number of firms,
hire 13% of all mutual fund managers and manage 46% of all assets in the industry (see
Figure 1). That 13% of managers manage 46% of the assets is suggestive that larger firms
are able to hire better managers. To establish this fact, we begin by showing that firm
performance is persistent, that is, firms that have added value in the past keep adding
value in the future. We then show that the future performance of a manager is predictable
10

by the past performance of other managers at the same firm. These two results establish
that, for whatever reason, better managers work with each other.

5.1

Persistence in Firm Value Added

We demonstrate firm persistence by sorting funds into quantiles based on the skill ratio of
their firms and showing that funds that belong to firms with high skill ratios have higher
future value added. Using the firm skill ratio measured at each time t, we sort funds
into two quantiles, the top and bottom 50%. We then count the fraction of times, over a
specified future time horizon, that a fund of each quantile outperforms the median fund.
For a fund to be included in this sort, we require its firm to have at least three years of
historical data. We estimate the fund’s future value added over a measurement horizon of
h months. Because we need a minimum number of months to estimate the fund’s betas,
we drop all funds with less than 18 observations in the measurement horizon. To remove
the obvious selection bias, for the remaining funds we drop the first 18 observations as
well, leaving the remaining observations exclusively in the horizon {t + 19, .., t + h}. At
each future time τ ∈ {t + 19, .., t + h} we compare the value added of every fund to the
value added of the median fund, and count the number of times the fund’s value added
exceeds the median value added. At the end of the horizon, funds are again sorted on
the firm’s skill ratio at that time, and the process is repeated as many times as the data
allows. At the end of the process we add up the total number of times funds in each half
of the sample beat the median fund. To convert this number into a percentage, we divide
it by the total number of observations in that half of the sample.7 The first column of
Table 3 reports the results. At the 3, 4 and 5 year horizon, funds of firms with above
median skill ratios significantly outperform (at the 99% confidence level) funds of firms
with below median skill ratios.
We repeat the above analysis sorting funds into the top quintile and bottom quintile
based on their firm’s skill ratio, as well as top decile and bottom decile. That is, in the
measurement horizon we restrict attention to top and bottom quintile/decile funds and
record the fraction of times funds in each quintile/decile outperform the median fund in
7

The main difficulty with implementing this strategy is uncertainty in the estimate of the fund’s
betas. When estimation error in the periods before the sort is positively correlated to the error in the
measurement horizon, a researcher could falsely conclude that evidence of persistence exists when there is
no persistence. To avoid this bias we do not use information from the periods before the sort to estimate
the betas in the periods after the sort. This means that we require a future horizon of sufficient length
to produce reliable beta estimates, so the shortest horizon we use to measure future performance is three
years.

11

the restricted sample. The second and third column of Table 3 report these results. At
all horizons, and for both quintile and decile sorts, the results show that funds from firms
with higher skill ratios statistically outperform funds from firms with lower skill ratios.

3 Years
4 Years
5 Years

Top q% Outperforms Bottom q%
q=50
q=20
q=10
50.57∗∗
51.13∗∗
51.46∗∗
(0.17)
(0.30)
(0.39)
∗∗
∗∗
50.55
50.93
51.18∗∗
(0.18)
(0.33)
(0.43)
∗∗
∗
50.51
50.87
50.98∗
(0.19)
(0.43)
(0.46)

Table 3: Predicting Fund Performance Using Firm Skill: We report the fraction of times (in
percentages) a fund sorted into the top q% quantile (based on its firm’s skill ratio) has higher realized
value added than the median fund over the next 3, 4, or 5 years. Standard errors, clustered by yearmonth,
are given in parentheses. * (**) indicates that the estimate is significantly greater than 50% at the 95%
(99%) confidence level.

5.2

Predicting a Manager’s Performance by the Past
Performance of His Colleagues

We next establish that a manager’s future performance can be predicted by the past
performance of other managers at the same firm. To do this test, we complete the following
three steps for every fund i: (1) we identify the set of managers managing fund i, (2) we
identify all funds in the firm managed by any member of this set of managers, and (3) we
recalculate the firm’s skill ratio excluding those funds, hereafter, the adjusted skill ratio.
We then sort funds using the adjusted skill ratio, thus ensuring that the sort excludes any
manager of the fund itself and proceed with the same test as described in the previous
section. Table 4 tabulates the resulting statistics using 2, 5 and 10 quantiles. The table
shows that funds sorted into the top quantile consistently outperform the bottom quantile
for all 3 sorts and over all 3 measurement horizons.
Taken together, these results establish that better managers work together. However,
they do not provide additional insight into what the exact role of the firm is. Do better
managers choose to work at better firms because they are more productive hanging out
with each other, or do firms provide extra services that these managers value? The next
section answers this question.

12

3 Years
4 Years
5 Years

Top q% Outperforms Bottom q%
q=50
q=20
q=10
∗
∗∗
50.31
50.73
50.86∗∗
(0.13)
(0.22)
(0.29)
∗
∗
50.30
50.58
50.95∗∗
(0.14)
(0.23)
(0.31)
50.44∗∗
50.70∗∗
50.91∗∗
(0.14)
(0.23)
(0.32)

Table 4: Predicting Managers’ Performance Using Their Peers: We report the fraction of times
(in percentages) a fund sorted into the top q% quantile (based on skill ratio of other managers belonging
to the same firm but not managing this fund) has higher realized value added than the median fund
over the next 3, 4, or 5 years. Standard errors, clustered by yearmonth, are given in parentheses. * (**)
indicates that the estimate is significantly greater than 50% at the 95% (99%) confidence level.

6

Matching Capital with Skill

At first glance, it might seem that the most direct way to study the role of the firm would
be to estimate an attribution model. Managers move frequently enough between firms to
form a very well-connected network. So the most obvious approach to studying the role of
the firm is to estimate a panel regression that includes fixed effects for firms and managers.
Unfortunately, the results of such an approach would be difficult to interpret because
manager moves are endogenous. Conceivably, the firm could merely be a coordination
device for managers to work together. We avoid the aforementioned endogeneity problem
by concentrating on promotions and demotions within the firm, because these internal
firm decisions cannot be driven by managers self-selecting into firms.
We take as the Null hypothesis the Coasian benchmark, a neoclassical world with no
frictions and informational asymmetries. In this world investors already invest the optimal
amount of capital in funds and therefore there is no role for the firm to assign more or
less capital to its fund managers. To test this Null, we study changes in value added
after a firm reassigns capital to its managers. Firms make these reallocation decisions
when they either give a fund to a manager to manage and thereby increase the manager’s
AUM, hereafter a promotion, or take away a fund from a manager and thereby decrease
the manager’s AUM, hereafter a demotion. Because we need to observe the manager’s
value added after the demotion decision, we are forced to exclude demotions that are also
termination decisions.8
8

In cases in which a firm both adds and takes away a fund at the same time, we use the net change
in assets due to the capital reallocation decision to determine whether the decision was a promotion or
demotion.

13

We begin our analysis by asking whether firms’ reallocation decisions create value,
that is, we run the following panel regression:
Vmt = λt + λm + β · 1reallocated
+ mt ,
mt

(10)

where Vmt is the estimated value added of manager m at time t (defined in (4)); 1reallocated
mt
is an indicator variable that takes on the value of 1 if manager m is internally promoted
or demoted before time t; λm are manager fixed effects; and λt are time fixed effects.
The results are reported in the first column of Table 5.9 The firm adds $715,000 per
month when it makes a decision to either promote or demote one of its managers which
is statistically different from zero at the 99% confidence level.
Estimates of (10) may be biased if the capital reallocation decisions are correlated
with past performance. If a manager is promoted (demoted) after superior (poor) performance, and if past performance has a component that is due to good (bad) luck, then
in expectation the manager’s future performance will mean revert. Consequently, past
bad luck will be measured as future value added and past good luck will be measured
as value destroyed by the manager. To examine the importance of this issue, we split
into two dummies, one for a promotion 1promoted
the reallocation dummy 1reallocated
, and
mt
mt
demoted
one for a demotion 1mt
. The promotion dummy takes on a value of 1 if the most
recent capital reallocation decision resulted in a net increase in the manager’s AUM and
zero otherwise. Similarly, the demotion dummy takes on the value of 1 if the most recent
capital reallocation decision resulted in a net decrease in the manager’s AUM and zero
otherwise. So, for example, if for a particular manager, the first capital reallocation decision is a promotion at time t1 and the second decision is a demotion at time t2 , then both
dummies will be zero up to time t1 , the promotion dummy will be 1 until time t2 and
zero afterwards and the demotion dummy will be zero up to time t2 and 1 afterwards.
We then run the following panel regression separately for promotions and demotions:
Vmt = λt + λm + β p · 1promoted
+ β d · 1demoted
+ mt
mt
mt
9

(11)

Standard errors of (10) estimates are two-way clustered by manager and comanagement block. Recall
that if a fund is comanaged we assign equal shares of the fund’s value added to all of its managers,
so two managers have correlated value added by construction if there exists a fund managed by both
managers. Consequently, we cluster standard errors by comanagement block, which is defined so that two
observations of the same year are assigned to the same block if their managers comanage a fund during
that year. Standard errors do not further increase if we instead assume all observations of the same year
belong to the same comanagement block (i.e. we find no correlation across comanagement blocks). See
Gameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2006), Thompson (2011) and Petersen (2009) for details on multi-way
clustering.

14

Capital Reallocation

0.715∗∗
(0.229)
0.817∗∗
(0.290)
0.477
(0.432)

• Promotion
• Demotion

0.946∗∗
(0.320)
0.468
(0.428)

0.950∗∗
(0.320)
0.481
(0.430)

0.943∗∗
(0.319)
0.558
(0.431)
0.576∗∗
(0.221)

-0.474
(0.451)

-0.470
(0.452)
-0.116
(0.115)

-0.466
(0.453)
-0.129
(0.117)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Comanager

AUM
Manager Tenure

Fixed Effects
• Manager
• Yearmonth

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.805∗∗
(0.291)
0.499
(0.432)

Yes
Yes

Table 5: Internal Reallocation of Capital: The first column of the table reports the panel regression
specification that uses the capital reallocation dummy from (10). The next three columns report the
specification where we split reallocations into promotions and demotions, that is, the estimates from (11)
along with AUM and manager tenure (measured in years since entry into the database) as additional
regressors. The fifth column includes, as an additional regressor, a dummy variable that equals one after
a comanager is added to a fund that that manager under consideration manages and remains on until
the manager under consideration is either promoted or demoted. The final column defines promotions
and demotions based on the change in the total dollar fees collected, rather than just the change in
AUM. Manager and yearmonth fixed effects are included in all regression specifications. Standard errors,
heteroskedastic-robust and two-way clustered by manager and by comanagement block, are provided
in parentheses. All numbers are reported in $ millions/month. * (**) indicates that the estimate is
significantly different from zero at the 95% (99%) confidence level.

where the definitions of all other variables are consistent with those from (10). The second
column of Table 5 reports the results. The coefficients on the promotion and demotion
dummies are positive, and importantly, the promotion dummy is $817,000 dollars per
month and statistically significantly different from zero. Because the mean reversion effect
biases the coefficient on the promotion dummy downwards, this estimate underestimates
the value created by the promotion decision. We can therefore be certain that the mean
reversion effect is not driving the rejection of our Null.
One might be concerned that, in a world with constant returns to scale, one would

15

expect to see a positive coefficient on the promotion dummy.10 That is, if a manager’s
gross alpha is independent of the amount of money under management, then an increase
in AUM necessarily implies an increase in value added. Although it is unclear how the
mutual fund market would equilibrate in such a world, to rule out this possibility, we
include last month’s AUM as an additional explanatory variable and report the results in
the third column of Table 4. Were this explanation of our results correct, the coefficient
on AUM would be positive and it would better explain variation in value added than the
promotion dummy. In fact, the coefficient is insignificant and the point estimate has the
wrong sign, while the promotion dummy remains highly significant.
It is likely that a manager’s value added rises with experience and so the firm’s promotion decisions will be partially based on manager tenure.11 To decompose the capital
reallocation decision into the portion that is driven by experience and the portion driven
by other factors, we control for managerial experience by including the number of prior
years the manager has managed money (at the current firm as well as any prior firms she
might have worked for). As reported in the fourth column of Table 5, the coefficient is
not statistically significantly different from zero and including tenure does not change the
magnitude of the coefficient on the promotion dummy. Firms use factors other than just
tenure to make promotion decisions.
The fifth column of Table 5 examines the effect of a promotion decision on existing
managers. This is, what happens to the value added of an existing manager when another manager is added to one of his funds? To answer this question, we include a new
dummy (termed “comanager”) that switches on whenever a new comanager is added to a
fund that the manager under consideration manages, and remains on until the manager
under consideration experiences a capital reallocation decision. The coefficient estimate
is positive and significant, implying that the addition of the new manager has positive
spillovers. Either the new manager’s value added is above the average value added of existing managers, or there are positive synergistic effects, so the addition of a new manager
increases the value added of existing managers. In either case, the implication is that the
coefficient on the promotion dummy underestimates the value of the firm’s decision to
increase its managers’ AUM.
10

There is a growing body of empirical evidence documenting decreasing returns to scale in the mutual fund industry, see Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004), Pollet and Wilson (2011), and Pastor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2014).
11
See Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2014) for analysis on the relationship between skill and manager
tenure.

16

We have defined promotions (and demotions) based on the change in AUM. But from
the firm’s perspective, what is arguably more important is the dollar fees the manager
generates for the firm. To address this issue, we redefine promotion and demotion based
on the change in the manager’s revenue. That is, a promotion is a capital reallocation
decision that increases the dollar fees collected (AUM × expense ratio), and a demotion
decreases the dollar fees collected. We then re-estimate (11) using this definition in the
sixth column of Table 5. A comparison between the second and sixth columns reveals
that using this alternative definition of a promotion and a demotion does not change our
results.
The point estimate of the coefficient on the demotion dummy is positive, as one would
expect if the decision to demote is optimal. If the manager was managing too much money
and thereby destroying value (perhaps by trading too much) the decision to demote will
increase the manager’s value added. The estimate is not statistically significantly different
from zero. The power to reject is lower for demotions than for promotions because our
data set is censored. When a manager is demoted and fired at the same time we do
not observe his subsequent value added. One way to address this issue is to explicitly
recognize that once a manager leaves a firm his contribution to the firm’s value added
is zero. The problem with this approach is that the decision to leave is not necessarily
the firm’s decision, so not all separations are also demotions. To distinguish voluntary
separations (retirement decisions) from firings (demotions), we infer whether the manager
was fired based on the firm’s earlier capital reallocation decisions and the manager’s
subsequent actions. We assume that if the most recent capital reallocation decision was
a demotion and the manager does not get another job with a different firm, then the
separation decision was a firing. That is, we set all subsequent value added observations
to zero when a manager leaves the database and his demotion dummy is on at the time
of the separation. Table 6 presents the results of rerunning the above analysis in this
augmented database. The demotion dummy remains positive and is now statistically
significantly different from zero in all specifications, consistent with the hypothesis that
the decision to demote is optimal. Managers who are dismissed were destroying value
prior to the dismissal. However, caution in interpreting these results is still in order.
First, our decision rule separating voluntary separations from firings is unlikely to work
perfectly, and second, the coefficient on the dismissal dummy is potentially upward biased
because of the aforementioned tendency for value added to mean revert. We will provide
further evidence on the second concern in the next section.

17

Capital Reallocation

0.720∗∗
(0.223)

• Promotion
• Demotion

Fixed Effects
• Manager
• Yearmonth

Yes
Yes

0.723∗∗
(0.278)
0.717∗
(0.334)

0.710∗
(0.279)
0.736∗
(0.333)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Table 6: Internal Reallocation of Capital (Adjusted for Firings): If a manager drops off the
database when his demotion dummy is on we fill in a value added of zero for that manager for all
subsequent firm observations. The first column of the table reports the panel regression specification
that uses the capital reallocation dummy from (10). The next column report the specification where we
split reallocations into promotions and demotions, that is, the estimates from (11). The final column
defines promotions and demotions based on the change in the total dollar fees collected, rather than just
the change in AUM. Manager and yearmonth fixed effects are included in all regression specifications.
Standard errors, heteroskedastic-robust and two-way clustered by manager and by comanagement block,
are provided in parentheses. All numbers are reported in $ millions/month. * (**) indicates that the
estimate is significantly different from zero at the 95% (99%) confidence level.

The value added numbers reported in Table 5 indicate that the value created from a
capital reallocation decision is large. However, it is important to appreciate that we don’t
know what would have happened had the firm not reassigned the capital. That is, these
numbers quantify the total value created, but do not necessarily quantify the value created
by the firm. Had the firm not reassigned the capital, potentially, investors could have done
the reassignment themselves. That is, to interpret our estimates as solely the value created
by the firm, one has to assume that no capital adjustment would have occurred through
the flow of funds. In the short term, this implicit assumption is not unrealistic; the
magnitude of the firm’s capital allocation decisions dwarfs the magnitude of inflows and
outflows. However, over longer periods of time, inflows and outflows could, in principle,
accumulate and eventually lead to an overall change in AUM that is commensurate with
the magnitude of promotions and demotions. So to quantitatively assess the magnitude
of the additional value added of the firm, we must construct a counterfactual. To be
conservative, we will focus on promotions because, as we argued above, our estimate of
the value added of a promotion is an underestimate whereas the estimate of value added
for a demotion is an overestimate because of the aforementioned mean reversion effect.
To construct a realistic counterfactual, we assume that the manager’s subsequent in18

flows would match the inflows, over the same time period, of a comparable set of managers.
Rather than construct a single counterfactual from one set of comparables, we construct a
range of counterfactuals. We construct the first counterfactual by assuming the promoted
manager would have experienced the same percentage increase in her AUM due to flows as
the weighted average percentage increase due to flows of all managers in that month. We
then construct the other counterfactuals by narrowing the set of comparable managers.
We eliminate all managers whose past two-year net return over the benchmark was below
a particular quantile and then assume that the manager’s percentage inflow would have
been the same as the weighted average percentage inflow of the remaining managers in
the counterfactual.12 For example, the second counterfactual eliminates managers whose
two-year return over the benchmark is in the bottom 1% and computes the flow of funds
by taking the weighted average of the remaining 99%. The third counterfactual eliminates the bottom 2% and we continue this process up to the extreme counterfactual which
eliminates the bottom 99%, and thus computes the flows by taking the weighted average
of the top 1%.
Using the percentage increases computed under the counterfactual flows, we recompute
what the AUM of the manager would have been. We do this until the counterfactual AUM
either grows to the manager’s actual AUM or the manager is demoted. Once either event
occurs, we use the actual AUM from then onwards. We then re-estimate the value added
of a promotion using the counterfactual AUM.
n
be the weighted average AUM and net return of the comFormally, let q∗t and R∗t
C
parable managers under the counterfactual. Let qmt
be the manager’s AUM under the
C
counterfactual. Then, for a promotion that occurs at time τ , qmt
for t ≥ τ is defined as
follows:



n
n
∗t )
 qmt−1 1 + q∗t −q∗t−1 (1+R
(1 + Rmt
) if t = τ
n )
q∗t−1 (1+R∗t
C


.
qmt =
n )
q∗t −q∗t−1 (1+R∗t
n
 qC
1
+
(1
+
R
)
if
t
>
τ
mt−1
mt
q∗t−1 (1+Rn )
∗t

Now, after a promotion at time τ , the value added of the manager can be expressed as
follows:


 g
C
B
C
qmτ −1 + qmt−1
− qmτ −1 + qmt−1 − qmt−1
Rmt − Rmt

 g

 g

g
B
C
B
C
B
= qmτ −1 Rmt
− Rmt
+ qmt−1 − qmt−1
Rmt − Rmt
+ qmt−1
− qmτ −1 Rmt
− Rmt
.
|
{z
} |
{z
} |
{z
}

Vmt =

{1}

12

{2}

{3}

Table 7 shows that investors flow is most sensitive to manager performance over the past two years.

19

The first term, {1}, measures the manager’s value added without the promotion and
without future inflows or outflows. The second term, {2}, measures the contribution to the
manager’s value added of the promotion. The last term, {3}, measures the contribution
to value added though investor flows under the counterfactual. To measure just the
contribution of the promotion, we need to drop the third term. Thus, define the adjusted
value added:
V̂mt ≡

C
qmτ −1 + qmt−1 − qmt−1

= Vmt ·



g
B
Rmt
− Rmt



C
qmτ −1 + qmt−1 − qmt−1
.
qmt−1

To estimate the magnitude of the value added of just the promotion, we replace Vmt with
V̂mt over the time period from the promotion until the first time V̂mt > Vmt or the manager
is demoted (whichever comes first). We then repeat the previous test, that is, we estimate
(11), using the counterfactually computed value added. Figure 2 plots the coefficient on
the promotion dummy over the range of counterfactuals discussed above. Even under the
extreme assumption that the counterfactual is computed solely from managers in the top
1% of the performance distribution, the firm’s contribution to value added is still very
large ($537, 000 per month).
We can interpret the values in Figure 2 as a lower bound on the average value a firm
adds to its manager upon promotion. From these numbers we can also compute a lower
bound on the fraction of value added that is attributable to the existence of mutual fund
firms. Taking the estimate for the value added of a promotion reported in Figure 2, we
multiply by the fraction of months in which the promotion dummy is equal to one (17%)
to get the average value of a promotion decision. Figure 3 reports this number, for all
the counterfactuals, as a fraction of the total value added by an average manager (which
is $274, 000 per month).13 Even for the extreme counterfactual where flows are assumed
to be equivalent to the flows of the top 1% of managers, the firm still contributes more
than 30% of total value added.
Another way to assess the overall impact of promotions (demotions) is to ask how
long it would have taken for investors to achieve the reallocation of funds the promotion
(demotion) decision achieved. To answer this question for promotions, under each counterfactual, we compute how many years it would have taken for investors to provide the
equivalent amount of additional AUM through the flow of funds alone. If this date does
13

That is, the average Vmt across all managers at all points in time.

20

Figure 2: Firm Value Added Under a Range of Counterfactuals: We construct the counterfactual by excluding all funds with performance below the indicated percentile and then assume that under
the counterfactual a manager would have experienced the same inflow of funds as the weighted average
inflow of all remaining managers in that month.

not occur by the last date of our sample, we assume that capital will continue to flow at
a rate equal to the flow of funds, under the counterfactual, in the average month of our
entire sample. That is, fund flow after March 2011 is assumed to be equal to the average
historical fund flow under the counterfactual. We then average the time taken across
all promotions for a given counterfactual. We conduct a similar exercise for demotions,
except that we redefine the counterfactuals. In this case instead of dropping the worst
performing managers, we drop the best performing managers. That is, we eliminate all
managers whose monthly net return over the benchmark was above a particular quantile
and then assume that the manager’s percentage inflow would have been the same as the
weighted average percentage inflow in that month of the remaining managers. For example, the most extreme counterfactual eliminates the top 99% of funds and computes the
flow of funds by taking the weighted average of the remaining 1%.
Figure 4 plots the the average time it would have taken for investors to achieve the
same change in AUM, for each counterfactual, for both promotions and demotions. For
promotions, even under the most extreme counterfactual, it would have taken 6 years for
investors to achieve what the firm achieved in a single month. For demotions the effect is
less extreme. Under the most extreme counterfactual, it would take 2 years for investor
21

Figure 3: Firm Contribution as Fraction of Total Value Added: We compute a lower bound on
firm’s contribution as a fraction of total value added by multiplying the value of a promotion under each
counterfactual by the fraction of periods in which the promotion dummy is equal to one. We then divide
this estimate by the average value added per manager per month. We plot this fraction for each of the
100 counterfactuals considered.

outflows to achieve the same effect as the demotion decision. However, in this case, the
fact that we ignore demotions that are associated with firings is likely to materially impact
our estimates. The reason is that when a manager is fired, the magnitude of the demotion
is large (the manager loses all of his funds). Thus, by ignoring those observations we are
restricting attention to the smaller demotion decisions, and so it is not surprising that
investors can match the firm’s demotion decision in a shorter amount of time than for
promotions.

7

Source of Firm Skill

The results in the previous section imply that the amount of capital under management
affects a manager’s ability to generate value. Although such a result might seem obvious,
it is in fact not consistent with the standard neoclassical assumptions in Berk and Green
(2004). In that model, investor fund flows are always sufficient to ensure that managers
have enough capital to extract the maximum amount of value from markets. If, in fact,
the manager was managing the optimal amount of capital before being promoted, she

22

Figure 4: Time Taken to Reach Same AUM Under a Range of Counterfactuals: Under each
counterfactual, we compute the number of years it would have taken for investors (through the flow of
funds) to match the equivalent change in AUM as the promotion (demotion) decision.
would not be able to put the new capital to productive use, resulting in no increase in
value added. The fact that adding capital creates value implies that, for whatever reason,
the manager was not managing the optimal amount of capital prior to the promotion,
and, more importantly, this misallocation was corrected by a decision made by the firm
(rather than by investors).
A key assumption in Berk and Green (2004) is that investors and managers have the
same information about the manager’s ability. Thus, one possible explanation for our
results is an asymmetry of information between investors, managers and firms.14 As a
consequence of this asymmetry, firms have a role intermediating between managers and
investors. Capital reallocation decisions add value because firms have more information
than investors about managerial ability and firm executives use this information to direct
capital away from overfunded managers and towards underfunded managers. Note that
if managers know their own ability and are able to borrow (or go short) the firm would
not need to intermediate. This explanation for our results therefore requires that one or
both of these conditions are also violated.
A concern that one might have interpreting the value added by the firm as rents for
14

Gervais, Lynch, and Musto (2005) develop a model that studies the implications of relaxing the
symmetric information assumption.

23

1-Month

3-Months

6-Months

12-Months

24-Months

0.009
(0.059)
0.035
(0.064)

0.345∗∗
(0.051)
-0.101
(0.076)

0.676∗∗
(0.055)
-0.184
(0.119)

1.198∗∗
(0.066)
-0.434∗
(0.205)

1.612∗∗
(0.073)
-0.522
(0.318)

-0.024∗∗
(0.004)

-0.025∗∗
(0.004)

-0.026∗∗
(0.004)

-0.027∗∗
(0.004)

-0.027∗∗
(0.004)

Yearmonth
Fixed Effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adjusted R2 (%)

0.08

1.40

2.82

4.75

4.86

β
γ

Manager Tenure

Table 7: Sensitivity of Fund Flow to Performance: This table reports the coefficient estimates
of (13) over the past 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months. Yearmonth fixed effects are included for all regression
specifications. Adjusted R2 values are also reported. Standard errors, in parentheses, are two-way
clustered by manager and by comanagement block. * (**) indicates that the estimate is significantly
different from zero at the 95% (99%) confidence level.

private information, is that investors might rationally anticipate the firm’s capital reallocation decisions in determining their own investment decisions. That is, it is conceivable
that investors have the same information as the firm, but knowing that firms will reallocate capital for them, investors rationally choose not to allocate capital themselves. In this
case our estimate of value added by the firm measures a transfer of duty from investors
to firms, but does not represent additional value creation by the firm that would not otherwise occur. Of course, since it is costly to run a firm, this hypothesis begs the question
of why an investor would pay somebody else to do something they could do themselves.
Nevertheless, we can use the existence of single manager firms (hereafter, self-employed
managers) to test the plausibility of this hypothesis. For such managers investor flows is
the only mechanism that adjusts AUM. Thus, if investors are letting firms do something
they could do themselves, we should observe a much stronger flow of funds relation for
self-employed managers than for those that work for firms.
The percentage change in AUM for a manager due to the flow of funds from investors
is:
f lowmt =

X qit − qit−1 (1 + Rn )
1
it
.
n
qmt−1 (1 + Rmt
) i∈Ω
nit−1
mt−1

24

(12)

Using this measure, we test for differences in the flow of fund performance relation between
self-employed managers and other managers by running the following regression over
horizons of τ = 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months:


f lowmt = λt + δ · tenuremt + β + γ · 1

self-employed
mt

τ −1
X
1
s=0

τ


n
B
Rmt−s
− Rmt−s
+ mt ,

(13)

where λt are time fixed effects and tenuremt is the number of years the manager has
been in the database at time t. The dummy variable 1self-employed
takes on the value of
mt
1 if manager m is self-employed at time t and 0 otherwise, so the coefficient γ in (13)
compares the sensitivity of the flow performance relation of self-employed managers with
all other managers. In line with the existing literature, we winsorize the flow of funds at
the 1st and 99th percentiles.15 Table 7 reports the coefficient estimates.
For both types of managers, investor fund flow responds significantly to performance.
But more importantly, for our purposes, the estimated γ is never significantly positive and
the point estimate is almost always negative. There is no evidence that the flow of funds
performance relation is stronger for self-employed managers than for other managers.
Therefore, we find no evidence that investors transfer capital reallocation decisions that
they could do themselves to firms.
Presumably the firm’s informational advantage results from its unique ability to observe its own employees. Consequently, if private information plays an important role in
the firm’s decisions, we should expect internal capital allocation decisions to add more
value than capital reallocations that result from managers changing firms. To test this
hypothesis, we define an external promotion as a change in jobs that is also accompanied
by an increase in the manager’s AUM. Similarly, an external demotion is a job change
that is accompanied by a decrease in the manager’s AUM. We repeat the same tests as
we did for internal capital changes using these two definitions. The results are reported
in Table 8. None of the coefficients are significantly different from zero.
If one were willing to assume that the investors information set contains no more
information than what is available in past returns, then an alternative way to measure
the importance of the firm’s informational advantage, is to measure how much of the
capital reallocation decision can be explained by past performance alone. To do this, we
run a probit model where we regress the promotion (or demotion) event, expressed as a
15

See Chen, Hong, Jiang, and Kubik (2013), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008), and Huang, Sialm,
and Zhang (2011).

25

Capital Reallocation

0.051
(0.194)

• Promotion
• Demotion

Fixed Effects
• Manager
• Yearmonth

Yes
Yes

-0.028
(0.257)
0.212
(0.403)

-0.023
(0.256)
0.198
(0.397)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Table 8: External Reallocation of Capital: This table reports statistics on the value added (in
$ millions/month) to an average manager through external capital reallocations by the firm. The first
column of the table reports the panel regression specification that uses the capital reallocation dummy
from (10). The next column report the specification where we split reallocations into promotions and
demotions, that is, the estimates from (11). The final column defines promotions and demotions based on
the change in the total dollar fees collected, rather than just the change in AUM. Manager and yearmonth
fixed effects are included in all regression specifications. Standard errors, heteroskedastic-robust and twoway clustered by manager and comanagement block, are provided in parentheses. * (**) indicates that
the estimate is significantly different from zero at the 95% (99%) confidence level.
dummy in that period, on the manager’s net return in excess of the benchmark over the
previous 6 months, 7-18 months and the entire history, T . Writing this out formally, first
define
α̂6mt

≡

5
B
n
X
− Rmt−s
Rmt−s
s=0

6

,

α̂18
mt

≡

17
B
n
X
− Rmt−s
Rmt−s

12

s=6

,

α̂Tmt

T −1
B
n
X
− Rmt−s
Rmt−s
≡
T − 18
s=18

where managers with fewer than 24 months of experience are excluded so that all three
performance measures are meaningful. We then run the following probit panel regression:
T
event
Pr[1reallocation
= 1] = Φ β 0 + β 6 α̂6mt + β 18 α̂18
mt
mt + β T α̂mt



(14)

event
where the indicator function 1reallocation
equals one if the reallocation event under
mt
consideration (i.e., either a promotion or a demotion) occurs to manager m at time t.
Estimates of the coefficients of (14) and pseudo-R2 values are reported in Table 9. The
pseudo-R2 of the regressions are 0.20% for promotions and 0.11% for demotions.

Because the pseudo-R2 values are difficult to interpret, we repeat the same analysis for
investor flows, and use the relative difference in the pseudo-R2 ’s to infer the importance of
past performance in capital reallocations. Consequently, we define an investor promotion
26

Panel A: β Estimates

Promotion
• Firm (Internal)
• Investor
Demotion
• Firm (Internal)
• Investor

pseudo-R2

1-6 Months

7-18 Months

19+ Months

0.20%

0.349
(1.035)
22.42∗∗
(1.981)

6.566∗∗
(1.149)
30.97∗∗
(1.191)

5.875∗∗
(1.473)
10.77∗∗
(1.316)

-3.418∗∗
(1.252)
-22.42∗∗
(1.981)

-3.962
(2.359)
-30.97∗∗
(1.191)

-0.433
(2.203)
-10.77∗∗
(1.316)

3.70%

0.11%
3.70%

Panel B: Marginal Effects
Prob.

1-6 Months

7-18 Months

19+ Months

Promotion
• Firm (Internal)
• Investor

0.88%
48.1%

0.008%
8.901%

0.167%
12.23%

0.150%
4.291%

Demotion
• Firm (Internal)
• Investor

0.65%
51.9%

-0.060%
-8.901%

-0.069%
-12.23%

-0.008%
-4.291%

Table 9: Predictability of Promotions and Demotions: We consider two types of promotions
and demotions. A “Firm” promotion (demotion) is the standard definition we have used throughout the
paper, the addition (subtraction) of a fund to a manager. An “Investor” promotion (demotion) is an
inflow (outflow) of investor funds. Panel A of this table reports estimated coefficients and the pseudo-R2
value for a probit regression of a promotion (or demotion) dummy on historical realized alpha (over the
past 1-6 months, 7-18 months, and the remaining history (19+)). Provided in parentheses are standard
errors, clustered by comanagement block. * (**) indicates that the estimate is significantly different from
zero at the 95% (99%) confidence level. The first column of Panel B of this table reports the unconditional
probability of a promotion (or demotion). The other columns use the estimates in Panel A and (14) to
compute the effect on the unconditional probability of a 0.01 (1%) increase in each regressor while keeping
the other regressors fixed.

27

(demotion) dummy which takes on the value 1 in months when a manager receives a net
inflow (outflow) of funds from investors, and 0 otherwise and report the results in Table
9. The pseudo-R2 is 3.70% for investor promotions and demotions. The pseudo-R2 values
for firm reallocations of capital are an order of magnitude smaller, consistent with the
hypothesis that firm executives use factors other than past performance in making their
decisions. This result also implies that the mean reversion bias mentioned in the last
section is likely to be small.
Another way to assess the relative importance of firms’ capital reallocation decisions
and investor fund flows, is to use the estimates of the beta coefficients reported in Table
9 and (14) to compute the marginal effect of observing a change of one percentage point
to the regressors. Panel B of Table 9 reports the results. Observing a 1% increase in the
estimated alpha has a large effect on the flow of investor funds, but hardly changes the
probability of being promoted. For example, observing an 1% increase in the estimated
alpha in the past 6 months, increases the probability of an inflow of funds by 8.9%, from
48.1% to 57.0%. The same event does not change the probability of a promotion. Past
performance has a large influence on investor flows but bears little on the firm’s capital
reallocation decisions.
The longer a manager stays in the mutual fund industry, the more accurately her skill
can be assessed. Thus, if the firm’s ability to assign capital to labor derives from private
information about employee skill, then this advantage should be more apparent for newer
employees. To see whether this is true in the data, we define manager tenure as the
length of time (in months) since the manager first entered our data sample. We then sort
managers into quintiles based on their tenure. Because our data sample begins in 1977,
tenure is censored from above. We address this issue by starting the analysis in January
1987. Within each quintile, we sum the absolute value of the change in AUM that results
firms’ capital reallocation decisions across months and managers. We then divide by the
sum across months and managers of the AUM in the quintile.16 Figure 5 plots this ratio
for managers for each of the five age groups. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that
the firm plays a more important role in capital allocation for newer employees.
Taken together, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that firms use additional
information not available to investors to make capital reallocation decisions.
16

Both the numerator and the denominator are winsorized below at the 1% level and winsorized above
at the 99% level to reduce the effect of extreme outliers.

28

Figure 5: Capital Reallocation and Manager Tenure: Starting in 1987, we sort managers into
quintiles based on their tenure. Within each quintile, we sum the absolute value of the dollar change in
AUM that results from firms’ capital reallocation decisions across months and managers. We then divide
by the sum across months and managers of the AUM in the quintile.

8

Conclusion

Arguably one of the most important questions in economics is why firms exist. A large
literature has addressed this question both from a theoretical and an empirical point
of view. That literature has identified the important role of capital in determining the
boundary of the firm. In recent years, however, the importance of firms with little or no
capital has increased. This growth raises the question of what other factors determine
the boundary of the firm. In this paper we identify another important role of the firm —
the efficient allocation of capital to labor.
To identify reasons for firm existence that do not rely on the ownership of capital, we
study the mutual fund industry because firms in this industry do not own most of their
capital. Another advantage of this industry is that we can directly measure employee
output. Furthermore, we can accurately predict what the return on capital would be
were it not invested in the firm. Using this information, we are able to bound the value
added by a mutual fund firm by reallocating capital. We find that the role of the firm is
important. At least 30% of the value added of a manager can be attributed to the firm’s
decision to efficiently allocate capital to managers.

29

Although we establish our results in the mutual fund sector, it is unlikely that this
sector is exceptional. Thus measuring the importance of the efficient matching of capital
to labor in other sectors is an important topic for future research.

30

References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): “High Wage Workers and
High Wage Firms,” Econometrica, 67(2), 251–333.
Alchian, A. A., and H. Demsetz (1972): “Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization,” The American Economiic Review, 62(5), 777–795.
Alfaro, L., A. Charlton, and F. Kanczuk (2009): “Plant-Size Distribution and
Cross-Country Income Differences,” NBER Internation Seminar on Macroeconomics.
Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2013): “Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection,” American Economic
Review, 103, 305–334.
Berk, J. B., and R. C. Green (2004): “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in
Rational Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(6), 1269–1295.
Berk, J. B., and J. H. van Binsbergen (2013): “Measuring Skill in the Mutual Fund
Industry,” NBER Working Paper No. w18184.
Bertrand, M., and A. Schoar (2003): “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers
on Firm Policies,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1169–1208.
Bhattacharya, U., J. H. Lee, and V. K. Pool (2013): “Conflicting Family Values
in Mutual Fund Familes,” Journal of Finance, 68(1), 173–200.
Chen, J., H. Hong, M. Huang, and J. D. Kubik (2004): “Does Fund Size Erode Mutual Fund Performance? The Role of Liquidity and Organization,” American Economic
Review, 94(5), 1276–1302.
Chen, J., H. Hong, W. Jiang, and J. D. Kubik (2013): “Outsourcing Mutual Fund
Management: Firm Boundaries, Incentives, and Performance,” Journal of Finance,
68(2), 523–558.
Ewens, M., and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2013): “Is a VC Partnership Greater than the
Sum of its Partners?,” NBER Working Paper No. w19120.
Fang, J., A. Kempf, and M. Trapp (2014): “Fund Manager Allocation,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 111(3), 661–674.
31

French, K. R. (2008): “The Cost of Active Investing,” Journal of Finance, 63(4),
1537–1573.
Gameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2006): “Robust Inference with
Multi-Way Clustering,” Working Paper.
Gaspar, J.-M., M. Massa, and P. Matos (2006): “Favoritism in Mutual Fund Families? Evidence of Strategic Cross-Fund Subsidization,” Journal of Finance, 61, 73–104.
Gervais, S., A. W. Lynch, and D. K. Musto (2005): “Fund Families as Delegated
Monitors of Money Managers,” Review of Financial Studies, 18(4), 1139–1169.
Giroud, X., and H. M. Mueller (2014): “Capital and Labor Reallocation within
Firms,” Working Paper.
Graham, J. R., S. Li, and J. Qiu (2011): “Managerial Attributes and Executive
Compensation,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1944–1979.
Hart, O. (1995): Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford University Press.
Hart, O., and J. Moore (1990): “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
Journal of Political Economy, 98(6), pp. 1119–1158.
Holmstrom, B. R., and J. Tirole (1989): “The theory of the firm,” Handbook of
industrial organization, 1, 61–133.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1403–1448.
Huang, J., C. Sialm, and H. Zhang (2011): “Risk Shifting and Mutual Fund Performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 2575–2616.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2008): “Unobserved Actions of Mutual
Funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(6), 2379–2416.
Kempf, A., and S. Ruenzi (2008): “Tournaments in Mutual-Fund Families,” Review
of Financial Studies, 21, 1013–1036.
Massa, M. (2003): “How Do Family Strategies Affect Fund Performance? When
Performance-Maximization is not the Only Game in Town,” Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 249–305.
32

Pastor, L., R. F. Stambaugh, and L. A. Taylor (2014): “Scale and Skill in Active
Management,” NBER Working Paper No. w19891.
Petersen, M. A. (2009): “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets:
Comparing Approaches,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 435–480.
Pollet, J., and M. Wilson (2011): “How Does Size Effect Mutual Fund Behavior?,”
Journal of Finance, 63(6), 2941–2969.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales (1998): “Power in a Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113(2), 387–432.
Tate, G. A., and L. Yang (2014): “The Bright Side of Corporate Diversification:
Evidence from Internal Labor Markets,” Working Paper.
Thompson, S. B. (2011): “Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm
and time,” Journal of Financial Economics, 99(1), 1 – 10.

33

